PRINCIPAL TREE REGIONS OF NORTH AMERICA

[Illustration: PRINCIPAL TREE REGIONS OF NORTH AMERICA]




    A North Eastern
    B North Western
    AB North Eastern & North Western
    C South Eastern
    D Tropical Florida
    E Texas-Mexican Boundary
    F Rocky Mountains
    G Oregon & California
    H New Mexico & Arizona Mexican Boundary




                  MANUAL OF THE TREES OF NORTH AMERICA
                         (EXCLUSIVE OF MEXICO)


                                   BY
                        CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT
        _Director of the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University_
                 _Author of The Silva of North America_

  _WITH SEVEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-THREE ILLUSTRATIONS FROM DRAWINGS BY_
                          CHARLES EDWARD FAXON
                                 _AND_
                              MARY W. GILL

                            _Second Edition_

[Illustration: The Riverside Press]

                          BOSTON AND NEW YORK
                        HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                    _The Riverside Press Cambridge_
                                  1922

          COPYRIGHT, 1905 AND 1927, BY CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT
                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                                   TO
                                M. R. S.
                THE WISE AND KIND FRIEND OF THIRTY YEARS
                         THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
                      WITH GRATITUDE AND AFFECTION




                     PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


The studies of the trees of North America (exclusive of Mexico) which
have been carried on by the agents and correspondents of the Arboretum
in the sixteen years since the publication of the _Manual of the Trees
of North America_ have increased the knowledge of the subject and made
necessary a new edition of this _Manual_. The explorations of these
sixteen years have added eighty-nine species of trees and many recently
distinguished varieties of formerly imperfectly understood species to
the silva of the United States, and made available much additional
information in regard to the geographical distribution of American
trees. Further studies have made the reduction of seven species of the
first edition to varieties of other species seem desirable; and two
species, _Amelanchier obovalis_ and _Cercocarpus parvifolius_, which
were formerly considered trees, but are more properly shrubs, are
omitted. The genus Anamomis is now united with Eugenia; and the Arizona
_Pinus strobiformis_ Sarg. (not Engelm.) is now referred to _Pinus
flexilis_ James.

Representatives of four Families and sixteen Genera which did not appear
in the first edition are described in the new edition in which will be
found an account of seven hundred and seventeen species of trees in one
hundred and eighty-five genera, illustrated by seven hundred and
eighty-three figures, or one hundred and forty-one figures in addition
to those which appeared in the first edition.

An International Congress of Botanists which assembled in Vienna in
1905, and again in Brussels in 1910, adopted rules of nomenclature which
the world, with a few American exceptions, has now generally adopted.
The names used in this new _Manual_ are based on the rules of this
International Congress. These are the names used by the largest number
of the students of plants, and it is unfortunate that the confusion in
the names of American trees must continue as long as the Department of
Agriculture, including the Forest Service of the United States, uses
another and now generally unrecognized system.

The new illustrations in this edition are partly from drawings made by
Charles Edward Faxon, who died before his work was finished; it was
continued by the skillful pencil of Mary W. Gill, of Washington, to whom
I am grateful for her intelligent cooperation.

It is impossible to name here all the men and women who have in the last
sixteen years contributed to this account of American trees, and I will
now only mention Mr. T. G. Harbison and Mr. E. J. Palmer, who as agents
of the Arboretum have studied for years the trees of the Southeastern
States and of the Missouri-Texas region, Professor R. S. Cocks, of
Tulane University, who has explored carefully and critically the forests
of Louisiana, and Miss Alice Eastwood, head of the Botanical Department
of the California Academy of Sciences, who has made special journeys in
Alaska and New Mexico in the interest of this _Manual_. Mr. Alfred
Rehder, Curator of the Herbarium of the Arboretum, has added to the
knowledge of our trees in several Southern journeys; and to him I am
specially indebted for assistance and advice in the preparation of the
keys to the different groups of plants found in this volume.

This new edition of the _Manual_ contains the results of forty-four
years of my continuous study of the trees of North America carried on in
every part of the United States and in many foreign countries. If these
studies in any way serve to increase the knowledge and the love of trees
I shall feel that these years have not been misspent.

                                                          C. S. Sargent.
Arnold Arboretum
   September, 1921




                                PREFACE


In this volume I have tried to bring into convenient form for the use of
students the information concerning the trees of North America which has
been gathered at the Arnold Arboretum during the last thirty years and
has been largely elaborated in my _Silva of North America_.

The indigenous trees of no other region of equal extent are, perhaps, so
well known as those that grow naturally in North America. There is,
however, still much to be learned about them. In the southern states,
one of the most remarkable extratropical regions in the world in the
richness of its arborescent flora, several species are still imperfectly
known, while it is not improbable that a few may have escaped entirely
the notice of botanists; and in the northern states are several forms of
Crataegus which, in the absence of sufficient information, it has been
found impracticable to include in this volume. Little is known as yet of
the silvicultural value and requirements of North American trees, or of
the diseases that affect them; and one of the objects of this volume is
to stimulate further investigation of their characters and needs.

The arrangement of families and genera adopted in this volume is that of
Engler & Prantl's _Die Natuerlichen Pflanzenfamilien_, in which the
procession is from a simpler to a more complex structure. The
nomenclature is that of _The Silva of North America_. Descriptions of a
few species of Crataegus are now first published, and investigations made
since the publication of the last volume of _The Silva of North
America_, in December, 1902, have necessitated the introduction of a few
additional trees described by other authors, and occasional changes of
names.

An analytical key to the families, based on the arrangement and
character of the leaves, will lead the reader first to the family to
which any tree belongs; a conspectus of the genera, embodying the
important and easily discovered contrasting characters of each genus and
following the description of each family represented by more than one
genus, will lead him to the genus he is trying to determine; and a
similar conspectus of the species, following the description of the
genus, will finally bring him to the species for which he is looking.
Further to facilitate the determination, one or more letters, attached
to the name of the species in the conspectus following the description
of the genus, indicate in which of the eight regions into which the
country is divided according to the prevailing character of the
arborescent vegetation that species grows (see map forming frontispiece
of the volume). For example, the northeastern part of the country,
including the high Appalachian Mountains in the southern states which
have chiefly a northern flora, is represented by (A), and a person
wishing to learn the name of a Pine-tree or of an Oak in that region
need occupy himself only with those species which in the conspectus of
the genus Quercus or Pinus are followed by the letter (A), while a
person wishing to determine an Oak or a Pine-tree in Oregon or
California may pass over all species which are not followed by (G), the
letter which represents the Pacific coast region south of the state of
Washington.

The sign of degrees ( deg.) is used in this work to represent feet, and the
sign of minutes (') inches.

The illustrations which accompany each species and important variety are
one half the size of nature, except in the case of a few of the large
Pine cones, the flowers of some of the Magnolias, and the leaves and
flower-clusters of the Palms. These are represented as less than half
the size of nature in order to make the illustrations of uniform size.
These illustrations are from drawings by Mr. Faxon, in which he has
shown his usual skill and experience as a botanical draftsman in
bringing out the most important characters of each species, and in them
will be found the chief value of this Manual. For aid in its preparation
I am indebted to him and to my other associates, Mr. Alfred Rehder and
Mr. George R. Shaw, who have helped me in compiling the most difficult
of the keys.

                                                          C. S. Sargent.
Arnold Arboretum, Jamaica Plain, Mass.
   January, 1905.




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


  Map of North America (exclusive of Mexico) showing the eight
          regions into which the country is divided according to the
          prevailing character of the trees                _Frontispiece_
  Synopsis of the Families of Plants described in this work            xi
  Analytical Key to the Genera of Plants described in this work,
          based chiefly on the character of their leaves              xvi
  Manual of Trees                                                       1
      Gymnospermae                                                       1
      Angiospermae                                                      96
      Monocotyledons                                                   96
      Dicotyledons                                                    118
      Apetalae                                                         118
      Petalatae                                                        342
      Polypetalae                                                      342
      Gamopetalae                                                      790
  Glossary of Technical Terms                                         893
  Index                                                               899




                                SYNOPSIS
            OF THE FAMILIES OF PLANTS DESCRIBED IN THIS BOOK


                         Class I. GYMNOSPERMAE.

Resinous trees; stems formed of bark, wood, or pith, and increasing in
diameter by the annual addition of a layer of wood inside the bark;
flowers unisexual; stamens numerous; ovules and seeds 2 or many, borne
on the face of a scale, not inclosed in an ovary; embryo with 2 or more
cotyledons; leaves straight-veined, without stipules.

  I. Pinaceae (p. 1). Flowers usually monoecious; ovules 2 or several;
          fruit a woody cone (_in Juniperus berry-like_); cotyledons 2
          or many; leaves needle-shaped, linear or scale-like,
          persistent (_deciduous in Larix and Taxodium_).
  II. Taxaceae (p. 90). Flowers dioecious, axillary, solitary; ovules 1;
          fruit surrounded by or inclosed in the enlarged fleshy
          aril-like disk of the flower; cotyledons 2; leaves linear,
          alternate, persistent.

                         Class II. ANGIOSPERMAE.

Carpels or pistils consisting of a closed cavity containing the ovules
and becoming the fruit.

                      Division I. MONOCOTYLEDONS.

Stems with woody fibres distributed irregularly through them, but
without pith or annual layers of growth; parts of the flower in 3's;
ovary superior, 3-celled; embryo with a single cotyledon; leaves
parallel-veined, persistent, without stipules.

  III. Palmae (p. 96). Ovule solitary; fruit baccate or drupaceous, 1 or
          rarely 2 or 3-seeded; leaves alternate, pinnate, flabellate or
          orbicular, persistent.
  IV. Liliaceae (p. 110). Ovules numerous in each cell; fruit 3-celled,
          capsular or baccate; leaves linear-lanceolate.

                       Division II. DICOTYLEDONS.

Stems formed of bark, wood, or pith, and increasing by the addition of
an annual layer of wood inside the bark; parts of the flower mostly in
4's or 5's; embryo with a pair of opposite cotyledons; leaves
netted-veined.

Subdivision 1. Apetalae. Flowers without a corolla and sometimes without
a calyx.

Section 1. Flowers in unisexual aments (_female flowers of Juglans and
Quercus solitary or in spikes_); ovary inferior (_superior in
Leitneriaceae_) when a calyx is present.

  V. Salicaceae (p. 119). Flowers dioecious, without a calyx. Fruit a
          2--4-valved capsule. Leaves simple, alternate, with stipules,
          deciduous.
  VI. Myricaceae (p. 163). Flowers monoecious or dioecious; fruit a dry
          drupe, covered with waxy exudations; leaves simple, alternate,
          resinous-punctate, persistent.
  VII. Leitneriaceae (p. 167). Flowers dioecious, the staminate without a
          calyx; ovary superior; fruit a compressed oblong drupe; leaves
          alternate, simple, without stipules, deciduous.
  VIII. Juglandaceae (p. 168). Flowers monoecious; fruit a nut inclosed
          in an indehiscent (Juglans) or 4-valved (Carya) fleshy or
          woody shell; leaves alternate, unequally pinnate without
          stipules, deciduous.
  IX. Betulaceae (p. 200). Flowers monoecious; fruit a nut at the base of
          an open leaf-like involucre (Carpinus), in a sack-like
          involucre (Ostrya), in the axil of a scale of an ament
          (Betula), or of a woody strobile (Alnus); leaves alternate,
          simple, with stipules, deciduous.
  X. Fagaceae (p. 227). Flowers monoecious; fruit a nut more or less
          inclosed in a woody often spiny involucre; leaves alternate,
          simple, with stipules, deciduous (_in some species of Quercus
          and in Castanopsis and Lithocarpus persistent_).

Section 2. Flowers unisexual (_perfect in Ulmus_); calyx regular, the
stamens as many as its lobes and opposite them; ovary superior,
1-celled; seed 1.

  XI. Ulmaceae (p. 308). Fruit a compressed winged samara (Ulmus), a
          drupe (Celtis and Trema), or nut-like (Planera), leaves
          simple, alternate, with stipules, deciduous (_persistent in
          Trema_).
  XII. Moraceae (p. 328). Flowers in ament-like spikes or heads; fruit
          drupaceous, inclosed in the thickened calyx and united into a
          compound fruit, oblong and succulent (Morus), large, dry and
          globose (Toxylon), or immersed in the fleshy receptacle of the
          flower (Ficus); leaves simple, alternate, with stipules,
          deciduous (_persistent in Ficus_).

Section 3. Flowers usually perfect; ovary superior or partly inferior,
1--4-celled; leaves simple, persistent in the North American species.

  XIII. Olacaceae (p. 336). Calyx and corolla 4--6-lobed; ovary
          1--4-celled; fruit a drupe more or less inclosed in the
          enlarged disk of the flower; leaves alternate or fascicled,
          without stipules.
  XIV. Polygonaceae (p. 338). Calyx 5-lobed; ovary 1-celled; fruit a
          nutlet inclosed in the thickened calyx; leaves alternate,
          their stipules sheathing the stems.
  XV. Nyctaginaceae (p. 340). Calyx 5-lobed; ovary 1-celled; fruit a
          nutlet inclosed in the thickened calyx; leaves alternate or
          opposite, without stipules.

Subdivision 2. Petalatae. Flowers with both calyx and corolla (_without a
corolla in Lauraceae, in Liquidambar in Hamamelidaceae, in Cercocarpus in
Rosaceae, in Euphorbiaceae, in some species of Acer, in Reynosia,
Condalia, and Krugiodendron in Rhamnaceae, in Fremontia in Sterculiaceae,
in Chytraculia in Myrtaceae, in Conocarpus in Combretaceae and in some
species of Fraxinus in Oleaceae_).

Section 1. Polypetalae. Corolla of separate petals.

A. Ovary superior (_partly inferior in Hamamelidaceae; inferior in Malus,
Sorbus, Heteromeles, Crataegus, and Amelanchier in Rosaceae_).

  XVI. Magnoliaceae (p. 342). Flowers perfect; sepals and petals in 3 or
          4 rows of 3 each; fruit cone-like, composed of numerous
          cohering carpels; leaves simple, alternate, their stipules
          inclosing the leaf-buds, deciduous or rarely persistent.
  XVII. Anonaceae (p. 353). Flowers perfect; sepals 3; petals 6 in 2
          series; fruit a pulpy berry developed from 1 or from the union
          of several carpels; leaves simple, alternate, without
          stipules, deciduous or persistent.
  XVIII. Lauraceae (p. 356). Flowers perfect or unisexual; corolla 0;
          fruit a 1-seeded drupe or berry; leaves simple, alternate,
          punctate, without stipules, persistent (_deciduous in
          Sassafras_).
  XIX. Capparidaceae (p. 365). Flowers perfect; sepals and petals 4;
          fruit baccate, elongated, dehiscent; leaves alternate, simple,
          without stipules, persistent.
  XX. Hamamelidaceae (p. 366). Flowers perfect or unisexual; sepals and
          petals 5 (_corolla 0 in Liquidambar_); ovary partly inferior;
          fruit a 2-celled woody capsule opening at the summit; leaves
          simple, alternate, with stipules, deciduous.
  XXI. Platanaceae (p. 371). Flowers monoecious, in dense unisexual
          capitate heads; fruit an akene; leaves simple, alternate, with
          stipules, deciduous.
  XXII. Rosaceae (p. 376). Flowers perfect; sepals and petals 5 (_petals
          0 in Cercocarpus_); ovary inferior in Malus, Sorbus,
          Heteromeles, Crataegus, and Amelanchier; fruit a drupe (Prunus
          and Chrysobalanus), a capsule (Vauquelinia and Lyonothamnus),
          an akene (Cowania and Cercocarpus), or a pome (Malus, Sorbus,
          Heteromeles, Crataegus, and Amelanchier); leaves simple or
          pinnately compound, alternate (_opposite in Lyonothamnus_),
          with stipules, deciduous or persistent.
  XXIII. Leguminosae (p. 585). Flowers perfect, regular or irregular;
          fruit a legume; leaves compound, or simple (Dalea), alternate,
          with stipules, deciduous or persistent.
  XXIV. Zygophyllaceae (p. 630). Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; petals
          5; fruit capsular, becoming fleshy; leaves opposite, pinnate,
          with stipules, persistent.
  XXV. Malpigiaceae (p. 631). Flowers usually perfect rarely dimorphous;
          calyx 5-lobed; petals 5, unguiculate; fruit a drupe or samara;
          leaves opposite, simple, entire, persistent; often with
          stipules.
  XXVI. Rutaceae (p. 633). Flowers unisexual or perfect; fruit a capsule
          (Xanthoxylum), a samara (Ptelea), of indehiscent winged
          1-seeded carpels (Helietta), or a drupe (Amyris); leaves
          alternate or opposite, compound, glandular-punctate, without
          stipules, persistent or rarely deciduous (_0 in Canotia_).
  XXVII. Simaroubaceae (p. 641). Flowers dioecious, calyx 5-lobed; petals
          5; fruit drupaceous (Simarouba), baccate (Picramnia), a samara
          (Alvaradoa); leaves alternate, equally pinnate, without
          stipules, persistent.
  XXVIII. Burseraceae (p. 645). Flowers perfect; calyx 4 or 5-parted;
          petals 5; fruit a drupe; leaves alternate, compound, without
          stipules, deciduous.
  XXIX. Meliaceae (p. 648). Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5;
          fruit a 5-celled dehiscent capsule; leaves alternate, equally
          pinnate, without stipules, persistent.
  XXX. Euphorbiaceae (p. 649). Flowers perfect; calyx 4--6-parted
          (Drypetes), 3-lobed (Hippomane), or 0 (Gymnanthes); petals 0;
          fruit a drupe (Drypetes and Hippomane), or a 3-lobed capsule
          (Gymnanthes).
  XXXI. Anacardiaceae (p. 655). Flowers usually unisexual, dioecious or
          polygamo-dioecious (_Pistacia without a calyx, and without a
          corolla in the North American species_); fruit a dry drupe;
          leaves simple or compound, alternate, without stipules,
          deciduous (_persistent in Pistacia and in one species of
          Rhus_).
  XXXII. Cyrillaceae (p. 665). Flowers perfect; calyx 5--8-lobed; petals
          5--8; fruit an indehiscent capsule; leaves alternate, without
          stipules, persistent (_more or less deciduous in Cyrilla_).
  XXXIII. Aquifoliaceae (p. 668). Flowers polygamo-dioecious; calyx 4 or
          5-lobed; petals 5; fruit a drupe, with 4--8 1-seeded nutlets;
          leaves alternate, simple, with stipules, persistent or
          deciduous.
  XXXIV. Celastraceae (p. 674). Flowers perfect, polygamous or dioecious;
          calyx 4 or 5-lobed; petals 4 or 5; fruit a drupe, or a capsule
          (Evonymus); leaves simple, opposite or alternate, with or
          without stipules, persistent (_deciduous in Evonymus_).
  XXXV. Aceraceae (p. 681). Flowers dioecious or monoeciously polygamous;
          calyx usually 5-parted; petals usually 5, or 0; fruit of 2
          long-winged samara joined at the base; leaves opposite, simple
          or rarely pinnate, without or rarely with stipules, deciduous.
  XXXVI. Hippocastanaceae (p. 702). Flowers perfect, irregular; calyx
          5-lobed; petals 4 or 5, unequal; fruit a 3-celled 3-valved
          capsule; leaves opposite, digitately compound, long-petiolate,
          without stipules, deciduous.
  XXXVII. Sapindaceae (p. 711). Flowers polygamous; calyx 4 or 5-lobed;
          corolla of 4 or 5 petals; fruit a berry (Sapindus and
          Exothea), a drupe (Hypelate), or a 3-valved capsule
          (Ungnadia); leaves alternate, compound, without stipules,
          persistent, or deciduous (Ungnadia).
  XXXVIII. Rhamnaceae (p. 718). Flowers usually perfect; calyx 4 or
          5-lobed; petals 4 or 5 (_0 in Reynosia, Condalia, and
          Krugiodendron_); fruit drupaceous; leaves simple, alternate
          (_mostly opposite in Reynosia and Krugiodendron_), with
          stipules, persistent (_deciduous in some species of Rhamnus_).
  XXXIX. Tiliaceae (p. 732). Flowers perfect; sepals and petals 5; fruit
          a nut-like berry; leaves simple, alternate, mostly oblique at
          base, with stipules, deciduous.
  XL. Sterculiaceae (p. 749). Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; petals 0;
          fruit a 4 or 5-valved dehiscent capsule; leaves simple,
          alternate, with stipules, persistent.
  XLI. Theaceae (p. 750). Flowers perfect; sepals and petals 5; fruit a
          5-celled woody dehiscent capsule, loculicidally dehiscent;
          leaves simple, alternate, without stipules, persistent or
          deciduous.
  XLII. Canellaceae (p. 753). Flowers perfect; sepals 3; petals 5;
          filaments united into a tube; fruit a berry; leaves simple,
          alternate, without stipules, persistent.
  XLIII. Koeberliniaceae (p. 754). Flowers perfect; sepals and petals 4,
          minute; leaves bract-like, alternate, without stipules,
          caducous.
  XLIV. Caricaceae (p. 755). Flowers unisexual or perfect; calyx 5-lobed;
          petals 5; fruit baccate; leaves palmately lobed or digitate,
          alternate, without stipules, persistent.

B. Ovary inferior (_partly inferior in Rhizophora_).

  XLV. Cactaceae (p. 757). Flowers perfect; petals and sepals numerous;
          fruit a berry; leaves usually wanting.
  XLVI. Rhizophoraceae (p. 763). Flowers perfect; calyx 4-parted; petals
          4; ovary partly inferior; fruit a 1-celled 1-seeded berry
          perforated at apex by the germinating embryo; leaves simple,
          opposite, entire, with stipules, persistent.
  XLVII. Combretaceae (p. 764). Flowers perfect or polygamous; calyx
          5-lobed; petals 5 (_0 in Conocarpus_); fruit drupaceous;
          leaves simple, alternate or opposite, without stipules,
          persistent.
  XLVIII. Myrtaceae (p. 768). Flowers perfect; calyx usually 4-lobed, or
          reduced to a single body forming a deciduous lid to the flower
          (Chytraculia); petals usually 4 (_0 in Chytraculia_); fruit a
          berry; leaves simple, opposite, pellucid-punctate, without
          stipules, persistent.
  XLIX. Melastomaceae (p. 776). Flowers perfect; calyx and corolla 4 or
          5-lobed; stamens as many or twice as many as the lobes of the
          corolla; fruit capsular or baccate, inclosed in the tube of
          the calyx; leaves opposite, rarely verticillate, 3--9-nerved,
          without stipules.
  L. Araliaceae (p. 777). Flowers perfect or polygamous; sepals and
          petals usually 5; fruit a drupe; leaves twice pinnate,
          alternate, with stipules, deciduous.
  LI. Nyssaceae (p. 779). Flowers dioecious, polygamous, dioecious or
          perfect; calyx 5-toothed or lobed; petals 5 or more, imbricate
          in the bud, or 0; stamens as many or twice as many as the
          petals; fruit drupaceous (Nyssa), usually 1-celled and
          1-seeded; leaves alternate, deciduous, without stipules.
  LII. Cornaceae (p. 784). Flowers perfect or polygamo-dioecious; calyx 4
          or 5-toothed; petals 4 or 5; fruit a fleshy drupe; leaves
          simple, opposite (_alternate in one species of Cornus_),
          without stipules, deciduous.

Section 2. Gamopetalae. Corolla of united petals (_divided in Elliottia
in Ericaceae, 0 in some species of Fraxinus in Oleaceae_).

A. Ovary superior (_inferior in Vaccinium in Ericaceae, partly inferior
in Symplocaceae and Styracaceae_).

  LIII. Ericaceae (p. 790). Flowers perfect; calyx and corolla 5-lobed
          (_in Elliottia corolla of 4 petals_); (_ovary inferior in
          Vaccinium_); fruit capsular, drupaceous or baccate; leaves
          simple, alternate, without stipules, persistent (_deciduous in
          Elliottia and Oxydendrum_).
  LIV. Theophrastaceae (p. 804). Flowers perfect, with staminodia; sepals
          and petals 5; stamens 5; fruit a berry; leaves simple,
          opposite or alternate, entire, without stipules.
  LV. Myrsinaceae (p. 805). Flowers perfect; calyx and corolla 5-lobed;
          stamens 5; fruit a drupe; leaves simple, alternate, entire,
          without stipules, persistent.
  LVI. Sapotaceae (p. 808). Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; corolla
          5-lobed (_6-lobed in Mimusops_), often with as many or twice
          as many internal appendages borne on its throat; fruit a
          berry; leaves simple, alternate, without stipules, persistent
          (_deciduous in some species of Bumelia_).
  LVII. Ebenaceae (p. 820). Flowers perfect, dioecious, or polygamous;
          calyx and corolla 4-lobed; fruit a 1 or several-seeded berry;
          leaves simple, alternate, entire, without stipules, deciduous.
  LVIII. Styraceae (p. 824). Flowers perfect; calyx 4 or 5-toothed;
          corolla 4 or 5-lobed or divided nearly to the base, or rarely
          6 or 7-lobed; ovary superior or partly superior; fruit a
          drupe; leaves simple, alternate, without stipules, deciduous;
          pubescence mostly scurfy or stellate.
  LIX. Symplocaceae (p. 830). Flowers perfect; calyx and corolla 5-lobed;
          ovary inferior or partly inferior; fruit a drupe; leaves
          simple, alternate, without stipules, deciduous; pubescence
          simple.
  LX. Oleaceae (p. 832). Flowers perfect or polygamo-dioecious; calyx
          4-lobed (_0 in some species of Fraxinus_); corolla 2--6-parted
          (_0 in some species of Fraxinus_); fruit a winged samara
          (Fraxinus) or a fleshy drupe (Forestiera, Chionanthus and
          Osmanthus); leaves pinnate (Fraxinus) or simple, opposite,
          without stipules, deciduous (_persistent in Osmanthus_).
  LXI. Borraginaceae (p. 858). Flowers perfect or polygamous; calyx and
          corolla 5-lobed; fruit a drupe; leaves simple, alternate,
          scabrous-pubescent, without stipules, persistent or tardily
          deciduous.
  LXII. Verbenaceae (p. 864). Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; corolla 4
          or 5-lobed; fruit a drupe or a 1-seeded capsule; leaves
          simple, opposite, without stipules, persistent.
  LXIII. Solanaceae (p. 867). Flowers perfect; calyx campanulate, usually
          5-lobed; corolla usually 5-lobed; fruit baccate, surrounded at
          base by the enlarged calyx; leaves alternate, rarely opposite,
          without stipules.
  LXIV. Bignoniaceae (p. 868). Flowers perfect; calyx bilabiate; corolla
          bilabiate, 5-lobed; fruit a woody capsule (Catalpa and
          Chilopsis) or a berry (Enallagma); leaves simple, opposite
          (_sometimes alternate in Chilopsis_), without stipules,
          deciduous (_persistent in Enallagma_).

B. Ovary inferior (_partly superior in Sambucus in Caprifoliaceae_).

  LXV. Rubiaceae (p. 875). Flowers perfect; calyx and corolla 4 or
          5-lobed; fruit a capsule (Exostema and Pinckneya), a drupe
          (Guettarda), or nut-like (Cephalanthus); leaves simple
          opposite, or in verticils of 3 (Cephalanthus), with stipules,
          persistent (_deciduous in Pinckneya and Cephalanthus_).
  LXVI. Caprifoliaceae (p. 882). Flowers perfect; calyx and corolla
          5-lobed; fruit a drupe; leaves unequally pinnate (Sambucus) or
          simple (Viburnum), opposite, without stipules, deciduous in
          North American species.




                             ANALYTICAL KEY
  TO THE GENERA OF PLANTS INCLUDED IN THIS BOOK, BASED CHIEFLY ON THE
                        CHARACTER OF THE LEAVES


  I. Leaves parallel-veined, alternate, persistent, clustered at the end
        of the stem or branches. Monocotyledons.
  Stem simple; leaves stalked.
    Leaves fan-shaped.
      Leaf stalks unarmed.
        Rachis short; leaves usually silvery white below.
          Leaves 2 deg.--4 deg. in diameter (_green below in No. 2_), their
                segments undivided at apex.
                                                        Thrinax (p. 96).
          Leaves 18'--24' in diameter, their segments divided at apex.
                                                  Coccothrinax (p. 100).
        Rachis elongated; leaves green below, their segments divided at
              apex.
                                                         Sabal (p. 101).
      Leaf stalks armed with marginal teeth or spines.
        Leaf stalks furnished irregularly with broad thin large and
              small, straight or hooked spines confluent into a thin
              bright orange-colored cartilaginous margin; leaves longer
              than wide, divided nearly to the middle into segments
              parted at apex and separating on the margins into thin
              fibres.
                                                  Washingtonia (p. 104).
        Leaf stalks furnished with stout or slender flattened teeth;
              leaves suborbicular, divided to the middle or nearly to
              the base into segments parted at apex; segments of the
              blade not separating on the margin into thin fibres.
                                                  Acoelorraphe (p. 105).
    Leaves pinnate.
      Leaves 10 deg.--12 deg. in length, their pinnae 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. long and often
            1-1/2 deg. wide, deep green.
                                                     Roystonea (p. 107).
      Leaves 5 deg.--6 deg. long, their pinnae 18' long and 1' wide, dark
            yellow-green above, pale and glaucous below.
                                                 Pseudophoenix (p. 109).
  Stem simple or branched; leaves sessile, lanceolate, long- and usually
        sharp-pointed at apex.
                                                         Yucca (p. 110).

  II. Leaves 1-nerved, needle-shaped, linear or scale-like, persistent
        (deciduous in Larix and Taxodium). Gymnospermae.


                         1. Leaves Persistent.

  _a_ Leaves fascicled, needle-shaped, in 1--5-leafed clusters enclosed
        at base in a membranaceous sheath.
                                                           Pinus (p. 2).
  _aa_ Leaves scattered, usually linear.
    _b_ Leaves linear, often obtuse or emarginate.
      Base of the leaves persistent on the branches.
        Leaves sessile, 4-sided, or flattened and stomatiferous above.
                                                          Picea (p. 34).
        Leaves stalked, flattened and stomatiferous below, or angular,
              often appearing 2-ranked.
                                                          Tsuga (p. 42).
      Base of the leaves not persistent on the branches; leaves often
            appearing 2-ranked.
        Leaves stalked, flattened, stomatiferous below; winter-buds
              pointed, not resinous.
                                                    Pseudotsuga (p. 47).
        Leaves sessile, flattened and often grooved on the upper side,
              or quadrangular, rarely stomatiferous above, on upper
              fertile branches often crowded; winter-buds obtuse,
              resinous (_except in No. 9_).
                                                          Abies (p. 50).
    _bb_ Leaves linear-lanceolate, rigid, acuminate, spirally disposed,
          appearing 2-ranked by a twist in the petiole.
      Leaves abruptly contracted at base, long-pointed, with pale bands
            of stomata on the lower surface on each side of the
            midveins; fruit drupe-like.
                                                        Torreya (p. 91).
      Leaves gradually narrowed at base, short-pointed, paler, and
            without distinct bands of stomata on the lower surface;
            fruit berry-like.
                                                          Taxus (p. 93).
    _bbb_ Leaves ovate-lanceolate and scale-like, spreading in 2 ranks
          or linear on the same tree, acute, compressed, keeled on the
          back and closely appressed or spreading at apex.
                                                        Sequoia (p. 61).
  _aaa_ Leaves opposite or whorled, usually scale-like.

    Internodes distinctly longer than broad; branchlets flattened, of
          nearly equal color on both sides; leaves eglandular.
                                                     Libocedrus (p. 65).
    Internodes about as long as broad, often pale below, usually
          glandular.
      Branchlets flattened.
        Branchlets in one plane, much flattened, 1/12'--1/6' broad.
                                                          Thuya (p. 67).
        Branchlets slightly flattened, 1/24'--1/16' broad.
                                                   Chamaecyparis (p. 75).
      Branchlets terete or 4-angled.
        Branchlets more or less in one plane; fruit a cone.
                                                      Cupressus (p. 69).
        Branchlets not in one plane; fruit a berry (_leaves
              needle-shaped, in whorls of 3 in No. 1_).
                                                      Juniperus (p. 78).


                          2. Leaves Deciduous.

  Leaves in many-leafed clusters on short lateral spurs.
                                                          Larix (p. 31).
  Leaves spreading in 2 ranks.
                                                       Taxodium (p. 63).

  III. Leaves netted-veined, rarely scale-like or wanting. Dicotyledons.


                  A. LEAVES OPPOSITE. (B, see p. xix).


                  1. Leaves Simple. (2, see p. xviii).


                           Leaves persistent.

  _a_ Leaves with stipules.
    _b_ Leaves entire or occasionally slightly crenate or serrate.
      _c_ Leaves emarginate at apex, very short-stalked, 1-1/2'--2'
            long.
        Leaves obovate, gradually narrowed into the petiole.
                                                       Gyminda (p. 678).
        Leaves oval to oblong, rounded or broad-cuneate (_rarely
              alternate_).
          Branchlets densely velutinous.
                                                 Krugiodendron (p. 721).
          Branchlets slightly puberulous at first, soon glabrous.
                                                      Reynosia (p. 720).
      _cc_ Leaves not emarginate at apex.
        Leaves obtuse, rarely acutish or abruptly short-pointed.
          Leaves elliptic, 3-1/2'--5' long.
                                                    Rhizophora (p. 763).
          Leaves obovate, usually rounded at apex, 3/4'--2' long.
                                                     Byrsonima (p. 632).
        Leaves acute to acuminate.
          Leaves oblong-ovate to lanceolate; branchlets glabrous.
                                                      Exostema (p. 877).
          Leaves broad-elliptic to oblong-elliptic; branchlets villose.
                                                     Guettarda (p. 879).
    _bb_ Leaves serrate (_often pinnate_).
                                                  Lyonothamnus (p. 378).
  _aa_ Leaves without stipules.
    Petioles biglandular; leaves obtuse or emarginate, 1-1/2'--2-1/2'
          long.
                                                  Laguncularia (p. 767).
    Petioles without glands.
      Leaves furnished below with small dark glands, slightly aromatic;
            petioles short.
        Leaves oblong to oblong-ovate and acuminate or elliptic and
              bluntly short-pointed.
                                                 Calyptranthes (p. 769).
        Leaves ovate, obovate or elliptic.
                                                       Eugenia (p. 770).
      Leaves without glands.
        Leaves green and glabrous below.
          Leaves obtuse or emarginate at apex (_rarely alternate_),
                1'--1-1/2' long.
                                                      Torrubia (p. 341).
          Leaves acute, acuminate, or sometimes rounded or emarginate,
                3'--5' long.
            Leaves distinctly veined.
                                                  Citharexylon (p. 864).
            Leaves obscurely veined.
                                                     Osmanthus (p. 856).
        Leaves hoary tomentulose or scurfy below.
          Leaves strongly 3-nerved, acuminate, densely scurfy below.
                                                    Tetrazygia (p. 776).
          Leaves penniveined, rounded or acute at apex, hoary
                tomentulose below.
                                                     Avicennia (p. 865).


                          ** Leaves deciduous.
  _a_ Leaves without lobes.
    _b_ Leaves serrate.
      Winter-buds with several opposite outer scales.
        Leaves puberulous below, closely and finely serrate; axillary
              buds solitary.
                                                      Evonymus (p. 675).
        Leaves glabrous below, remotely crenate-serrulate; axillary buds
              several, superposed.
                                                    Forestiera (p. 853).
      Winter-buds enclosed in 2 large opposite scales.
                                                      Viburnum (p. 886).
    _bb_ Leaves entire.
      _c_ Leaves without stipules.
        Leaves suborbicular or elliptic to oblong.
          Leaves rounded or acutish at apex, 1'--2' long, occasionally
                3-foliolate, glabrous; branchlets quadrangular.
                                              Fraxinus anomala (p. 837).
          Leaves acuminate or acute at apex, 3'--4' long.
            Leaf-scars connected by a transverse line, with 3
                  bundle-traces; branchlets slender,
                  appressed-pubescent.
                                                        Cornus (p. 785).
            Leaf-scars not connected, with 1 bundle-trace; branchlets
                  stout, villose, puberulous or glabrous.
                                                   Chionanthus (p. 855).
        Leaves broad-ovate, cordate, acuminate, 5'--12' long, on long
              petioles.
                                                       Catalpa (p. 870).
        Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, short-stalked or sessile
              (_sometimes alternate_).
                                                     Chilopsis (p. 869).
      _cc_ Leaves with persistent stipules, entire.
        Leaves oval or ovate; winter-buds resinous, the terminal up to
              1/2' in length.
                                                     Pinckneya (p. 876).
        Leaves ovate to lanceolate; winter-buds minute.
                                                  Cephalanthus (p. 878).
  _aa_ Leaves palmately lobed.
                                                          Acer (p. 681).


                          2. Leaves Compound.

  _a_ Leaves persistent, with stipules.
    Leaves equally pinnate; leaflets entire.
                                                      Guaiacum (p. 630).
    Leaves unequally pinnately parted into 3--8 linear-lanceolate
          segments (_sometimes entire_).
                                                  Lyonothamnus (p. 378).
    Leaves trifoliate.
      Leaflets stalked.
                                                        Amyris (p. 640).
      Leaflets sessile.
                                                      Helietta (p. 637).
  _aa_ Leaves deciduous.
    Leaves unequally pinnate or trifoliate.
      Leaflets crenate-serrate or entire, the veins arching within the
            margins; stipules wanting; winter-buds with several opposite
            scales.
                                                      Fraxinus (p. 833).
      Leaflets sharply or incisely serrate, the primary veins extending
            to the teeth.
        Leaflets 3--7, incisely serrate; stipules present; winter-buds
              with 1 pair of obtuse outer scales.
                                                  Acer Negundo (p. 699).
        Leaflets 5--9, sharply serrate; stipules present; winter-buds
              with many opposite acute scales; pith thick.
                                                      Sambucus (p. 882).
    Leaves digitate, with 5--7, sharply serrate leaflets; terminal buds
          large.
                                                       AEsculus (p. 702).


                          B. LEAVES ALTERNATE.


                  1. Leaves Simple. (2, see p. xxiv).


                 * Leaves persistent. (** see p. xxii).

  _a_ Leaves deeply 3--5-lobed, 1/3'--1/2' long, with linear lobes,
        hoary tomentose below.
                                                       Cowania (p. 549).
  _aa_ Leaves palmately lobed.
    Leaves stellate-pubescent, about 1-1/2' in diameter, with stipules.
                                                     Fremontia (p. 749).
    Leaves glabrous, 1 deg.--2 deg. in diameter, without stipules.
                                                        Carica (p. 755).
  _aaa_ Leaves not lobed or pinnately lobed.
    _b_ Branches spinescent.
      Leaves clustered at the end of the branches, at least 2'--3' long.
                                                        Bucida (p. 765).
      Leaves fascicled on lateral branchlets, obtuse or emarginate, pale
            and glabrous beneath.
                                          Bumelia angustifolia (p. 816).
      Leaves scattered.
        Leaves generally obovate, mucronate, not more than 1/2'--1'
              long, glabrous and green or brownish tomentulose beneath.
                                                      Condalia (p. 719).
        Leaves elliptic-ovate to oblong, obtuse or emarginate, glabrous,
              1--2 cm. long.
                                                       Ximenia (p. 337).
    _bb_ Branches not spinescent.
      _c_ Leaves serrate, or lobed (_in some species of Quercus_).
            (_cc_, see p. xxii).
        _d_ Juice watery. (_dd_, see p. xxii).
          _e_ Stipules present. (_ee_, see p. xxii).
            _f_ Primary veins extending straight to the teeth.
              Leaves and branchlets glabrous or pubescent to tomentose
                    with fascicled hairs.
                Leaves fulvous-tomentose beneath, repand-dentate, 3'--5'
                      long.
                                                   Lithocarpus (p. 236).
                Leaves glabrous or grayish to whitish tomentose beneath,
                      entire, lobed or dentate.
                                            Quercus sp. 21--34 (p. 268).
              Leaves and branchlets coated with simpled silky or woolly
                    hairs at least while young, not more than 2-1/2'
                    long.
                                                   Cercocarpus (p. 550).
            _ff_ Primary veins arching and united within the margin.
              Leaves 3-nerved from the base.
                                                     Ceanothus (p. 726).
              Leaves not 3-nerved.
                Leaves acute.
                  Leaves sinuately dentate, with few spiny teeth
                        (_rarely entire_), glabrous.
                                                    Ilex opaca (p. 669).
                  Leaves serrate.
                    Leaves tomentose below; branchlets tomentose.
                      Leaves narrow-lanceolate, glabrous and smooth
                            above.
                                                   Vauquelinia (p. 377).
                      Leaves ovate, cordate, scabrate above.
                                                         Trema (p. 327).
                    Leaves glabrous below.
                                                   Heteromeles (p. 392).
                  Leaves entire, very rarely toothed.
                    Leaves elliptic, glabrous.
                                            Prunus caroliniana (p. 579).
                    Leaves oblanceolate, pubescent beneath when young.
                                                  Ilex Cassine (p. 670).
                Leaves obtuse, sometimes mucronate.
                  Leaves spinose-serrate, glabrous.
                    Leaves broad-ovate to suborbicular or elliptic;
                          branchlets dark red-brown, spinescent.
                                                Rhamnus crocea (p. 723).
                    Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate; branchlets yellow
                          or orange-colored, not spinescent.
                                             Prunus ilicifolia (p. 581).
                  Leaves crenate (_often entire_), oval to oblong.
                                                Ilex vomitoria (p. 671).
          _ee_ Stipules wanting.
            Leaves resinous-dotted, aromatic, 1-1/2'--4' long.
                                                        Myrica (p. 163).
            Leaves not resinous-dotted, crenately serrate, 4'--6' long.
              Leaves dark green, glabrous below.
                                           Gordonia Lasianthus (p. 751).
              Leaves yellowish green, pubescent below, sometimes nearly
                    entire.
                                                     Symplocos (p. 831).
        _dd_ Juice milky.
          Petioles 2-1/2'--4' long; leaves broad-ovate.
                                                     Hippomane (p. 652).
          Petioles about 1/4' long; leaves elliptic to
                oblong-lanceolate.
                                                    Gymnanthes (p. 654).
      _cc_ Leaves entire (_rarely sparingly toothed on vigorous
            branchlets_).
        _d_ Stipules present.
          _e_ Stipules connate, at least at first.
            Stipules persistent, forming a sheath surrounding the branch
                  above the node; leaves obtuse.
                                                    Coccolobis (p. 338).
            Stipules deciduous, enveloping the unfolded leaf.
              Leaves ferrugineous-tomentose beneath.
                                          Magnolia grandiflora (p. 345).
              Leaves glabrous beneath, with milky juice.
                                                         Ficus (p. 333).
          _ee_ Stipules free.
            _f_ Juice milky; leaves oval to oblong, 3'--5' long.
                                                      Drypetes (p. 650).
            _ff_ Juice watery.
              _g_ Leaves obtuse or emarginate at apex.
                Leaves with ferrugineous scales beneath, their petioles
                      slender.
                                                      Capparis (p. 365).
                Leaves without ferrugineous scales.
                  Leaves soft-pubescent on both sides.
                                            Colubrina cubensis (p. 730).
                  Leaves glabrous at least at maturity.
                    Leaves rarely 2'--3' long, standing on the branch at
                          acute angles.
                                                 Chrysobalanus (p. 583).
                    Leaves rarely more than 1' long, spreading
                          (sometimes 3-nerved).
                                            Ceanothus spinosos (p. 728).
              _gg_ Leaves acute or acutish.

                Petioles with 2 glands.
                                                    Conocarpus (p. 766).
                Petioles without glands.
                  Leaves and branchlets more or less pubescent, at least
                        while young.
                    Leaves fascicled except on vigorous branchlets.
                                                   Cercocarpus (p. 550).
                    Leaves not fascicled.
                      Winter-buds minute, with few pointed scales.
                        Leaves rounded or nearly rounded at base.
                                            Colubrina sp. 1, 3 (p. 729).
                        Leaves broad-cuneate at base.
                                                  Ilex Cassine (p. 670).
                      Winter-buds conspicuous, with numerous scales.
                        Leaves usually lanceolate, entire, covered below
                              with yellow scales.
                                                   Castanopsis (p. 234).
                        Leaves oblong or oblong-obovate, repand-dentate,
                              fibrous tomentose below.
                                                   Lithocarpus (p. 236).
                  Leaves and branchlets glabrous.
                    Leaf-scar with 1 bundle-trace.
                                                 Ilex Krugiana (p. 672).
                    Leaf-scar with 3 bundle-traces. Cherry Laurels.
                                             Prunus sp. 19--22 (p. 579).
        _dd_ Stipules wanting.
          _e_ Leaves aromatic when bruised.
            Leaves resinous-dotted.
                                                        Myrica (p. 163).
            Leaves not resinous-dotted.
              Leaves obtuse, obovate, glabrous.
                                                       Canella (p. 753).
              Leaves acute.
                Leaves mostly rounded at the narrowed base, ovate to
                      oblong, acute, glabrous.
                                                         Anona (p. 354).
                Leaves more or less cuneate at base, elliptic to
                      lanceolate, usually acuminate.
                  Leaves abruptly long-acuminate, glabrous, the margin
                        undulate; branchlets red-brown.
                                                     Misanteca (p. 364).
                  Leaves gradually acuminate or nearly acute.
                    Leaves strongly reticulate beneath.
                      Branchlets glabrous, light grayish brown; leaves
                            glabrous, light green beneath.
                                                        Ocotea (p. 359).
                      Branchlets pubescent while young, greenish or
                            yellowish; leaves pale beneath, pubescent
                            while young.
                                                  Umbellularia (p. 360).
                    Leaves not or slightly reticulate, glaucous,
                          glabrous or pubescent beneath.
                                                        Persea (p. 356).

          _ee_ Leaves not aromatic.
            _f_ Leaves acute or acutish.
              Leaves obovate, gradually narrowed into short petioles.
                Leaves 2'--2-1/2' long.
                                                    Schaefferia (p. 679).
                Leaves at least 6'--8' long.
                                                     Enallagma (p. 873).
              Leaves elliptic to oblong or ovate.
                Leaves rough or pubescent above, pubescent below,
                      subcordate to cuneate at base.
                  Leaves stellate-pubescent.
                                                       Solanum (p. 867).
                  Leaves scabrous above.
                    Petiole 1/8'--1/4' long; leaves oval or oblong,
                          1-1/4'--4' long.
                                                       Ehretia (p. 862).
                    Petiole 1'--1-1/2' long; leaves ovate to
                          oblong-ovate, 3'--7' long.
                                                        Cordia (p. 858).
                Leaves smooth above.
                  Winter-buds scaly.
                    Leaves covered below with ferrugineous or pale
                          scales, 1'--3' long.
                                                        Lyonia (p. 797).
                    Leaves glabrous or nearly so below.
                      Leaves ovate-lanceolate or obovate-lanceolate,
                            4'--12' long, usually clustered at end of
                            branchlet, veinlets below obscure.
                                                  Rhododendron (p. 792).
                      Leaves elliptic or oval to oblong or lanceolate.
                        Leaves light yellowish green below and without
                              distinctly visible veins or veinlets,
                              entire, 3'--4' long.
                                                        Kalmia (p. 794).
                        Leaves pale below and more or less distinctly
                              reticulate, occasionally serrate or
                              denticulate, 1'--5' long; bark of branches
                              red.
                                                       Arbutus (p. 799).
                  Winter-buds naked.
                    Leaves pubescent below when unfolding.
                      Mature leaves nearly glabrous below.
                        Leaves oblong-lanceolate to narrow-obovate.
                                                      Dipholis (p. 810).
                        Leaves oval.
                                                   Sideroxylum (p. 809).
                      Mature leaves covered below with brilliant
                            copper-colored pubescence.
                    Leaves glabrous below.
                                                 Chrysophyllum (p. 817).
                      Leaves marked by minute black dots, ovate to
                            oblong-lanceolate.
                                                       Ardisia (p. 806).
                      Leaves lepidote, oblong-obovate.
                                                       Rapanea (p. 807).
            _ff_ Leaves obtuse or emarginate at apex.
              _g_ Leaves rounded or cordate at base, emarginate, their
                    petioles slender.
                Leaves reniform to broad-ovate, cordate; juice watery.
                                                        Cercis (p. 603).
                Leaves elliptic to oblong, rounded at base; juice milky
                      or viscid.
                  Leaves emarginate; petioles slender,
                        rufous-tomentulose.
                                                      Mimusops (p. 819).
                  Leaves obtuse at apex; petioles stout,
                        grayish-tomentulose or glabrous.
                                             Rhus integrifolia (p. 664).
              _gg_ Leaves cuneate at base.

                Petioles slender, 1/2' long.
                                                      Beureria (p. 861).
                Petioles short and stout.
                  Leaves coriaceous, with thick revolute margins
                        (_sometimes opposite_).
                                                     Jacquinia (p. 804).
                  Leaves subcoriaceous, slightly revolute.
                    Leaves reticulate-veined beneath.
                      Leaves oval to obovate or oblong-oval, more or
                            less pubescent while young.
                                                     Vaccinium (p. 802).
                      Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, glabrous.
                                                       Cyrilla (p. 666).
                    Leaves obscurely veined beneath, glabrous.
                      Leaves oblong-lanceolate, narrowed toward the
                            emarginate apex, decurrent nearly to base of
                            petiole.
                                                     Cliftonia (p. 667).
                      Leaves rounded at apex, distinctly petioled.
                                                      Maytenus (p. 676).


                          ** Leaves deciduous.


                + Leaves conspicuous. (++, see p. xxiv.)

  _a_ Leaves entire, sometimes 3 or 4-lobed. (_aa_, see p. xxiii).
    _b_ Stipules present.
      Juice milky.
                                                       Maclura (p. 331).
      Juice watery.
        Stipules connate, enveloping the young leaves, their scars
              encircling the branchlet.
          Leaves acute or acuminate, entire; winter-buds pointed, nearly
                terete.
                                                      Magnolia (p. 342).
          Leaves truncate, sinuately 4-lobed; winter-buds obtuse,
                compressed.
                                                  Liriodendron (p. 351).
        Stipules distinct.
          Branches spinescent; leaves glandular, caducous (_crenately
                serrate on vigorous shoots_).
                                                         Dalea (p. 621).
          Branches not spinescent; leaves without glands.
            Winter-buds with a single pair of connate scales.
                                                         Salix (p. 138).
            Winter-buds with several pairs of imbricate scales.
              Branchlets without a terminal bud; leaves 3-nerved.
                                                        Celtis (p. 318).
              Branchlets with a terminal bud, leaves penniveined.
                                            Quercus sp. 17--20 (p. 262).
    _bb_ Stipules wanting.
      _c_ Branchlets bright green and lustrous for the first 2 or 3
            years; leaves sometimes 3-lobed, aromatic.
                                                     Sassafras (p. 362).
      _cc_ Branchlets brown or gray.
        _d_ Leaves acute or acuminate.
          Leaves 10'--12' long, obovate-oblong, acuminate, glabrous,
                emitting a disagreeable odor.
                                                       Asimina (p. 353).
          Leaves smaller.
            Petioles very slender, 1'--2' long; leaves elliptic,
                  acuminate.
                                           Cornus alternifolia (p. 789).
            Petioles short.
              Branchlets with a terminal bud.
                Leaf-scars about as long as broad; branchlets without
                      lenticels, light reddish brown.
                                                     Elliottia (p. 791).
                Leaf-scars crescent-shaped, broader than long, with 3
                      distinct bundle-traces.
                  Leaves pubescent on both sides, rugulose above;
                        petioles 1'--2' long, like the young branchlet
                        densely pubescent.
                                                     Leitneria (p. 167).
                  Leaves glabrous and smooth above, glabrous or
                        pubescent below; petioles and branchlets usually
                        glabrous or nearly so at maturity.
                                                         Nyssa (p. 779).
              Branchlets without a terminal bud.
                Pubescence consisting of simple hairs or wanting.
                  Leaves 4'--6' long, pubescent beneath while young;
                        branchlet light brown or gray.
                                          Diospyros virginiana (p. 821).
                  Leaves 1-1/2'--3' long, glabrous; branches light
                        yellowish gray.
                                                     Schoepfia (p. 336).
                Pubescence stellate; leaves obovate or elliptic,
                      2-1/2'--5' long, pubescent below.
                                                        Styrax (p. 829).
        _dd_ Leaves obtuse or acute.
          Branchlets not spinescent.
            Leaves glabrous at maturity, their petioles slender.
                                                       Cotinus (p. 657).
            Leaves pubescent below at maturity; their petioles short and
                  thick.
                                              Diospyros texana (p. 823).
          Branchlets spinescent; leaves often fascicled on lateral
                branchlets.
                                                       Bumelia (p. 812).
  _aa_ Leaves serrate or pinnately lobed.
    _b_ Stipules present. (_bb_, see p. xxvi.)
      _c_ Winter-buds naked.
        Leaves oblique at base, the upper side rounded or subcordate,
              obovate, coarsely toothed.
                                                     Hamamelis (p. 368).
        Leaves equal at base, cuneate, finely serrate or crenate.
                                         Rhamnus sp. 2, 3 (p. 724, 725).
      _cc_ Winter-buds with a single pair of connate scales.
        Primary veins arching and uniting within the margins; leaves
              simply serrate or crenate, sometimes entire.
                                                         Salix (p. 138).
        Primary veins extending to the teeth, leaves doubly serrate,
              often slightly lobed.
                                                         Alnus (p. 220).
      _ccc_ Winter-buds with several pairs of imbricate scales.
        _d_ Terminal buds wanting; branchlets prolonged by an upper
              axillary bud.
          Juice milky; leaves usually ovate, often lobed.
                                                         Morus (p. 328).
          Juice watery; leaves not lobed.
            Leaves distinctly oblique at base.
              Leaves with numerous prominent lateral veins.
                Leaves generally broad-ovate, simply serrate,
                      stellate-pubescent at least while young, rarely
                      glabrous.
                                                         Tilia (p. 732).
                Leaves never broad-ovate, usually doubly serrate, more
                      or less pubescent with simple hairs, at least
                      while young.
                  Winter-buds ovoid, usually acute, 1/3 to nearly as
                        long as petioles; leaves 1'--7' long, doubly
                        serrate.
                                                         Ulmus (p. 309).
                  Winter-buds subglobose, minute; leaves 2'--2-1/2'
                        long, crenate-serrate.
                                                       Planera (p. 316).
              Leaves 3 or 4-nerved from the base.
                                                        Celtis (p. 318).
            Leaves slightly or not at all oblique at base.
              Leaves 3-nerved from the base, glandular-crenate or
                    glandular-serrate.
                                                     Ceanothus (p. 726).
              Leaves not or obscurely 3-nerved at base, usually doubly
                    serrate.
                Leaves blue-green; petioles 1/4'--1/2' long; bark
                      smooth, gray-brown.
                                                      Carpinus (p. 201).
                Leaves yellow-green.
                  Bark rough, furrowed; petioles 1/8'--1/4' long; leaves
                        not resinous-glandular.
                                                        Ostrya (p. 202).
                  Bark flaky or cherry-tree like; petioles 1/4'--1'
                        long; leaves often resinous-glandular while
                        young.
                                                        Betula (p. 205).
        _dd_ Terminal buds present.
          Primary veins arching and uniting within the margin
                (_extending to the margin in the lobed leaves of
                Malus_).
            Winter-buds resinous; leaves crenate, usually truncate at
                  base; petioles slender.
                                                       Populus (p. 119).
            Winter-buds not resinous.
              Leaf-scars with 3 bundle-traces.
                Leaves involute in bud, often lobed on vigorous shoots;
                      winter-buds obtuse, short, pubescent.
                                                         Malus (p. 379).
                Leaves conduplicate (_or in some species of Prunus
                      convolute_), never lobed; winter-buds acute.
                  Winter-buds elongated; branches never spinescent.
                                                   Amelanchier (p. 393).
                  Winter-buds not elongated, ovoid; branches sometimes
                        spinescent.
                                                        Prunus (p. 555).
              Leaf-scars with 1 bundle-trace; leaves simply serrate.
                                                 Ilex sp. 5--6 (p. 673).

          Primary veins extending to the teeth or to the lobes.
            Leaves lobed.
                                Quercus sp. 1--16, 35--50 (p. 241, 283).
            Leaves serrate-toothed.
              Winter-buds with numerous scales.
                Leaves lustrous beneath, remotely serrate or
                      denticulate; winter-buds elongated, acuminate.
                                                         Fagus (p. 228).
                Leaves pale beneath, coarsely dentate or serrate;
                      winter-buds acute. Chestnut Oaks.
                                            Quercus sp. 51--54 (p. 303).
              Winter-buds with 2 pairs of scales.
                                                      Castanea (p. 230).
            Leaves doubly or simply serrate, or lobed, with serrate
                  lobes; branches often furnished with spines.
              Leaves involute in the bud; branchlets often ending in
                    blunt spines.
                                                         Malus (p. 379).
              Leaves conduplicate in the bud; branches usually armed
                    with sharp-pointed single or branched axillary
                    spines.
                                                      Crataegus (p. 397).
    _bb_ Stipules wanting.
      _c_ Leaves not lobed.
        Leaves subcoriaceous, oblong, sometimes nearly entire, glabrous.
                                                     Symplocos (p. 831).
        Leaves thin.
          Leaves oblong-obovate, acute, pubescent beneath.
                                            Gordonia alatamaha (p. 752).
          Leaves oblong or lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous or puberulous
                while young, turning scarlet in the autumn.
                                                    Oxydendrum (p. 796).
          Leaves ovate to elliptic, stellate-pubescent or glabrous,
                turning yellow in the autumn.
                                                       Halesia (p. 824).
      _cc_ Leaves palmately lobed.
        Stipules large, foliaceous, united; branchlets without a
              terminal bud.
                                                      Platanus (p. 371).
        Stipules small, free, caducous; branchlets with a terminal bud.
                                                   Liquidambar (p. 367).


     ++ Leaves inconspicuous or wanting; branches spiny or prickly.

    Branches or stems succulent, armed with numerous prickles.
      Branches and stems columnar, ribbed, continuous; leaves 0.
                                                        Cereus (p. 757).
      Branches jointed, tuberculate; leaves scale-like.
                                                       Opuntia (p. 759).
    Branches rigid, spinescent.
      Leaves minute, narrow-obovate.
        Branchlets bright green.
                                                   Koeberlinia (p. 754).
        Branchlets red-brown.
                                                         Dalea (p. 621).
      Leaves scale-like, caducous.
                                                       Canotia (p. 677).


                          2. Leaves compound.


                * Leaves 3-foliolate, without stipules.

  Leaves persistent; leaflets obovate, entire, sessile.
                                                      Hypelate (p. 716).
  Leaves deciduous.
    Leaflets deltoid to hastate, entire, rounded at apex; branches
          prickly.
                                                     Erythrina (p. 627).
    Leaflets ovate to oblong, acuminate, strongly scented and bitter;
          branches unarmed.
                                                        Ptelea (p. 639).


               ** Leaves twice pinnate; stipules present.

  _a_ Leaves unequally twice pinnate, 2 deg.--4 deg. long, deciduous; leaflets
        serrate, 2'--3' in length; branches and stem armed with
        scattered prickles.
                                                        Aralia (p. 778).
  _aa_ Leaves equally twice pinnate, usually smaller; branches unarmed
        or armed with stipular or axillary spines (in _Parkinsonia_
        often apparently simply pinnate).
    _b_ Leaflets crenate; leaves simply or twice-pinnate on the same
          plant, deciduous, usually armed with simple or branched
          axillary spines.
                                                     Gleditsia (p. 607).
    _bb_ Leaflets entire.
      Leaflets 2--2-1/2' long; leaves deciduous; branchlets stout,
            unarmed.
                                                   Gymnocladus (p. 605).
      Leaflets smaller; leaves usually persistent; branchlets slender.
        Branches armed with prickles or spines.
          Leaves with 2 or rarely 4 pinnae.
            Branches armed with axillary spines or spiny rachises.
              Pinnae with 4--8 leaflets; branches with short axillary
                    spines.
                                                     Cercidium (p. 613).
              Pinnae with 8--60 leaflets; branches armed with spiny
                    rachises or rigid branchlets terminating in stout
                    spines.
                                                   Parkinsonia (p. 611).
            Branches armed with stipular prickles; leaves persistent.
              Pinnae with many oblong to linear leaflets.
                                                      Prosopis (p. 599).
              Pinnae with 1 pair of orbicular to broad-oblong leaflets.
                                     Pithecolobium unguis-cati (p. 586).
          Leaves with 6, or more, rarely 4, pinnae.
            Prickles usually spreading, often recurved.
                                                        Acacia (p. 591).
            Prickles usually more or less ascending, straight.
                                                 Pithecolobium (p. 586).
        Branches unarmed.
          Branchlets and petioles glabrous; leaves with 2--5 pair of
                pinnae, each with 40--80 leaflets.
                                                      Lysiloma (p. 589).
          Branchlets and petioles pubescent while young; leaves with
                5--17 pair of many-foliolate pinnae, or pinnae 2--4 and
                each with 8--16 leaflets.
                                                       Leucaena (p. 596).


                       *** Leaves simply pinnate.

  _a_ Leaves equally pinnate.
    Stipules wanting.
      Leaflets 2--4, generally oblong-obovate.
                                                       Exothea (p. 714).
      Leaflets 6--12.
        Leaflets obtuse, usually oblong-obovate.
          Leaflets 8--12, 2'--3' long, pale below; leaves occasionally
                opposite.
                                                     Simarouba (p. 642).
          Leaflets 6--8, 1'--1-1/2' long, green below.
                                         Xanthoxylum coriaceum (p. 637).
        Leaflets 6--8, acuminate.
                                                     Swietenia (p. 648).
    Stipules present.
      Branches armed with infra-stipular spines in pairs; leaflets
            10--15, usually oblong-obovate, 1/2'--3/4' long, persistent.
                                                        Olneya (p. 626).
      Branches unarmed; leaflets 20--46, ovals 1/2'--2/3' long.
                                                  Eysenhardtia (p. 620).
  _aa_ Leaves unequally pinnate.
    _b_ Stipules present.
      Leaflets sharply serrate; leaves deciduous; winter-buds resinous.
                                                        Sorbus (p. 390).
      Leaflets entire or crenately serrate.
        Leaves deciduous.
          Leaflets 7--11, 3'--4-1/2' long; branches unarmed.
            Leaflets usually alternate, thin and glabrous at maturity.
                                                    Cladrastis (p. 618).
            Leaflets opposite, coriaceous, pubescent beneath at least
                  along the veins.
                                                 Ichthyomethia (p. 628).
          Leaflets 9--21, 1--2 cm. long.
            Branches usually with stipular prickles, sometimes viscid.
                                                       Robinia (p. 622).
            Branches unarmed, not viscid; leaflets 13--19, elliptic.
                                               Sophora affinis (p. 617).
        Leaves persistent.
          Leaflets 7--9, oblong-elliptic, 1'--2-1/2' long; branches
                unarmed.
                                          Sophora secundiflora (p. 616).
          Leaflets 10--15; branches prickly.
                                                        Olneya (p. 626).
    _bb_ Stipules wanting.
      _d_ Leaves persistent.
        Leaflets long-stalked (_sometimes nearly sessile in Xanthoxylum
              flavum_).
          Leaflets oblong-ovate, cuneate at base.
            Leaflets acuminate, glabrous.
                                                     Picramnia (p. 643).
            Leaflets obtuse, tomentose when unfolding.
                                            Xanthoxylum flavum (p. 636).
          Leaflets broad-ovate, usually rounded or subcordate at base.
                                                      Metopium (p. 658).
        Leaflets sessile or nearly so.
          Petiole and rachis winged.
            Leaflets crenate, obovate, about 1/2' long; branches
                  prickly.
                                            Xanthoxylum Fagara (p. 634).
            Leaflets entire.
              Leaflets oblong, usually acute, 3'--4' long.
                                            Sapindus saponaria (p. 712).
              Leaflets spathulate, rounded at apex, not more than 3/4'
                    long.
                                                      Pistacia (p. 656).
          Petiole and rachis not winged.
            Leaflets 7--19, acuminate, 2'--5' long.
                                           Sapindus marginatus (p. 713).
            Leaflets 21--41, obtuse, 1/2'--3/4' long.
                                                     Alvaradoa (p. 644).
      _dd_ Leaves deciduous.
        Leaflets long-stalked, 3--7, entire, acute.
                                                       Bursera (p. 645).
        Leaflets sessile or nearly so.
          Branches prickly; leaflets crenate.
                                    Xanthoxylum clava-Herculis (p. 635).
          Branches unarmed.
            Juice milky or viscid; leaflets serrate or entire; rachis
                  sometimes winged.
                                             Rhus species 1--3 (p. 660).
            Juice watery.
              Rachis without wings.
                Leaflets entire, acuminate, 7--9.
                                           Sapindus Drummondii (p. 714).
                Leaflets serrate or crenate.
                  Winter-buds large; leaflets 5--23, aromatic.
                    Winter-buds naked.
                                                       Juglans (p. 169).
                    Winter-buds covered with scales.
                                                         Carya (p. 176).
                  Winter-buds minute, globose, scaly; leaflets 5--7,
                        ovate, not aromatic.
                                                      Ungnadia (p. 717).
              Rachis winged; leaflets 10--20, entire, rounded at apex,
                    not more than 1/4' long.
                                           Bursera microphylla (p. 647).




                         TREES OF NORTH AMERICA
                         (Exclusive of Mexico)




                         Class 1. GYMNOSPERMAE.


Ovules and seeds borne on the face of a scale, not inclosed in an ovary;
resinous trees, with stems increasing in diameter by the annual addition
of a layer of wood inside the bark.




                              I. PINACEAE.


Trees, with narrow or scale-like generally persistent clustered or
alternate leaves and usually scaly buds. Flowers appearing in early
spring, mostly surrounded at the base by an involucre of the more or
less enlarged scales of the buds, unisexual, monoecious (_dioecious in
Juniperus_), the male consisting of numerous 2-celled anthers, the
female of scales bearing on their inner face 2 or several ovules, and
becoming at maturity a woody cone or rarely a berry. Seeds with or
without wings; seed-coat of 2 layers; embryo axile in copious albumen;
cotyledons 2 or several. Of the twenty-nine genera scattered over the
surface of the globe, but most abundant in northern temperate regions,
thirteen occur in North America.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN GENERA.

  Scales of the female flowers numerous; spirally arranged in the axils
        of persistent bracts; ovules 2, inverted; seeds borne directly
        on the scales, attached at the base in shallow depressions on
        the inner side of the scales, falling from them at maturity and
        usually carrying away a scarious terminal wing; leaves fascicled
        or scattered (_deciduous in Larix_). Abietineae.
    Fruit maturing in two or rarely in three seasons; leaves fascicled,
          needle-shaped in axillary 1--5-leaved clusters, inclosed at
          the base in a membranaceous sheath; cone-scales thick and
          woody, much longer than their bracts.
                                                               1. Pinus.
    Fruit maturing in one season.
      Leaves in many-leaved clusters on short spur-like branchlets,
            deciduous; cone-scales thin, usually shorter than their
            bracts.
                                                               2. Larix.
      Leaves scattered, linear.
        Cones pendulous, the scales persistent on the axis.
          Branchlets roughened by the persistent leaf-bases; leaves
                deciduous in drying; bracts shorter than the
                cone-scales.
            Leaves sessile, 4-sided, or flattened and stomatiferous
                  above.
                                                               3. Picea.
            Leaves stalked, flattened and stomatiferous below, or
                  angular.
                                                               4. Tsuga.
          Branchlets not roughened by leaf-bases; leaves stalked,
                flattened; not deciduous in drying; bracts of the cone
                2-lobed, aristate, longer than the scales.
                                                         5. Pseudotsuga.
        Cones erect, their scales deciduous from the axis, longer or
              shorter than the bracts; leaves sessile, flat or 4-sided.
                                                               6. Abies.
  Scales of the female flowers without bracts; ovules and seeds borne on
        the face of minute scales adnate to the base of the
        flower-scales, enlarging and forming the scales of the cone.
        Seeds with a narrow marginal wing (_wingless in Juniperas_).
    Scales of the female flowers numerous, spirally arranged, forming a
          woody cone; ovules erect, 2 or many under each scale; leaves
          linear, alternate, often of 2 forms (_deciduous in Taxodium_).
          Taxodiae.
      Ovules and seeds numerous under each scale.
                                                             7. Sequoia.
      Ovules and seeds 2 under each scale; leaves mostly spreading in 2
            ranks.
                                                            8. Taxodium.
    Scales of the female flower few, decussate, forming a small cone, or
          rarely a berry; ovules 2 or many under each scale; leaves
          decussate or in 3 ranks, often of 2 forms, usually scale-like,
          mostly adnate to the branch, the earliest free and subulate.
          Cupressineae.
      Fruit a cone; leaves scale-like.
        Cones oblong, their scales oblong, imbricated or valvate; seeds
              2 under each scale, maturing the first year.
          Scales of the cone 6, the middle ones only fertile; seeds
                unequally 2-winged.
                                                          9. Libocedrus.
          Scales of the cone 8--12; seeds equally 2-winged.
                                                              10. Thuja.
        Cones subglobose, the scales peltate, maturing in one or two
              years; seeds few or many under each scale.
          Fruit maturing in two seasons; seeds many under each scale;
                branchlets terete or 4-winged.
                                                          11. Cupressus.
          Fruit maturing in one season; seeds 2 under each scale;
                branchlets flattened.
                                                       12. Chamaecyparis.
      Fruit a berry formed by the coalition of the scales of the flower;
            ovules in pairs or solitary; flowers dioecious; leaves
            decussate or in 3's, subulate or scale-like, often of 2
            forms.
                                                          13. Juniperus.




                         1. PINUS Duham. Pine.


Trees or rarely shrubs, with deeply furrowed and sometimes laminate or
with thin and scaly bark, hard or often soft heartwood often
conspicuously marked by dark bands of summer cells impregnated with
resin, pale nearly white sapwood, and large branch-buds formed during
summer and composed of minute buds in the axils of bud-scales, becoming
the bracts of the spring shoot. Leaves needle-shaped, clustered, the
clusters borne on deciduous spurs in the axils of scale-like primary
leaves, inclosed in the bud by numerous scales lengthening and forming a
more or less persistent sheath at the base of each cluster. Male flowers
clustered at the base of leafy growing shoots of the year, each flower
surrounded at the base by an involucre of 3--6 scale-like bracts,
composed of numerous sessile anthers, imbricated in many ranks and
surmounted by crest-like nearly orbicular connectives; the female
subterminal or lateral, their scales in the axils of non-accrescent
bracts. Fruit a woody cone maturing at the end of the second or rarely
of the third season, composed of the hardened and woody scales of the
flower more or less thickened on the exposed surface (the _apophysis_),
with the ends of the growth of the previous year appearing as terminal
or dorsal brown protuberances or scars (the _umbo_). Seeds usually
obovoid, shorter or longer than their wings or rarely wingless; outer
seed-coat crustaceous or thick, hard, and bony, the inner membranaceous;
cotyledons 3--18, usually much shorter than the inferior radicle.

Pinus is widely distributed through the northern hemisphere from the
Arctic Circle to the West Indies, the mountains of Central America, the
Canary Islands, northern Africa, the Philippine Islands, and Sumatra.
About sixty-six species are recognized. Of exotic species the so-called
Scotch Pine, _Pinus sylvestris_ L., of Europe and Asia, the Swiss Stone
Pine, _Pinus cembra_ L., and the Austrian Pine and other forms of _Pinus
nigra_ Arnold, from central and southern Europe, are often planted in
the northeastern states, and _Pinus Pinaster_ Ait., of the coast region
of western France and the Mediterranean Basin is successfully cultivated
in central and southern California. _Pinus_ is the classical name of the
Pine-tree.

The North American species can be conveniently grouped in two sections,
Soft Pines and Pitch Pines.


                              SOFT PINES.

Wood soft, close-grained, light-colored, the sapwood thin and nearly
white; sheaths of the leaf-clusters deciduous; leaves with one
fibro-vascular bundle.

  Leaves in 5-leaved clusters.
    Cones long-stalked, elongated, cylindric bright green at maturity,
          becoming light yellow brown, their scales thin, with terminal
          unarmed umbos; seeds shorter than their wings. White Pines.
      Leaves without conspicuous white lines on the back.
        Leaves slender, flexible; cones 4'--8' long.
                                                      1. P. Strobus (A).
        Leaves stout, more rigid; cones 5'--11' long.
                                                 2. P. monticola (B, G).
      Leaves with conspicuous white lines on the back; cones 12'--18'
            long.
                                                  3. P. Lambertiana (G).
    Cones short-stalked, green or purple at maturity, their scales
          thick.
      Cones cylindric or subglobose, their scales with terminal umbos;
            leaves 2' long or less. Stone Pines.
        Cones 3'--10' long, their scales opening at maturity; seeds with
              wings.
                                                  4. P. flexilis (F, H).
        Cones 1/2'--3' long, their scales remaining closed at maturity;
              seeds wingless.
                                             5. P. albicaulis (B, F, G).
      Cones ovoid-oblong, their scales with dorsal umbos armed with
            slender prickles; seeds shorter than their wings; leaves in
            crowded clusters, incurved, less than 2' long. Foxtail
            Pines.
        Cones armed with minute incurved prickles.
                                                  6. P. Balfouriana (G).
        Cones armed with long slender prickles.
                                                  7. P. aristata (F, G).
  Leaves in 1--4-leaved clusters; cones globose, green at maturity,
        becoming light brown, their scales few, concave, much thickened,
        only the middle scales seed-bearing; seeds large and edible,
        their wings rudimentary; leaves 2' or less, often incurved. Nut
        Pines.
                                          8. P. cembroides (C, F, G, H).


                    1. Pinus Strobus L. White Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

Leaves soft bluish green, whitened on the ventral side by 3--5 bands of
stomata, 3'--5' long, mostly turning yellow and falling in September in
their second season, or persistent until the following June. Flowers:
male yellow; female bright pink, with purple scale margins. Fruit fully
grown in July of the second season, 4'--8' long, opening and discharging
its seeds in September; seeds narrowed at the ends, 1/4' long, red-brown
mottled with black, about one fourth as long as their wings.

A tree, while young with slender horizontal or slightly ascending
branches in regular whorls usually of 5 branches; at maturity often
100 deg., occasionally 220 deg. high, with a tall straight stem 3 deg.--4 deg. or rarely
6 deg. in diameter, when crowded in the forest with short branches forming a
narrow head, or rising above its forest companions with long lateral
branches sweeping upward in graceful curves, the upper branches
ascending and forming a broad open irregular head, and slender
branchlets coated at first with rusty tomentum, soon glabrous, and
orange-brown in their first winter. Bark on young stems and branches
thin, smooth, green tinged with red, lustrous during the summer,
becoming 1'--2' thick on old trunks and deeply divided by shallow
fissures into broad connected ridges covered with small closely
appressed purplish scales. Wood light, not strong, straight-grained,
easily worked, light brown often slightly tinged with red; largely
manufactured into lumber, shingles, and laths, used in construction, for
cabinet-making, the interior finish of buildings, wooden ware, matches,
and the masts of vessels.

Distribution. Newfoundland to Manitoba, southward through the northern
states to Pennsylvania, northern and eastern (Belmont County) Ohio,
northern Indiana, valley of the Rocky River near Oregon, Ogle County,
Illinois, and central and southeastern Iowa, and along the Appalachian
Mountains to eastern Kentucky and Tennessee and northern Georgia;
forming nearly pure forests on sandy drift soils, or more often in small
groves scattered in forests of deciduous-leaved trees on fertile
well-drained soil, also on the banks of streams, or on river flats, or
rarely in swamps.

Largely planted as an ornament of parks and gardens in the eastern
states, and in many European countries, where it grows with vigor and
rapidity; occasionally used in forest planting in the United States.


                 2. Pinus monticola D. Don. White Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

Leaves blue-green, glaucous, whitened by 2--6 rows of ventral and often
by dorsal stomata, mostly persistent 3 or 4 years. Flowers: male yellow;
female pale purple. Fruit 5'--11' long, shedding its seeds late in the
summer or in early autumn; seeds narrowed at the ends, 1/3' long, pale
red-brown mottled with black, about one third as long as their wings.

A tree, often 100 deg. or occasionally 150 deg. high, with a trunk frequently
4 deg.--5 deg. or rarely 7 deg.--8 deg. in diameter, slender spreading slightly
pendulous branches clothing young stems to the ground and in old age
forming a narrow open often unsymmetrical pyramidal head, and stout
tough branchlets clothed at first with rusty pubescence, dark
orange-brown and puberulous in their first and dark red-purple and
glabrous in their second season. Bark of young stems and branches thin,
smooth, light gray, becoming on old trees 3/4'--1-1/2' thick and divided
into small nearly square plates by deep longitudinal and cross fissures,
and covered by small closely appressed purple scales. Wood light, soft,
not strong, close, straight-grained, light brown or red; sometimes
manufactured into lumber, used in construction and the interior finish
of buildings.

Distribution. Scattered through mountain forests from the basin of the
Columbia River in British Columbia to Vancouver Island; on the mountains
of northern Washington to the western slopes of the Rocky Mountains of
northern Montana; on the coast ranges of Washington and Oregon; and on
the Cascade and Sierra Nevada ranges southward to the Kern River valley,
California; most abundant and of its greatest value in northern Idaho on
the bottom-lands of streams tributary to Lake Pend Oreille; reaching the
sea-level on the southern shores of the Straits of Fuca and elevations
of 10,000 deg. on the California Sierras.

Often planted as an ornamental tree in Europe, and occasionally in the
eastern United States where it grows more vigorously than any other
Pine-tree of western America.


                3. Pinus Lambertiana Dougl. Sugar Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

Leaves stout, rigid, 3-1/2'--4' long, marked on the two faces by 2--6
rows of stomata; deciduous during their second and third years. Flowers:
male light yellow; female pale green. Fruit fully grown in August and
opening in October, 11'--18' or rarely 21' long; seeds 1/2'--5/8' long,
dark chestnut-brown or nearly black, and half the length of their firm
dark brown obtuse wings broadest below the middle and 1/2' wide.

A tree, in early life with remote regular whorls of slender branches
often clothing the stem to the ground and forming an open narrow
pyramid; at maturity 200 deg.-220 deg. high, with a trunk 6 deg.--8 deg. or occasionally
12 deg. in diameter, a flat-topped crown frequently 60 deg. or 70 deg. across of
comparatively slender branches sweeping outward and downward in graceful
curves, and stout branchlets coated at first with pale or rufous
pubescence, dark orange-brown during their first winter, becoming dark
purple-brown. Bark on young stems and branches thin, smooth, dark green,
becoming on old trunks 2'--3' thick and deeply and irregularly divided
into long thick plate-like ridges covered with large loose rich
purple-brown or cinnamon-red scales. Wood light, soft, straight-grained,
light red-brown; largely manufactured into lumber and used for the
interior finish of buildings, woodwork, and shingles. A sweet sugar-like
substance exudes from wounds made in the heartwood.

Distribution. Mountain slopes and the sides of ravines and canyons;
western Oregon from the valley of the north branch of the Santiam River
southward on the Cascade and coast ranges; California along the northern
and coast ranges to Sonoma County; along the western slopes of the
Sierra Nevada, where it grows to its greatest size at elevations between
3000 deg. and 7000 deg.; reappearing on the Santa Lucia Mountains of the coast
ranges; and on the high mountains in the southwestern part of the state
from Santa Barbara County southward usually at elevations of
5000 deg.--7000 deg. above the sea; and on the San Pedro Martir Mountains in
Lower California.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in western Europe and in the
eastern states, the Sugar Pine has grown slowly in cultivation and shows
little promise of attaining the large size and great beauty which
distinguish it in its native forests.


          4. Pinus flexilis James. Rocky Mountain White Pine.

                _Pinus strobiformis_ Sarg., not Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 4]

Leaves stout, rigid, dark green, marked on all sides by 1--4 rows of
stomata, 1-1/2'--3' long, deciduous in their fifth and sixth years.
Flowers: male reddish; female clustered, bright red-purple. Fruit
subcylindric, horizontal or slightly declining, green or rarely purple
at maturity, 3'--10' long, with narrow and more or less reflexed scales
opening at maturity; seeds compressed, 1/3'--1/2' long, dark red-brown
mottled with black, with a thick shell produced into a narrow margin,
their wings about 1/12' wide, generally persistent on the scale after
the seed falls.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg., occasionally 80 deg. high, with a short trunk
2 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, stout long-persistent branches ultimately forming a
low wide round-topped head, and stout branchlets orange-green and
covered at first with soft fine pubescence, usually soon glabrous and
darker colored; at high elevations often a low spreading shrub. Bark of
young stems and branches thin, smooth, light gray or silvery white,
becoming on old trunks 1'--2' thick, dark brown or nearly black, and
divided by deep fissures into broad ridges broken into nearly square
plates covered by small closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft,
close-grained, pale clear yellow, turning red with exposure;
occasionally manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. Eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains from Alberta to
western Texas and westward on mountain ranges at elevations of 5000 deg. to
12,000 deg. to Montana, and southern California, reaching the western slopes
of the Sierra Nevada at the head of King's River near the summit of San
Gorgonio Mountain and in Snow Canyon, San Bernardino Range; usually
scattered singly or in small groves; forming open forests on the eastern
foothills of the Rocky Mountains of Montana and on the ranges of central
Nevada; attaining its largest size on those of northern New Mexico and
Arizona.


                5. Pinus albicaulis Engelm. White Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 5]

Leaves stout, rigid, slightly incurved, dark green, marked by 1--3 rows
of dorsal stomata, clustered at the ends of the branches, 1-1/2'--2-1/2'
long, persistent for from five to eight years. Flowers opening in July,
scarlet. Fruit ripening in August, oval or subglobose, horizontal,
sessile, dark purple, 1-1/2'--3' long, with scales thickened, acute,
often armed with stout pointed umbos, remaining closed at maturity;
seeds wingless, acute, subcylindric or flattened on one side, 1/3'--1/2'
long, 1/3' thick, with a thick dark chestnut-brown hard shell.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--30 deg. or rarely 60 deg. high, generally with a short
trunk 2 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, stout very flexible branches, finally often
standing nearly erect and forming an open very irregular broad head, and
stout dark red-brown or orange-colored branchlets puberulous for two
years or sometimes glabrous; at high elevations often a low shrub, with
wide-spreading nearly prostrate stems. Bark thin, except near the base
of old trunks and broken by narrow fissures into thin narrow brown or
creamy white plate-like scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained,
brittle, light brown. The large sweet seeds are gathered and eaten by
Indians.

Distribution. Alpine slopes and exposed ridges between 5000 deg. and 12,000 deg.
elevation, forming the timber-line on many mountain ranges from latitude
53 deg. north in the Rocky Mountains and British Columbia, southward to the
Wind River and Salt River Ranges, Wyoming, the mountains of eastern
Washington and Oregon, the Cascade Range, the mountains of northern
California and the Sierra Nevada to Mt. Whitney.


                6. Pinus Balfouriana Balf. Foxtail Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

Leaves stout, rigid, dark green and lustrous on the back, pale and
marked on the ventral faces by numerous rows of stomata, 1'--1-1/2'
long, persistent for ten or twelve years. Flowers: male dark orange-red;
female dark purple. Fruit 3-1/2'--5' long, with scales armed with minute
incurved prickles, dark purple, turning after opening dark red or
mahogany color; seeds full and rounded at the apex, compressed at the
base, pale, conspicuously mottled with dark purple, 1/3' long, their
wings narrowed and oblique at the apex, about 1' long and 1/4' wide.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg. or rarely 90 deg. high, with a trunk generally
1 deg.--2 deg. or rarely 5 deg. in diameter, short stout branches forming an open
irregular pyramidal picturesque head, and long rigid more or less
spreading puberulous, soon glabrous, dark orange-brown ultimately dark
gray-brown or nearly black branchlets, clothed only at the extremities
with the long dense brush-like masses of foliage. Bark thin, smooth, and
milky white on the stems and branches of young trees, becoming on old
trees sometimes 3/4' thick, dark red-brown, deeply divided into broad
flat ridges. broken into nearly square plates separating on the surface
into small closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft and brittle, pale
reddish brown.

Distribution. California, on rocky slopes and ridges, forming scattered
groves on Scott Mountain, Siskiyou County, at elevations of
5000 deg.--6000 deg.; on the mountains at the head of the Sacramento River; on
Mt. Yolo Bally in the northern Coast Range, and on the southern Sierra
Nevada up to elevations of 11,500 deg., growing here to its largest size and
forming an extensive open forest on the Whitney Plateau east of the
canyon of Kern River, and at the highest elevations often a low shrub,
with wide-spreading prostrate stems.


         7. Pinus aristata Engelm. Foxtail Pine. Hickory Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 7]

Leaves stout or slender, dark green, lustrous on the back, marked by
numerous rows of stomata on the ventral faces, 1'--1-1/2' long, often
deciduous at the end of ten or twelve years or persistent four or five
years longer. Flowers male dark orange-red; female dark purple. Fruit
3'--3-1/2' long, with scales armed with slender incurved brittle
prickles nearly 1/4' long, dark purple-brown on the exposed parts, the
remainder dull red, opening and scattering their seeds about the 1st of
October; seeds nearly oval, compressed, light brown mottled with black,
1/4' long, their wings broadest at the middle, about 1/3' long and 1/4'
wide.

A bushy tree, occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a short trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, short stout branches in regular whorls while young, in old age
growing very irregularly, the upper erect and much longer than the
usually pendulous lower branches, and stout light orange-colored,
glabrous, or at first puberulous, ultimately dark gray-brown or nearly
black branchlets clothed at the ends with long compact brush-like tufts
of foliage. Bark thin, smooth, milky white on the stems and branches of
young trees, becoming on old trees 1/2'--3/4' thick, red-brown, and
irregularly divided into flat connected ridges separating on the surface
into small closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, light
red; occasionally used for the timbers of mines and for fuel.

Distribution. Rocky or gravelly slopes at the upper limit of tree growth
and rarely below 8,000 deg. above the sea from the outer range of the Rocky
Mountains of Colorado to those of southern Utah, central and southern
Nevada, southeastern California, and the San Francisco peaks of northern
Arizona.


               8. Pinus cembroides Zucc. Nut Pine. Pinon.

[Illustration: Fig. 8]

Leaves in 2 or 3-leaved clusters, slender, much incurved, dark green,
sometimes marked by rows of stomata on the 3 faces, 1'--2' long,
deciduous irregularly during their third and fourth years. Flowers: male
in short crowded clusters, yellow; female dark red. Fruit subglobose,
1'--2' broad; seeds subcylindric or obscurely triangular, more or less
compressed at the pointed apex, full and rounded at base, nearly black
on the lower side and dark chestnut-brown on the upper, 1/2'--3/4' long,
the margin of their outer coat adnate to the cone-scale.

A bushy tree, with a short trunk rarely more than a foot in diameter and
a broad round-topped head, usually 15 deg.--20 deg. high, stout spreading
branches, and slender dark orange-colored branchlets covered at first
with matted pale deciduous hairs, dark brown and sometimes nearly black
at the end of five or six years; in sheltered canyons on the mountains of
Arizona and in Lower California occasionally 50 deg. or 60 deg. tall. Bark about
1/2' thick, irregularly divided by remote shallow fissures and separated
on the surface into numerous large thin light red-brown scales. Wood
light, soft, close-grained, pale clear yellow. The large oily seeds are
an important article of food in northern Mexico, and are sold in large
quantities in Mexican towns.

Distribution. Mountain ranges of central and southern Arizona, usually
only above elevations of 6500 deg., often covering their upper slopes with
open forests; in an isolated station on the Edwards Plateau on uplands
and in canyons at the headwaters of the Frio and Nueces Rivers, Edwards
and Kerr Counties, Texas; on the Sierra de Laguna, Lower California, and
on many of the mountain ranges of northern Mexico; passing into the
following varieties differing only in the number of the leaves in the
leaf-clusters, and in their thickness.


         Pinus cembroides var. Parryana Voss. Nut Pine. Pinon.

                       _Pinus quadrifolia_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 9]

Leaves in 1--5 usually 4-leaved clusters, stout, incurved, pale glaucous
green, marked on the three surfaces by numerous rows of stomata,
1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, irregularly deciduous, mostly falling in their
third year.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 18' in diameter,
and thick spreading branches forming a compact regularpyramidal or in
old age a low round-topped irregular head, and stout branchlets coated
at first with soft pubescence, and light orange-brown. Bark 1/2'--3/4'
thick, dark brown tinged with red, and divided by shallow fissures into
broad flat connected ridges covered by thick closely appressed
plate-like scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained, pale brown or
yellow. The seeds form an important article of food for the Indians of
Lower California.

Distribution. Arid mesas and low mountain slopes of Lower California
southward to the foothills of the San Pedro Martir Mountains, extending
northward across the boundary of California to the desert slopes of the
Santa Rosa Mountains, Riverside County, where it is common at elevations
of 5000 deg. above the sea-level.


          Pinus cembroides var. edulis Voss. Nut Pine. Pinon.

                         _Pinus edulis_ Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 10]

Leaves in 2 or rarely in 3-leaved clusters, stout, semiterete or
triangular, rigid, incurved, dark-green, marked by numerous rows of
stomata, 3/4'--1-1/2' long, deciduous during the third or not until the
fourth or fifth year, dropping irregularly and sometimes persistent for
eight or nine years.

A tree often 40 deg.--50 deg. high with a tall trunk occasionally 2 deg. in diameter
and short erect branches forming a narrow head, or frequently with a
short divided trunk and a low round-topped head of spreading branches,
and thick branchlets orange color during their first and second years,
finally becoming light gray or dark brown sometimes tinged with red.
Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick and irregularly divided into connected ridges
covered by small closely appressed light brown scales tinged with red or
orange color. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, pale brown; largely
employed for fuel and fencing, and as charcoal used in smelting; in
western Texas occasionally sawed into lumber. The seeds form an
important article of food among Indians and Mexicans, and are sold in
the markets of Colorado and New Mexico.

Distribution. Eastern foothills of the outer ranges of the Rocky
Mountains, from northern Colorado (Owl Canyon, Larimer County); to the
extreme western part of Oklahoma (near Kenton, Cimarron County, _G. W.
Stevens_) and to western Texas, westward to eastern Utah, southwestern
Wyoming, and to northern and central Arizona; over the mountains of
northern Mexico, and on the San Pedro Martir Mountains, Lower
California; often forming extensive open forests at the eastern base of
the Rocky Mountains, on the Colorado plateau, and on many mountain
ranges of northern and central Arizona up to elevations of 7000 deg. above
the sea.


        Pinus cembroides var. monophylla Voss. Nut Pine. Pinon.

                        _Pinus monophylla_ Torr.

[Illustration: Fig. 11]

Leaves in 1 or 2-leaved clusters, rigid, incurved, pale glaucous green,
marked by 18--20 rows of stomata, usually about 1-1/2' long, sometimes
deciduous during their fourth and fifth seasons, but frequently
persistent until their twelfth year.

A tree usually 15 deg.--20 deg., occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a short trunk
rarely more than a foot in diameter and often divided near the ground
into several spreading stems, short thick branches forming while the
tree is young a broad rather compact pyramid, and in old age often
pendulous and forming a low round-topped often picturesque head, and
stout light orange-colored ultimately dark brown branchlets. Bark about
3/4' thick and divided by deep irregular fissures into narrow connected
flat ridges broken on the surface into thin closely appressed light or
dark brown scales tinged with red or orange color. Wood light, soft,
weak, and brittle; largely used for fuel, and charcoal used in smelting.
The seeds supply an important article of food to the Indians of Nevada
and California.

Distribution. Dry gravelly slopes and mesas from the western base of the
Wasatch Mountains of Utah, westward over the mountain ranges of Nevada
to the eastern slopes of the southern Sierra Nevada, and to their
western slope at the headwaters of the Tuolumne, Kings and Kern Rivers,
and southward to northern Arizona and to the mountains of southern
California where it is common on the San Bernardino and San Jacinto
Mountains between altitudes of 3500 deg. and 7000 deg., and on the Sierra del
Pinal, Lower California; often forming extensive open forests at
elevations between 5000 deg. and 7000 deg.


                              PITCH PINES.

Wood usually heavy, coarse-grained, generally dark-colored, with pale
often thick sapwood; cones green at maturity (_sometimes purple in_ 10
_and_ 21) becoming various shades of brown; cone-scales more or less
thickened, mostly armed; seeds shorter than their wings (_except in_ 17
_and_ 28); leaves with 2 fibro-vascular bundles.

  Sheaths of the leaf-clusters deciduous; cones 1/2'--2' long, maturing
        in the third year, leaves in 3-leaved clusters, slender,
        2-1/2'--4' long.
                                                   9. P. leiophylla (H).
  Sheaths of the leaf-clusters persistent.
    Leaves in 3-leaved clusters (3 and 5-leaved in 10, 3--2 leaved in
          12).
      Cones subterminal, usually deciduous above the basal scales
            persistent on the branch.
        Buds brown; leaves in 2--5-leaved clusters.
                                          10. P. ponderosa (B, F, G, H).
        Buds white.
                                                   11. P. palustris (C).
      Cones lateral.
        Cones symmetrical, their outer scales not excessively developed.
          Leaves in 2 and 3-leaved clusters, 8'--12' long; cones
                short-stalked.
                                                     12. P. caribaea (C).
          Leaves in 3-leaved clusters; cones sessile.
            Cones oblong-conic, prickles stout; leaves 6'--9' long.
                                                    13. P. taeda (A, C).
            Cones ovoid, prickles slender; leaves 3'--5' long.
                                                   14. P. rigida (A, C).
        Cones unsymmetrical by the excessive development of the scales
              on the outer side.
          Cones 5'--6' long, their scales not prolonged into stout,
                straight or curved spines.
            Prickles of the cone-scales minute.
                                                     15. P. radiata (G).
            Prickles of the cone-scales stout.
                                                   16. P. attenuata (G).
          Cones 6'--14' long, their scales prolonged into stout,
                straight or curved spines; leaves long and stout.
          Cones oblong-ovoid; seeds longer than their wings.
                                                   17. P. Sabiniana (G).
          Cones oblong-conic; seeds shorter than their wings.
                                                    18. P. Coulteri (G).
    Leaves in 2-leaved clusters (2 and 3-leaved in 23).
      Cones subterminal.
        Cones symmetrical, 2'--2-1/2' long, their scales unarmed; leaves
              5'--6' long.
                                                    19. P. resinosa (A).
        Cones unsymmetrical by the greater development of the scales on
              the outer side, armed with slender prickles; leaves 1'--4'
              long.
                                              20. P. contorta (B, F, G).
      Cones lateral.
        Cones about 2' long.
          Cone-scales very unevenly developed and mostly unarmed; cones
                incurved; leaves less than 2' long.
                                                   21. P. Banksiana (A).
          Cone-scales evenly developed, armed with weak or deciduous
                prickles; leaves up to 4' in length.
            Bark of the branches and upper trunk smooth.
                                                      22. P. glabra (C).
            Bark of the branches and upper trunk roughened.
                                                 23. P. echinata (A, C).
        Cones about 3' long, armed with persistent spines.
          Cone-scales armed with slender or stout prickles.
            Cone-scales evenly developed, their prickles slender,
                  acuminate, from a broad base; leaves 3' long or less.
              Cones opening at maturity.
                                               24. P. virginiana (A, C).
              Cones often remaining closed for many years.
                                                      25. P. clausa (C).
            Cone-scales unevenly developed and armed with stout
                  prickles; cones 2'--3-1/2' long, remaining closed;
                  leaves 4'--6' long.
                                                        26. P. muricata.
          Cone-scales armed with very stout hooked spines; cones
                2-1/2'--3' long; opening in the autumn or remaining
                closed for two or three years; leaves 2' long or less.
                                                         27. P. pungens.
    Leaves in 5-leaved clusters; cones 4'--6' long, unsymmetrical, their
          scales thick; seeds longer than their wings; leaves stout,
          9'--13' long.
                                                   28. P. Torreyana (G).


          9. Pinus leiophylla Schlecht. and Cham. Yellow Pine.

                      _Pinus chihuahuana_, Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 12]

Leaves slender, pale glaucous green, marked by 6--8 rows of conspicuous
stomata on each of the 3 sides, 2-1/2'--4' long, irregularly deciduous
from their fourth season, their sheaths deciduous. Flowers: male yellow;
female yellow-green. Fruit ovoid, horizontal or slightly declining,
long-stalked, 1-1/2'--2' long, becoming light chestnut-brown and
lustrous, maturing at the end of the third season, with scales only
slightly thickened, their ultimately pale umbos armed with recurved
deciduous prickles; seeds oval, rounded above and pointed below, about
1/8' long, with a thin dark brown shell, their wings 1/3' long and
broadest near the middle.

A tree, rarely more than 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes 2 deg.
in diameter, stout slightly ascending branches forming a narrow open
pyramidal or round-topped head of thin pale foliage, and slender bright
orange-brown branchlets, soon becoming dull red-brown. Bark of old
trunks 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, dark reddish brown or sometimes nearly black,
and deeply divided into broad flat ridges covered with thin closely
appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong but durable, light orange
color, with thick much lighter colored sapwood. Often forming coppice by
the growth of shoots from the stump of cut trees.

Distribution. Mountain ranges of southern New Mexico and Arizona,
usually at elevations between 6000 deg. and 7000 deg.; not common; more abundant
on the Sierra Madre of northern Mexico and on several of the short
ranges of Chihuahua and Sonora, and of a larger size in Mexico than in
the United States.


           10. Pinus ponderosa Laws. Yellow Pine. Bull Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 13]

Leaves tufted at the ends of naked branches, in 2 or in 2 and 3-leaved
clusters, stout, dark yellow-green, marked by numerous rows of stomata
on the 3 faces, 5'--11' long, mostly deciduous during their third
season. Flowers: male yellow; female clustered or in pairs, dark red.
Fruit ellipsoidal, horizontal or slightly declining, nearly sessile or
short-stalked, 3'--6' long, often clustered, bright green or purple when
fully grown, becoming light reddish brown, with narrow scales much
thickened at the apex and armed with slender prickles, mostly falling
soon after opening and discharging their seeds, generally leaving the
lower scales attached to the peduncle; seeds ovoid, acute, compressed at
the apex, full and rounded below, 1/4' long, with a thin dark purple
often mottled shell, their wings usually broadest below the middle,
gradually narrowed at the oblique apex, 1'--1-1/4' long, about 1' wide.

A tree, sometimes 150 deg.--230 deg. high, with a massive stem 5 deg.--8 deg. in
diameter, short thick many-forked often pendulous branches generally
turned upward at the ends and forming a regular spire-like head, or in
arid regions a broader often round-topped head surmounting a short
trunk, and stout orange-colored branchlets frequently becoming nearly
black at the end of two or three years. Bark for 80--100 years broken
into rounded ridges covered with small closely appressed scales, dark
brown, nearly black or light cinnamon-red, on older trees becoming
2'--4' thick and deeply and irregularly divided into plates sometimes
4 deg.--5 deg. long and 12'--18' wide, and separating into thick bright
cinnamon-red scales. Wood hard, strong, comparatively fine-grained,
light red, with nearly white sapwood sometimes composed of more than 200
layers of annual growth; largely manufactured into lumber used for all
sorts of construction, for railway-ties, fencing, and fuel.

Distribution. Mountain slopes, dry valleys, and high mesas from
northwestern Nebraska and western Texas to the shores of the Pacific
Ocean, and from southern British Columbia to Lower California and
northern Mexico; extremely variable in different parts of the country in
size, in the length and thickness of the leaves, size of the cones, and
in the color of the bark. The form of the Rocky Mountains (var.
_scopulorum_, Engelm.), ranging from Nebraska to Texas, and over the
mountain ranges of Wyoming, eastern Montana and Colorado, and to
northern New Mexico and Arizona, where it forms on the Colorado plateau
with the species the most extensive Pine forests of the continent, has
nearly black furrowed bark, rigid leaves in clusters of 2 or 3 and
3'--6' long, and smaller cones, with thin scales armed with slender
prickles hooked backward. More distinct is


                  Pinus ponderosa var. Jeffreyi Vasey.

[Illustration: Fig. 14]

This tree forms great forests about the sources of the Pitt River in
northern California, along the eastern slopes of the central and
southern Sierra Nevada, growing often on the most exposed and driest
ridges, and in southern California on the San Bernardino and San Jacinto
ranges up to elevations of 7000 deg. above the sea, on the Cuyamaca
Mountains, and in Lower California on the Sierra del Pinal and the San
Pedro Martir Mountains.

A tree, 100 deg. to nearly 200 deg. high, with a tall massive trunk 4 deg.--6 deg. in
diameter, covered with bright cinnamon-red bark deeply divided into
large irregular plates, stiffer and more elastic leaves 4'--9' long and
persistent on the glaucous stouter branchlets for six to nine years,
yellow-green staminate flowers, short-stalked usually purple cones
5'--15' long, their scales armed with stouter or slender prickles
usually hooked backward, and seeds often nearly 1/2' long with larger
wings.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in eastern Europe, especially
the variety _Jeffreyi_, which is occasionally successfully cultivated in
the eastern states.


           Pinus ponderosa var. arizonica Shaw. Yellow Pine.

                       _Pinus arizonica_ Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 15]

Leaves tufted at the ends of the branches, in 3--5-leaved clusters,
stout, rigid, dark green, stomatiferous on their 3 faces, 5'--7' long,
deciduous during their third season. Fruit ovoid, horizontal, 2'--2-1/2'
long, becoming light red-brown, with thin scales much thickened at the
apex and armed with slender recurved spines; seeds full and rounded
below, slightly compressed towards the apex, 1/8' long, with a thick
shell, their wings broadest above the middle, about 1/3' long and 1/4'
wide.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a tall straight massive trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, thick spreading branches forming a regular open round-topped
or narrow pyramidal head, and stout branchlets orange-brown and pruinose
when they first appear, becoming dark gray-brown. Bark on young trunks
dark brown or almost black and deeply furrowed, becoming on old trees
1-1/2'--2' thick and divided into large unequally shaped plates
separating on the surface into thin closely appressed light cinnamon-red
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, rather brittle, light red or often
yellow, with thick lighter yellow or white sapwood; in Arizona
occasionally manufactured into coarse lumber.

Distribution. High cool slopes on the sides of canyons of the mountain
ranges of southern Arizona at elevations between 6000 deg. and 8000 deg.,
sometimes forming nearly pure forests; more abundant and of its largest
size on the mountains of Sonora and Chihuahua.


       11. Pinus palustris Mill. Long-leaved Pine. Southern Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 16]

Leaves in crowded clusters, forming dense tufts at the ends of the
branches, slender, flexible, pendulous, dark green, 8'--18' long,
deciduous at the end of their second year. Flowers in very early spring
before the appearance of the new leaves, male in short dense clusters,
dark rose-purple; female just below the apex of the lengthening shoot in
pairs or in clusters of 3 or 4, dark purple. Fruit cylindric-ovoid,
slightly curved, nearly sessile, horizontal or pendant, 6'--10' long,
with thin flat scales rounded at apex and armed with small reflexed
prickles, becoming dull brown; in falling leaving a few of the basal
scales attached to the stem; seeds almost triangular, full and rounded
on the sides, prominently ridged, about 1/2' long, with a thin pale
shell marked with dark blotches on the upper side, and wings widest near
the middle, gradually narrowed to a very oblique apex, about 1-3/4' long
and 7/16' wide.

A tree, 100 deg.--120 deg. high, with a tall straight slightly tapering trunk
usually 2 deg.--2-1/2 deg. or occasionally 3 deg. in diameter, stout slightly
branched gnarled and twisted limbs covered with thin dark scaly bark and
forming an open elongated and usually very irregular head one third to
one half the length of the tree, thick orange-brown branchlets, and
acute winter-buds covered by elongated silvery white lustrous scales
divided into long spreading filaments forming a cobweb-like network over
the bud. Bark of the trunk 1/16'--1/2' thick, light orange-brown,
separating on the surface into large closely appressed papery scales.
Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, strong, tough, coarse-grained, durable,
light red to orange color, with very thin nearly white sapwood; largely
used as "southern pine" or "Georgia pine" for masts and spars, bridges,
viaducts, railway-ties, fencing, flooring, the interior finish of
buildings, the construction of railway-cars, and for fuel and charcoal.
A large part of the naval stores of the world is produced from this
tree, which is exceedingly rich in resinous secretions.

Distribution. Generally confined to a belt of late tertiary sands and
gravels stretching along the coast of the Atlantic and Gulf states and
rarely more than 125 miles wide, from southeastern Virginia to the
shores of Indian River and the valley of the Caloosahatchee River,
Florida, and along the Gulf coast to the uplands east of the Mississippi
River, extending northward in Alabama to the southern foothills of the
Appalachian Mountains and to central and western Mississippi (Hinds and
Adams Counties); west of the Mississippi River to the valley of the
Trinity River, Texas, and through eastern Texas and western Louisiana
nearly to the northern borders of this state.


           12. Pinus caribaea Morelet. Slash Pine. Swamp Pine.

                       _Pinus heterophylla_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 17]

Leaves stout, in crowded 2 and 3-leaved clusters, dark green and
lustrous, marked by numerous bands of stomata on each face, 8'--12'
long, deciduous at the end of their second season. Flowers in January
and February before the appearance of the new leaves, male in short
crowded clusters, dark purple; female lateral on long peduncles, pink.
Fruit ovoid or ovoid-conic, reflexed during its first year, pendant,
2'--6' long, with thin flexible flat scales armed with minute incurved
or recurved prickles, becoming dark rich lustrous brown; seeds almost
triangular, full and rounded on the sides, 1-1/6'--1-1/4' long, with a
thin brittle dark gray shell mottled with black, and dark brown wings
3/4'--1' long, 1/4' wide, their thickened bases encircling the seeds and
often covering a large part of their lower surface.

A tree, often 100 deg. high, with a tall tapering trunk 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, heavy horizontal branches forming a handsome round-topped
head, and stout orange-colored ultimately dark branchlets. Bark
3/4'--1/2' thick, and separating freely on the surface into large thin
scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, very strong, durable,
coarse-grained, rich dark orange color, with thick nearly white sapwood;
manufactured into lumber and used for construction and railway-ties.
Naval stores are largely produced from this tree.

Distribution. Coast region of South Carolina southward over the coast
plain to the keys of southern Florida and along the Gulf coast to
eastern Louisiana (Saint Tammany, Washington, southern Tangipahoa and
eastern Livingston Parishes); common on the Bahamas, on the Isle of
Pines, and on the lowlands of Honduras and eastern Guatemala; in the
coast region of the southern states gradually replacing the Long-leaved
Pine, _Pinus palustris_, Mill.


            13. Pinus taeda L. Loblolly Pine. Old Field Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 18]

Leaves slender, stiff, slightly twisted, pale green and somewhat
glaucous, 6'--9' long, marked by 10--12 rows of large stomata on each
face, deciduous during their third year. Flowers opening from the middle
of March to the first of May; male crowded in short spikes, yellow;
female lateral below the apex of the growing shoot, solitary or
clustered, short-stalked, yellow. Fruit oblong-conic to ovoid-cylindric,
nearly sessile, 2'--6' long, becoming light reddish brown, with thin
scales rounded at the apex and armed with short stout straight or
reflexed prickles, opening irregularly and discharging their seeds
during the autumn and winter, and usually persistent on the branches for
another year; seeds rhomboidal, full and rounded, 1/4' long, with a thin
dark brown rough shell blotched with black, and produced into broad thin
lateral margins, encircled to the base by the narrow border of their
thin pale brown lustrous wing broadest above the middle, 1' long, about
1/4' wide.

A tree, generally 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk usually
about 2 deg. but occasionally 5 deg. in diameter, short thick much divided
branches, the lower spreading, the upper ascending and forming a compact
round-topped head, and comparatively slender glabrous branchlets brown
tinged with yellow during their first season and gradually growing
darker in their second year. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1-1/2' thick,
bright red-brown, and irregularly divided by shallow fissures into broad
flat ridges covered with large thin closely appressed scales. Wood weak,
brittle, coarse-grained, not durable, light brown, with orange-colored
or often nearly white sapwood, often composing nearly half the trunk;
largely manufactured into lumber, used for construction and the interior
finish of buildings.

Distribution. Cape May, New Jersey, through southern Delaware and
eastern Maryland and southward to the shores of Indian River and Tampa
Bay, Florida, westward to middle North Carolina and through South
Carolina and Georgia and the eastern Gulf states to the Mississippi
River, extending into southern Tennessee and northeastern Mississippi;
west of the Mississippi River from southern Arkansas and the
southwestern part of Oklahoma through western Louisiana to the shores of
the Gulf of Mexico, and through eastern Texas to the valley of the
Colorado River; on the Atlantic coast often springing up on lands
exhausted by agriculture; west of the Mississippi River one of the most
important timber-trees, frequently growing in nearly pure forests on
rolling uplands.


                   14. Pinus rigida Mill. Pitch Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 19]

Leaves stout, rigid, dark yellow-green, marked on the 3 faces by many
rows of stomata, 3'--5' long, standing stiffly and at right angles with
the branch, deciduous during their second year. Flowers: male in short
crowded spikes, yellow or rarely purple; female often clustered and
raised on short stout stems, light green more or less tinged with rose
color. Fruit ovoid, acute at apex, nearly sessile, often clustered,
1'--3-1/2' long, becoming light brown, with thin flat scales armed with
recurved rigid prickles, often remaining on the branches for ten or
twelve years; seeds nearly triangular, full and rounded on the sides,
1/4' long, with a thin dark brown mottled roughened shell and wings
broadest below the middle, gradually narrowed to the very oblique apex,
3/4' long, 1/3' wide.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. or rarely 100 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 3 deg.
in diameter, thick contorted often pendulous branches covered with thick
much roughened bark, forming a round-topped thick head, often irregular
and picturesque, and stout bright green branchlets becoming dull orange
color during their first winter and dark gray-brown at the end of four
or five years; often fruitful when only a few feet high. Bark of young
stems thin and broken into plate-like dark red-brown scales, becoming on
old trunks 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, deeply and irregularly fissured, and
divided into broad flat connected ridges separating on the surface into
thick dark red-brown scales often tinged with purple. Wood light, soft,
not strong, brittle, coarse-grained, very durable, light brown or red,
with thick yellow or often white sapwood; largely used for fuel and in
the manufacture of charcoal; occasionally sawed into lumber.

Distribution. Sandy plains and dry gravelly uplands, or less frequently
in cold deep swamps; island of Mt. Desert, Maine, to the northern shores
of Lake Ontario, and southward to southern Delaware and southern Ohio
(Scioto County) and along the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia
and to their western foothills in West Virginia, Kentucky, and
Tennessee; very abundant in the coast region south of Massachusetts;
sometimes forming pure forests in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.


        Pinus rigida var. serotina Loud. Pond Pine. Marsh Pine.

                        _Pinus serotina_ Michx.

[Illustration: Fig. 20]

Leaves in clusters of 3 or occasionally of 4, slender, flexuose, dark
yellow-green, 6'--8' long, marked by numerous rows of stomata on the 3
faces, deciduous during their third and fourth years. Flowers: male in
crowded spikes, dark orange color; female clustered or in pairs on stout
stems. Fruit subglobose to ovoid, full and rounded or pointed at apex,
subsessile or short-stalked, horizontal or slightly declining,
2'--2-1/2' long, with thin nearly flat scales armed with slender
incurved mostly deciduous prickles, becoming light yellow-brown at
maturity, often remaining closed for one or two years and after opening
long-persistent on the branches; seeds nearly triangular, often ridged
below, full and rounded at the sides, 1/8' long, with a thin nearly
black roughened shell produced into a wide border, the wings broadest at
the middle, gradually narrowed at the ends, 3/4' long, 1/4' wide.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg. or occasionally 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a short
trunk sometimes 3 deg. but generally not more than 2 deg. in diameter, stout
often contorted branches more or less pendulous at the extremities,
forming an open round-topped head, and slender branchlets dark green
when they first appear, becoming dark orange color during their first
winter and dark brown or often nearly black at the end of four or five
years. Bark of the trunk 1/2'--3/4' thick, dark red-brown and
irregularly divided by narrow shallow fissures into small plates
separating on the surface into thin closely appressed scales. Wood very
resinous, heavy, soft, brittle, coarse-grained, dark orange color, with
thick pale yellow sapwood; occasionally manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. Low wet flats or sandy or peaty swamps; near Cape May, New
Jersey, and southeastern Virginia southward near the coast to northern
Florida and central Alabama.


                15. Pinus radiata D. Don. Monterey Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 21]

Leaves in 3, rarely in 2-leaved clusters, slender, bright rich green,
4'--6' long, mostly deciduous during their third season. Flowers: male
in dense spikes, yellow; female clustered, dark purple. Fruit ovoid,
pointed at apex, very oblique at base, short-stalked, reflexed, 3'--7'
long, becoming deep chestnut-brown and lustrous, with scales much
thickened and mammillate toward the base on the outer side of the cone,
thinner on the inner side and at its apex, and armed with minute
thickened incurved or straight prickles, long-persistent and often
remaining closed on the branches for many years; seeds ellipsoidal,
compressed, 1/4' long, with a thin brittle rough nearly black shell,
their wings light brown, longitudinally striped, broadest above the
middle, gradually narrowed and oblique at apex, 1' long, 1/4' wide.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--60 deg. rarely 100 deg.--115 deg. high, with a tall trunk
usually 1 deg.--2 deg. but occasionally 4-1/2 deg. in diameter, spreading branches
forming a regular narrow open round-topped head, and slender branchlets
light or dark orange color, at first often covered with a glaucous
bloom, ultimately dark red-brown. Bark of the trunk 1-1/2'--2' thick,
dark red-brown, and deeply divided into broad flat ridges broken on the
surface into thick appressed plate-like scales. Wood light, soft, not
strong, brittle, close-grained; occasionally used as fuel.

Distribution. In a narrow belt a few miles wide on the California coast
from Pescadero to the shores of San Simeon Bay; in San Luis Obispo
County near the village of Cambria; on the islands of Santa Rosa and
Santa Cruz of the Santa Barbara group; and on Guadaloupe Island off the
coast of Lower California; most abundant and of its largest size on
Point Pinos south of the Bay of Monterey, California.

Largely planted for the decoration of parks in western and southern
Europe, occasionally planted in the southeastern states and in Mexico,
Australia, New Zealand, and other regions with temperate climates, and
more generally in the coast region of the Pacific states from Vancouver
Island southward than any other Pine-tree.


               16. Pinus attenuata Lemm. Knob-cone Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 22]

Leaves slender, firm and rigid, pale yellow or bluish green, marked by
numerous rows of stomata on their 3 faces, 3'--7', usually 4'--5' long.
Flowers: male orange-brown; female fascicled, often with several
fascicles on the shoot of the year. Fruit elongated, conic, pointed,
very oblique at base by the greater development of the scales on the
outer side, whorled, short-stalked, strongly reflexed and incurved,
3'--6' long, becoming light yellow-brown, with thin flat scales rounded
at apex, those on the outer side being enlarged into prominent
transversely flattened knobs armed with thick flattened incurved spines,
those on the inner side of the cone slightly thickened and armed with
minute recurved prickles, persistent on the stems and branches for
thirty or forty years, sometimes becoming completely imbedded in the
bark of old trunks, and usually not opening until the death of the tree;
seeds ellipsoidal, compressed, acute at apex, 1/4' long, with a thin
oblique shell, their wings broadest at the middle, gradually narrowed to
the ends, 1-1/4' long, 1/3' wide.

A tree, usually about 20 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter, and
often fruitful when only 4 deg. or 5 deg. tall; occasionally growing to the
height of 80 deg.--100 deg., with a trunk 2-1/2 deg. thick, and frequently divided
above the middle into two ascending stems, slender branches arrangedin
regular whorls while the tree is young, and in old age forming a narrow
round-topped straggling head of sparse thin foliage, and slender dark
orange-brown branchlets growing darker during their second season. Bark
of young stems and branches thin, smooth, pale brown, becoming at the
base of old trunks 1/4'--1/2' thick and dark brown often tinged with
purple, slightly and irregularly divided by shallow fissures and broken
into large loose scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle,
coarse-grained, light brown, with thick sapwood sometimes slightly
tinged with red.

Distribution. Dry mountain slopes from the valley of the Mackenzie River
in Oregon over the mountains of southwestern Oregon, where it is most
abundant and grows to its largest size, often forming pure forests over
large areas, southward along the western slopes of the Cascade
Mountains; in California on the northern cross ranges, the coast ranges
from Trinity to Sonoma Counties, the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada
to Mariposa County, and over the southern coast ranges from Santa Cruz
to the dry arid southern slopes of the San Bernardino Mountains, where
it forms a belt between City and East Twin Creeks at an altitude of
3500 deg. above the sea.


           17. Pinus Sabiniana Dougl. Digger Pine. Bull Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 23]

Leaves stout, flexible, pendant, pale blue-green, marked on each face
with numerous rows of pale stomata, 8'--12' long, deciduous usually in
their third and fourth years. Flowers: male yellow; female on stout
peduncles, dark purple. Fruit oblong-ovoid, full and rounded at base,
pointed, becoming light reddish brown, 6'--10' long, long-stalked,
pendulous, the scales narrowed into a stout incurved sharp hook,
strongly reflexed toward the base of the cone and armed with spur-like
incurved spines; seeds full and rounded below, somewhat compressed
toward the apex, 3/4' long, 1/3' wide, dark brown or nearly black, with
a thick hard shell, encircled by their wings much thickened on the inner
rim, obliquely rounded at the broad apex and about 1/2 length of nuts.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg. but occasionally 80 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg.
in diameter, divided generally 15 deg.--20 deg. above the ground into 3 or 4
thick secondary stems, clothed with short crooked branches pendant below
and ascending toward the summit of the tree, and forming an open
round-topped head remarkable for the sparseness of its foliage, and
stout pale glaucous branchlets, becoming dark brown or nearly black
during their second season. Bark of the trunk 1-1/2'--2' thick, dark
brown slightly tinged with red or nearly black and deeply and
irregularly divided into thick connected ridges covered with small
closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained,
brittle, light brown or red with thick nearly white sapwood. Abietine, a
nearly colorless aromatic liquid with the odor of oil of oranges, is
obtained by distilling the resinous juices. The large sweet slightly
resinous seeds formed an important article of food for the Indians of
California.

Distribution. Scattered singly or in small groups over the dry foothills
of western California, ranging from 500 deg. up to 4000 deg. above the sea-level
and from the southern slopes of the northern cross ranges to the
Tehachapi Mountains and the Sierra de la Liebre; most abundant and
attaining its largest size on the eastern foothills of the Sierra Nevada
near the centre of the state at elevations of about 2000 deg.; here often
the most conspicuous feature of the vegetation.


                 18. Pinus Coulteri D. Don. Pitch Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 24]

Leaves tufted at the ends of the branches, stout, rigid, dark
blue-green, marked by numerous bands of stomata on the 3 faces, 6'--12'
long, deciduous during their third and fourth seasons. Flowers: male
yellow; female dark reddish brown. Fruit oblong-conic, short-stalked and
pendant, 10'--14' long, becoming light yellow-brown, with thick broad
scales terminating in a broad, flat, incurved, hooked claw 1/2'--1-1/2'
long, gradually opening in the autumn and often persistent on the
branches for several years; seeds ellipsoidal, compressed, 1/2' long,
1/4'--1/3' wide, dark chestnut-brown, with a thick shell, inclosed by
their wings, broadest above the middle, oblique at apex, nearly 1'
longer than the seed, about 5/8' wide.

A tree, 40 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--2-1/2 deg. in diameter, thick
branches covered with dark scaly bark, long and mostly pendulous below,
short and ascending above, and forming a loose unsymmetrical often
picturesque head, and very stout branchlets dark orange-brown at first,
becoming sometimes nearly black at the end of three or four years. Bark
of the trunk 1-1/2'--2' thick, dark brown or nearly black and deeply
divided into broad rounded connected ridges covered with thin closely
appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, coarse-grained,
light red, with thick nearly white sapwood; occasionally used for fuel.
The seeds were formerly gathered in large quantities and eaten by the
Indians of southern California.

Distribution. Scattered singly or in small groves through coniferous
forests on the dry slopes and ridges of the coast ranges of California
at elevations of 3000 deg.--6000 deg. above the sea, from Mount Diablo and the
Santa Lucia Mountains to the San Bernardino and Cuyamaca Mountains; and
on the Sierra del Pinal, Lower California; most abundant on the San
Bernardino and San Jacinto ranges at elevations of about 5000 deg.


             19. Pinus resinosa Ait. Red Pine. Norway Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 25]

Leaves slender, soft and flexible, dark green and lustrous, 5'--6' long,
obscurely marked on the ventral faces by bands of minute stomata,
deciduous during their fourth and fifth seasons. Flowers: male in dense
spikes, dark purple; female terminal, short-stalked, scarlet. Fruit
ovoid-conic, subsessile, 2'--2-1/4' long, with thin slightly concave
scales, unarmed, becoming light chestnut-brown and lustrous at maturity;
shedding their seeds early in the autumn and mostly persistent on the
branches until the following summer; seeds oval, compressed, 1/8' long,
with a thin dark chestnut-brown more or less mottled shell and wings
broadest below the middle, oblique at apex, 3/4' long, 1/4'--1/3' broad.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. or occasionally 120 deg. high, with a tall straight
trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. or rarely 5 deg. in diameter, thick spreading more or less
pendulous branches clothing the young stems to the ground and forming a
broad irregular pyramid, and in old age an open round-topped picturesque
head, and stout branchlets at first orange color, finally becoming light
reddish brown. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1-1/4' thick and slightly divided
by shallow fissures into broad flat ridges covered by thin loose light
red-brown scales. Wood light, hard, very close-grained, pale red, with
thin yellow often nearly white sapwood; largely used in the construction
of bridges and buildings, for piles, masts, and spars. The bark is
occasionally used for tanning leather.

Distribution. Light sandy loam or dry rocky ridges, usually forming
groves rarely more than a few hundred acres in extent and scattered
through forests of other Pines and deciduous-leaved trees; occasionally
on sandy flats forming pure forests; Nova Scotia to Lake St. John,
westward through Quebec and central Ontario to the valley of the
Winnipeg River, and southward to eastern Massachusetts, the mountains of
northern Pennsylvania, and to central and southwestern (Port Huron)
Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota, most abundant, and growing to its
largest size in the northern parts of these states; rare and local in
eastern Massachusetts and southward.

Often planted for the decoration of parks, and the most desirable as an
ornamental tree of the Pitch Pines which flourish in the northern
states.


                  20. Pinus contorta Loud. Scrub Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 26]

Leaves dark green, slender, 1'--1-1/2' long, marked by 6--10 rows of
stomata on each face, mostly persistent 4--6 years. Flowers orange-red:
male in short crowded spikes; female clustered or in pairs on stout
stalks. Fruit ovoid to subcylindric, usually very oblique at base,
horizontal or declining, often clustered, 3/4'--2' long, with thin
slightly concave scales armed with long slender more or less recurved
often deciduous prickles, and toward the base of the cone especially on
the upper side developed into thick mammillate knobs, becoming light
yellow-brown and lustrous, sometimes opening and losing their seeds as
soon as ripe, or remaining closed on the branches and preserving the
vitality of their seeds for many years; seeds oblique at apex, acute
below, about 1/6' long, with a thin brittle dark red-brown shell mottled
with black and wings widest above the base, gradually tapering toward
the oblique apex, 1/2' long.

A tree, sometimes fertile when only a few inches high, usually 15 deg.--20 deg.
or occasionally 30 deg. tall, with a short trunk rarely more than 18' in
diameter, comparatively thick branches forming a round-topped compact
and symmetrical or an open picturesque head, and stout branchlets light
orange color when they first appear, finally becoming dark red-brown or
occasionally almost black. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1' thick, deeply and
irregularly divided by vertical and cross fissures into small oblong
plates covered with closely appressed dark red-brown scales tinged with
purple or orange color. Wood light, hard, strong although brittle,
coarse-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thick nearly white
sapwood; occasionally used for fuel.

Distribution. Coast of Alaska, usually in sphagnum-covered bogs
southward in the immediate neighborhood of the coast to the valley of
the Albion River, Mendocino County, California; south of the northern
boundary of the United States generally inhabiting sand dunes and
barrens or occasionally near the shores of Puget Sound the margins of
tide pools and deep wet swamps; spreading inland and ascending the coast
ranges and western slopes of the Cascade Mountains, where it is not
common and where it gradually changes its habit and appearance, the
thick deeply furrowed bark of the coast form being found only near the
ground, while the bark higher on the stems is thin, light-colored, and
inclined to separate into scales, and the leaves are often longer and
broader. This is


        Pinus contorta var. latifolia S. Wats. Lodge-pole Pine.

               _Pinus contorta_ var. _Murrayana_ Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 27]

Leaves yellow-green, usually about 2' long, although varying from 1'--3'
in length and from 1/16' to nearly 1/8' in width. Fruit occasionally
opening as soon as ripe but usually remaining closed and preserving the
vitality of the seeds sometimes for twenty years.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. but often 150 deg. high, with a trunk generally
2 deg.--3 deg. but occasionally 5 deg.--6 deg. in diameter, slender much-forked branches
frequently persistent nearly to the base of the stem, light
orange-colored during their early years, somewhat pendulous below,
ascending near the top of the tree, and forming a narrow pyramidal
spire-topped head. Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/4' thick, close
and firm, light orange-brown and covered by small thin loosely appressed
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close, straight-grained and easily
worked, not durable, light yellow or nearly white, with thin lighter
colored sapwood; occasionally manufactured into lumber; also used for
railway-ties, mine-timbers, and for fuel.

Distribution. Common on the Yukon hills in the valley of the Yukon
River; on the interior plateau of northern British Columbia and eastward
to the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains, covering with dense
forests great areas in the basin of the Columbia River; forming forests
on both slopes of the Rocky Mountains of Montana; on the Yellowstone
plateau at elevations of 7000 deg.-8000 deg.; common on the mountains of
Wyoming, and extending southward to southern Colorado; the most abundant
coniferous tree of the northern Rocky Mountain region; common on the
ranges of eastern Washington and Oregon, on the mountains of northern
California, and southward along the Sierra Nevada, where it attains its
greatest size and beauty in alpine forests at elevations between 8000 deg.
and 9500 deg.; in southern California the principal tree at elevations
between 7000 deg. and 10,000 deg. on the high peaks of the San Bernardino and
San Jacinto Mountains; on the upper slopes of the San Pedro Martir
Mountains, Lower California.


            21. Pinus Banksiana Lamb. Gray Pine. Jack Pine.

                  _Pinus divaricata_ Du Mont de Cours.

[Illustration: Fig. 28]

Leaves in remote clusters, stout, flat or slightly concave on the inner
face, at first light yellow-green, soon becoming dark green,
3/4'--1-1/4' long, gradually and irregularly deciduous in their second
or third year. Flowers: male in short crowded clusters, yellow; female
clustered, dark purple, often with 2 clusters produced on the same
shoot. Fruit oblong-conic, acute, oblique at base, sessile, usually
erect and strongly incurved, 1-1/2'--2' long, dull purple or green when
fully grown, becoming light yellow and lustrous, with thin stiff scales
often irregularly developed, and armed with minute incurved often
deciduous prickles; seeds nearly triangular, full and rounded on the
sides, 1/12' long, with an almost black roughened shell and wings
broadest at the middle, full and rounded at apex, 1/3' long, 1/8' wide.

A tree, frequently 70 deg. high, with a straight trunk sometimes free of
branches for 20 deg.--30 deg. and rarely exceeding 2 deg. in diameter, long
spreading branches forming an open symmetrical head, and slender tough
flexible pale yellow-green branchlets turning dark purple during their
first winter and darker the following year; often not more than 20 deg.--30 deg.
tall, with a stem 10'--12' in diameter; generally fruiting when only a
few years old; sometimes shrubby with several low slender stems. Bark of
the trunk thin, dark brown slightly tinged with red, very irregularly
divided into narrow rounded connected ridges separating on the surface
into small thick closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong,
close-grained, clear pale brown or rarely orange color, with thick
nearly white sapwood; used for fuel and occasionally for railway-ties
and posts; occasionally manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. From Nova Scotia to the valley of the Athabasca River and
down the Mackenzie to about latitude 65 deg. north, ranging southward to the
coast of Maine, northern New Hampshire and Vermont, the Island of
Nantucket (Wauwinet, _J. W. Harshburger_), northern New York, the shores
of Saginaw Bay, Michigan, the southern shores of Lake Michigan in
Illinois, the valley of the Wisconsin River, Wisconsin, and central and
southeastern Minnesota (with isolated groves in Root River valley, near
Rushford, Fillmore County); abundant in central Michigan, covering
tracts of barren lands; common and of large size in the region north of
Lake Superior; most abundant and of its greatest size west of Lake
Winnipeg and north of the Saskatchewan, here often spreading over great
areas of sandy sterile soil.


            22. Pinus glabra Walt. Spruce Pine. Cedar Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 29]

Leaves soft, slender, dark green, 1-1/2'--3' long, marked by numerous
rows of stomata, deciduous at the end of their second and in the spring
of their third year. Flowers: male in short crowded clusters, yellow;
female raised on slender slightly ascending peduncles. Fruit single or
in clusters of 2 or 3, reflexed on short stout stalks, subglobose to
oblong-ovoid, 1/2'--2' long, becoming reddish brown and rather lustrous,
with thin slightly concave scales armed with minute straight or incurved
usually deciduous prickles; seeds nearly triangular, full and rounded on
the sides, 1/8' long, with a thin dark gray shell mottled with black and
wings broadest below the middle, 5/8' long, 1/4' wide.

A tree, usually 80 deg.--100 deg. or occasionally 120 deg. high, with a trunk
2 deg.--2-1/2 deg. or rarely 3-1/2 deg. in diameter, comparatively small horizontal
branches, and slender flexible branchlets at first light red more or
less tinged with purple, ultimately dark reddish brown. Bark of young
trees and upper trunks smooth pale gray becoming on old stems 1/2'--3/4'
thick, slightly and irregularly divided by shallow fissures into flat
connected ridges. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, close-grained,
light brown, with thick nearly white sapwood; occasionally used for fuel
and rarely manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. Valley of the lower Santee River, South Carolina to middle
and northwestern Florida; banks of the Alabama River, Dallas County,
Alabama; eastern and southwestern Mississippi, and sandy banks of
streams in northeastern Louisiana; usually growing singly or in small
groves; attaining its largest size and often occupying areas of
considerable extent in northwestern Florida.


        23. Pinus echinata Mill. Yellow Pine. Short-leaved Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 30]

Leaves in clusters of 2 and of 3, slender, flexible, dark blue-green,
3'--5' long, beginning to fall at the end of their second season and
dropping irregularly until their fifth year. Flowers: male in short
crowded clusters, pale purple; female in clusters of 2 or 3 on stout
ascending stems, pale rose color. Fruit ovoid to oblong-conic,
subsessile and nearly horizontal or short-stalked and pendant, generally
clustered, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, becoming dull brown, with thin scales
nearly flat below and rounded at the apex, armed with short straight or
somewhat recurved frequently deciduous prickles; seeds nearly
triangular, full and rounded on the sides, about 3/16' long, with a thin
pale brown hard shell conspicuously mottled with black, their wings
broadest near the middle, 1/2' long, 1/8' wide.

A tree, usually 80 deg.--100 deg. occasionally 120 deg. high, with a tall slightly
tapering trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, a short pyramidal truncate head of
comparatively slender branches, and stout brittle pale green or
violet-colored branchlets covered at first with a glaucous bloom,
becoming dark red-brown tinged with purple before the end of the first
season, their bark beginning in the third year to separate into large
scales. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1' thick and broken into large
irregularly shaped plates covered with small closely appressed light
cinnamon-red scales. Wood very variable in quality, and in the thickness
of the nearly white sapwood, heavy, hard, strong and usually
coarse-grained, orange-colored or yellow-brown; largely manufactured
into lumber.

Distribution. Long Island (near Northport), and Staten Island, New York,
and southern Pennsylvania to northern Florida, and westward through the
Gulf states to eastern Texas, through Arkansas to southwestern Oklahoma
(near Page, Leflore County, _G. W. Stevens_) and to southern Missouri
and southwestern Illinois and to eastern Tennessee and western West
Virginia; most abundant and of its largest size west of the Mississippi
River.


          24. Pinus virginiana Mill. Jersey Pine. Scrub Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 31]

Leaves in remote clusters, stout, gray-green, 1-1/2'--3' long, marked by
many rows of minute stomata, gradually and irregularly deciduous during
their third and fourth years. Flowers: male in crowded clusters,
orange-brown; female on opposite spreading peduncles near the middle of
the shoots of the year, generally a little below and alternate with 1 or
2 lateral branchlets, pale green, 2'--3' long, the scale-tips tinged
with rose color. Fruit ovoid-conic, often reflexed, dark red-brown and
lustrous, with thin nearly flat scales, and stout or slender persistent
prickles, opening in the autumn and slowly shedding their seeds, turning
dark reddish brown and remaining on the branches for three or four
years; seeds nearly oval, full and rounded, 1/4' long, with a thin pale
brown rough shell, their wings broadest at the middle, 1/3' long, about
1/8' wide.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely more than 18'
in diameter, long horizontal or pendulous branches in remote whorls
forming a broad open often flat-topped pyramid, and slender tough
flexible branchlets at first pale green or green tinged with purple and
covered with a glaucous bloom, becoming purple and later light
gray-brown; toward the western limits of its range a tree frequently
100 deg. tall, with a trunk 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter. Bark of the trunk
1/4'--1/2' thick, broken by shallow fissures into flat plate-like scales
separating on the surface into thin closely appressed dark brown scales
tinged with red. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, coarse-grained,
durable in contact with the soil, light orange color, with thick nearly
white sapwood; often used for fuel and occasionally manufactured into
lumber.

Distribution. Middle and southern New Jersey; Plymouth, Luzerne County,
and central, southern and western Pennsylvania to Columbia County,
Georgia, Dallas County, Alabama (near Selma, _T. G. Harbison_), and to
the hills of northeastern Mississippi (Bear Creek near its junction with
the Tennessee River, _E. N. Lowe_), through eastern and middle Tennessee
to western Kentucky and to southeastern and southern (Scioto County)
Ohio, and southern Indiana; usually small in the Atlantic states and
only on light sandy soil, spreading rapidly over exhausted fields; of
its largest size west of the Alleghany Mountains on the low hills of
southern Indiana.


             25. Pinus clausa Sarg. Sand Pine. Spruce Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 32]

Leaves slender, flexible, dark green, 2'--3-1/2' long, marked by 10--20
rows of stomata, deciduous during their third and fourth years. Flowers:
male in short crowded spikes, dark orange color; female lateral on stout
peduncles. Fruit elongated ovoid-conic, often oblique at base, usually
clustered and reflexed, 2'--3-1/2' long, nearly sessile or
short-stalked, with convex scales armed with short stout straight or
recurved prickles, becoming dark yellow-brown in autumn; some of the
cones opening at once, others remaining closed for three or four years
before liberating their seeds, ultimately turning to an ashy gray color;
others still unopened becoming enveloped in the growing tissues of the
stem and branches and finally entirely covered by them; seeds nearly
triangular, compressed, 1/4' long, with a black slightly roughened
shell, their wings widest near or below the middle, 3/4' long, about
1/4' wide.

A tree, usually 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a stem rarely a foot in diameter,
generally clothed to the ground with wide-spreading branches forming a
bushy flat-topped head, and slender tough flexible branchlets, pale
yellow-green when they first appear, becoming light orange-brown and
ultimately ashy gray; occasionally growing to the height of 70 deg.--80 deg.
with a trunk 2 deg. in diameter. Bark on the lower part of the trunk
1/3'--1/2' thick, deeply divided by narrow fissures into irregularly
shaped generally oblong plates separating on the surface into thin
closely appressed bright red-brown scales; on the upper part of the
trunk and on the branches thin, smooth, ashy gray. Wood light, soft, not
strong, brittle, light orange color or yellow, with thick nearly white
sapwood; occasionally used for the masts of small vessels.

Distribution. Coast of the Gulf of Mexico from southern Alabama to Peace
Creek, western Florida; eastern Florida from the neighborhood of St.
Augustine to New River, Dade County, covering sandy wind-swept plains
near the coast; growing to its largest size and most abundant in the
interior of the peninsula (Lake and Orange Counties).


             26. Pinus muricata D. Don. Prickle-cone Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 33]

Leaves in crowded clusters, thick, rigid, dark yellow-green, 4'--6'
long, beginning to fall in their second year. Flowers: male in elongated
spikes, orange-colored; female short-stalked, whorled, 2 whorls often
being produced on the shoot of the year. Fruit ovoid, oblique at base,
sessile, in clusters of 3--5 or sometimes of 7, 2'--3-1/2' but usually
about 3' long, becoming light chestnut-brown and lustrous, with scales
much thickened on the outside of the cone, those toward its base
produced into stout incurved knobs sometimes armed with stout flattened
spur-like often incurved spines, and on the inside of the cone slightly
flattened and armed with stout or slender straight prickles; often
remaining closed for several years and usually persistent on the stem
and branches during the entire life of the tree without becoming
imbedded in the wood; seeds nearly triangular, 1/4' long, with a thin
nearly black roughened shell, their wings broadest above the middle,
oblique at apex, nearly 1' long, 1/8' wide.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg. but occasionally 90 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg.
in diameter, thick spreading branches covered with dark scaly bark, in
youth forming a regular pyramid, and at maturity a handsome compact
round-topped head of dense tufted foliage, and stout branchlets dark
orange-green at first, turning orange-brown more or less tinged with
purple. Bark of the lower part of the trunk often 4'--6' thick and
deeply divided into long narrow rounded ridges roughened by closely
appressed dark purplish brown scales. Wood light, very strong, hard,
rather coarse-grained, light brown, with thick nearly white sapwood;
occasionally manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. California coast region from Mendocino County southward,
usually in widely separated localities to Point Reyes Peninsula, north
of the Bay of San Francisco, and from Monterey to Coon Creek, San Luis
Obispo County; in Lower California on Cedros Island and on the west
coast between Ensenada and San Quentin; of its largest size and the
common Pine-tree on the coast of Mendocino County.


       27. Pinus pungens Lamb. Table Mountain Pine. Hickory Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 34]

Leaves in crowded clusters, rigid, usually twisted, dark blue-green,
1-1/4'--2-1/2' long, deciduous during their second and third years.
Flowers: male in elongated loose spikes, yellow; female clustered,
long-stalked. Fruit ovoid-conic, oblique at base by the greater
development of the scales on the outer than on the inner side, sessile,
reflexed, in clusters usually of 3 or 4, or rarely of 7 or 8, 2'--3-1/2'
long, becoming light brown and lustrous, with thin tough scales armed
with stout hooked curved spines produced from much thickened mammillate
knobs, opening as soon as ripe and gradually shedding their seeds, or
often remaining closed for two or three years longer, and frequently
persistent on the branches for eighteen or twenty years; seeds almost
triangular, full and rounded on the sides, nearly 1/4' long, with a thin
conspicuously roughened light brown shell, their wings widest below the
middle, gradually narrowed to the ends, 1' long, 1/4' wide.

A tree, when crowded in the forest occasionally 60 deg. high, with a trunk
2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, and a few short branches near the summit forming a
narrow round-topped head; in open ground usually 20 deg.--30 deg. tall, and
often fertile when only a few feet high, with a short thick trunk
frequently clothed to the ground, and long horizontal branches, the
lower pendulous toward the extremities, the upper sweeping in graceful
upward curves and forming a flat-topped often irregular head, and stout
branchlets, light orange color when they first appear, soon growing
darker and ultimately dark brown. Bark on the lower part of the trunk
3/4'--1' thick and broken into irregularly shaped plates separating on
the surface into thin loose dark brown scales tinged with red, higher on
the stem, and on the branches dark brown and broken into thin loose
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, very coarse-grained, pale
brown, with thick nearly white sapwood; somewhat used for fuel, and in
Pennsylvania manufactured into charcoal.

Distribution. Dry gravelly slopes and ridges of the Appalachian
Mountains from southern Pennsylvania to North Carolina, eastern
Tennessee and northern Georgia, sometimes ascending to elevations of
3000 deg., with isolated outlying stations in eastern Pennsylvania, western
New Jersey, Maryland, the District of Columbia and Virginia; often
forming toward the southern limits of its range pure forests of
considerable extent.


                 28. Pinus Torreyana Carr. Torrey Pine.

[Illustration: Fig. 35]

Leaves forming great tufts at the ends of the branches, stout, dark
green, conspicuously marked on the 3 faces by numerous rows of stomata,
8'--13' long. Flowers from January to March; male yellow, in short dense
heads; female subterminal on long stout peduncles. Fruit broad-ovoid,
spreading or reflexed on long stalks, 4'--6' in length, becoming deep
chestnut-brown, with thick scales armed with minute spines; mostly
deciduous in their fourth year and in falling leaving a few of the
barren scales on the stalk attached to the branch; seeds oval, more or
less angled, 3/4'--1' long, dull brown and mottled on the lower side,
light yellow-brown on the upper side, with a thick hard shell, nearly
surrounded by their dark brown wings often nearly 1/2' long.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk about 1 deg. in diameter,
or occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. tall, with a long straight slightly tapering
stem 2-1/2 deg. in diameter, stout spreading and often ascending branches,
and very stout branchlets bright green in their first season, becoming
light purple and covered with a metallic bloom the following year,
ultimately nearly black. Bark 3/4'--1' thick, deeply and irregularly
divided into broad flat ridges covered by large thin closely appressed
light red-brown scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, coarse-grained,
light yellow, with thick yellow or nearly white sapwood; occasionally
used for fuel. The large edible seeds are gathered in large quantities
and are eaten raw or roasted.

Distribution. Only in a narrow belt a few miles long on the coast near
the mouth of the Soledad River just north of San Diego and on the island
of Santa Rosa, California; the least widely distributed Pine-tree of the
United States.

Now planted in the parks of San Diego, California, and in New Zealand,
growing rapidly in cultivation, and promising to attain a much larger
size than on its native cliffs.




                         2. LARIX Adans. Larch.


Tall pyramidal trees, with thick sometimes furrowed scaly bark, heavy
heartwood, thin pale sapwood, slender remote horizontal often pendulous
branches, elongated leading branchlets, short thick spur-like lateral
branchlets, and small subglobose buds, their inner scales accrescent and
marking the lateral branchlets with prominent ring-like scars. Leaves
awl-shaped, triangular and rounded above, or rarely 4-angled, spirally
disposed and remote on leading shoots, on lateral branchlets in crowded
fascicles, each leaf in the axil of a deciduous bud-scale, deciduous.
Flowers solitary, terminal, the staminate globose, oval or oblong,
sessile or stalked, on leafless branches, yellow, composed of numerous
spirally arranged anthers with connectives produced above them into
short points, the pistillate appearing with the leaves, short-oblong to
oblong, composed of few or many green nearly orbicular stalked scales in
the axes of much longer mucronate usually scarlet bracts. Fruit a woody
ovoid-oblong conic or subglobose short-stalked cone composed of slightly
thickened suborbicular or oblong-obovate concave scales, shorter or
longer than their bracts, gradually decreasing from the centre to the
ends of the cone, the small scales usually sterile. Seeds nearly
triangular, rounded on the sides, shorter than their wings; the outer
seed-coat crustaceous, light brown, the inner membranaceous, pale
chestnut-brown and lustrous; cotyledons usually 6, much shorter than the
inferior radicle.

Larix is widely distributed over the northern and mountainous region of
the northern hemisphere from the Arctic Circle to the mountains of West
Virginia and Oregon in the New World, and to central Europe, the
Himalayas, Siberia, Korea, western China, and Japan in the Old World.
Ten species are recognized. Of the exotic species the European _Larix
decidua_, Mill., has been much planted for timber and ornament in the
northeastern states, where the Japanese _Larix Koempferi_, Sarg., also
flourishes.

_Larix_ is the classical name of the Larch-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Cones small, subglobose; their scales few, longer than the bracts,
        leaves triangular.
                                               1. L. laricina (A, B, F).
  Cones elongated; their scales numerous, shorter than the bracts.
    Young branchlets pubescent, soon becoming glabrous; leaves
          triangular.
                                              2. L. occidentalis (B, G).
    Young branchlets tomentose; leaves 4-angled.
                                                   3. L. Lyallii (B, F).


              1. Larix laricina K. Koch. Tamarack. Larch.

                        _Larix americana_ Michx.

[Illustration: Fig. 36]

Leaves linear, triangular, rounded above, prominently keeled on the
lower surface, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, bright green, conspicuously
stomatiferous when they first appear; turning yellow and falling in
September or October. Flowers: male subglobose and sessile; female
oblong, with light-colored bracts produced into elongated green tips,
and nearly orbicular rose-red scales. Fruit on stout incurved stems,
subglobose, rather obtuse, 1/2'--3/4' long, composed of about 20 scales
slightly erose on their nearly entire margins, rather longer than broad
and twice as long as their bracts, bright chestnut-brown at maturity;
usually falling during their second year; seeds 1/8' long, about one
third as long as their light chestnut-brown wings broadest near the
middle and obliquely rounded at apex.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 18'--20' in diameter, small
horizontal branches forming during the early life of the tree a narrow
regular pyramidal head always characteristic of this tree when crowded
in the forest, or with abundant space sweeping out in graceful curves,
often becoming contorted and pendulous and forming a broad open
frequently picturesque head, and slender leading branchlets often
covered at first with a glaucous bloom, becoming light orange-brown
during their first winter and conspicuous from the small globose dark
red lustrous buds. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, separating into thin closely
appressed rather bright reddish brown scales. Wood heavy, hard, very
strong, rather coarse-grained, very durable, light brown; largely used
for the upper knees of small vessels, fence-posts, telegraph-poles, and
railway-ties.

Distribution. At the north often on well-drained uplands, southward in
cold deep swamps which it often clothes with forests of closely crowded
trees, from Labrador to the Arctic Circle, ranging west of the Rocky
Mountains to latitude 65 deg. 35' north, and southward through Canada and
the northern states to northern and eastern Pennsylvania, Garrett
County, Maryland (Oakland to Thayerville), and Preston County, West
Virginia (Cranesville Swamp), northern Indiana and Illinois, and
northeastern Minnesota; along the eastern foothills of the Rocky
Mountains to about latitude 53 deg. and between the Yukon River and Cook
Inlet, Alaska (_Larix alaskensis_ Wight.); very abundant in the interior
of Labrador, where it is the largest tree; common along the margins of
the barren lands stretching beyond the sub-Arctic forest to the shores
of the Arctic Sea; attaining its largest size north of Lake Winnipeg on
low benches which it occasionally covers with open forests; on the
eastern slopes of the northern Rocky Mountains usually at elevation from
600 deg.--1700 deg. above the sea; rare and local toward the southern limits of
its range.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the northeastern states,
growing rapidly and attaining in cultivation a large size and
picturesque habit.


                 2. Larix occidentalis Nutt. Tamarack.

[Illustration: Fig. 37]

Leaves triangular, rounded on the back, conspicuously keeled below,
rigid, sharp-pointed, 1'--1-3/4' long, about 1/32' wide, light pale
green, turning pale yellow early in the autumn. Flowers: male
short-oblong; female oblong, nearly sessile, with orbicular scales and
bracts produced into elongated tips. Fruit oblong, short-stalked,
1'--1-1/2' long, with numerous thin stiff scales nearly entire and
sometimes a little reflexed on their margins, much shorter than their
bracts, more or less thickly coated on the lower surface below the
middle with hoary tomentum, and standing after the escape of the seeds
at right angles to the axis of the cone, or often becoming reflexed;
seeds nearly 1/4' long, with a pale brown shell, one half to two thirds
as long as the thin fragile pale wings broadest near the middle and
obliquely rounded at apex.

A tree, sometimes 180 deg. high, with a tall tapering naked trunk 6 deg.--8 deg. in
diameter, or on dry soil and exposed mountain slopes usually not more
than 100 deg. tall, with a short narrow pyramidal head of small branches
clothed with scanty foliage, or occasionally with a larger crown of
elongated drooping branches, stout branchlets covered when they first
appear with soft pale pubescence, usually soon glabrous, bright
orange-brown in their first year, ultimately becoming dark gray-brown,
and dark chestnut-brown winter-buds about 1/8' in diameter. Bark of
young stems thin, dark-colored and scaly, becoming near the base of old
trunks 5' or 6' thick and broken into irregularly shaped oblong plates
often 2 deg. long and covered with thin closely appressed light cinnamon-red
scales. Wood very heavy, exceedingly hard and strong, close-grained,
very durable in contact with the soil, bright light red, with thin
nearly white sapwood; largely used for railway-ties and fence-posts, and
manufactured into lumber used in cabinet-making and the interior finish
of buildings.

Distribution. Moist bottom-lands and on high benches and dry mountain
sides generally at elevations between 2000 deg. and 7000 deg. above sea-level,
usually singly or in small groves, through the basin of the upper
Columbia River from southern British Columbia to the western slopes of
the continental divide of northern Montana, and to the eastern slopes of
the Cascade Mountains of Washington and northern Oregon; most abundant
and of its largest size on the bottom-lands of streams flowing into Flat
Head Lake in northern Montana, and in northern Idaho.

Occasionally planted in the eastern states and in Europe, but in
cultivation showing little promise of attaining a large size or becoming
a valuable ornamental or timber-tree.


                    3. Larix Lyallii Parl. Tamarack.

[Illustration: Fig. 38]

Leaves 4-angled, rigid, short-pointed, pale blue-green, 1'--1-1/2' long.
Flowers: male short-oblong; female ovoid-oblong, with dark red or
occasionally pale yellow-green scales and dark purple bracts abruptly
contracted into elongated slender tips. Fruit ovoid, rather acute,
1-1/2'--2' long, subsessile or raised on a slender stalk coated with
hoary tomentum, with dark reddish purple or rarely green erose scales,
fringed and covered on their lower surface with matted hairs at maturity
spreading nearly at right angles and finally much reflexed, much shorter
than their dark purple very conspicuous long-tipped bracts; seeds full
and rounded on the sides, 1/8' long and about half as long as their
light red lustrous wings broadest near the base with nearly parallel
sides.

A tree, usually 25 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk generally 18'--20' but
rarely 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, and remote elongated exceedingly tough
persistent branches sometimes pendulous, developing very irregularly and
often abruptly ascending at the extremities, stout branchlets coated
with hoary tomentum usually persistent until after their second winter,
ultimately becoming nearly black, and prominent winter-buds with
conspicuous long white matted hairs fringing the margins of their scales
and often almost entirely covering the bud. Bark of young trees and of
the branches thin, rather lustrous, smooth, and pale gray tinged with
yellow, becoming loose and scaly on larger stems and on the large
branches of old trees, and on fully grown trunks 1/2'--3/4' thick and
slightly divided by shallow fissures into irregularly shaped plates
covered by thin dark-red brown loosely attached scales. Wood heavy,
hard, coarse-grained, light reddish brown.

Distribution. Near the timber-line on mountain slopes at elevations of
4000 deg.--8000 deg., from southern Alberta on the eastern slope of the Rocky
Mountains and from the interior of southern British Columbia, southward
along the eastern slopes of the Cascade Mountains of northern Washington
to Mt. Stewart at the head of the north fork of the Yakima River, and
along the continental divide to the middle fork of Sun River, Montana,
forming here a forest of considerable size at elevations of
7000 deg.--8000 deg., and on the Bitter Root Mountains to the headwaters of the
south fork of the Clearwater River, Idaho.




                        3. PICEA Dietr. Spruce.


Pyramidal trees, with tall tapering trunks often stoutly buttressed at
the base, thin scaly bark, soft pale wood containing numerous
resin-canals, slender whorled twice or thrice ramified branches, their
ultimate divisions stout, glabrous or pubescent, and leaf-buds usually
in 3's, the 2 lateral in the axils of upper leaves. Leaves linear,
spirally disposed, extending out from the branch on all sides or
occasionally appearing 2-ranked by the twisting of those on its lower
side, mostly pointing to the end of the branch, entire, articulate on
prominent persistent rhomboid ultimately woody bases, keeled above and
below, 4-sided and stomatiferous on the 4 sides, or flattened and
stomatiferous on the upper and occasionally on the lower side,
persistent from seven to ten years, deciduous in drying. Flowers
terminal or in the axils of upper leaves, the male usually long-stalked,
composed of numerous spirally arranged anthers with connectives produced
into broad nearly circular toothed crests, the female oblong, oval or
cylindric, with rounded or pointed scales, each in the axis of an
accrescent bract shorter than the scale at maturity. Fruit an ovoid or
oblong, cylindric pendant cone, crowded on the upper branches or in some
species scattered over the upper half of the tree. Seeds ovoid or
oblong, usually acute at base, much shorter than their wings; outer
seed-coat crustaceous, light or dark brown, the inner membranaceous,
pale chestnut-brown; cotyledons 4--15.

Picea is widely distributed through the colder and temperate regions of
the northern hemisphere, some species forming great forests on plains
and high mountain slopes. Thirty-seven species are now recognized,
ranging from the Arctic Circle to the slopes of the southern Appalachian
Mountains and to those of northern New Mexico and Arizona in the New
World, and to central and southeastern Europe, the Caucasus, the
Himalayas, western China, Formosa and Japan. Of exotic species the
so-called Norway Spruce, _Picea Abies_ Karst., one of the most valuable
timber-trees of Europe, has been largely planted for ornament and
shelter in the eastern states, where the Caucasian _Picea orientalis_
Carr., and some of the Japanese species also flourish.

_Picea_ was probably the classical name of the Spruce-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves 4-sided, with stomata on the 4 sides.
    Cone-scales rounded at apex.
      Cone-scales stiff and rigid at maturity; branchlets pubescent.
        Cones ovoid on strongly incurved stalks, persistent for many
              years, their scales erose or dentate; leaves blue-green.
                                                1. P. mariana (A, B, F).
        Cones ovoid-oblong, early deciduous, their scales entire or
              denticulate; leaves dark yellow-green.
                                                        2. P. rubra (A).
      Cone-scales soft and flexible at maturity; branchlets glabrous;
            cones oblong-cylindric, slender, their scales entire; leaves
            blue-green.
                                                 3. P. glauca (A, B, F).
    Cone-scales truncate or acute at apex, oblong or rhombic; leaves
          blue-green.
      Cones oblong-cylindric or ellipsoidal; branchlets pubescent;
            leaves soft and flexible.
                                            4. P. Engelmannii (F, B, G).
      Cones oblong-cylindric; branchlets glabrous; leaves rigid,
            spinescent.
                                                      5. P. pungens (F).
  Leaves flattened, usually with stomata only on the upper surface;
        cone-scales rounded.
    Cone-scales ovate, entire; branchlets pubescent; cones ellipsoidal,
          leaves obtuse.
                                                   6. P. Breweriana (G).
    Cone-scales elliptic, denticulate above the middle; branchlets
          glabrous; cones oblong-cylindric, leaves acute or acuminate,
          with stomata occasionally on the lower surface.
                                                7. P. sitchensis (B, G).


                1. Picea mariana B. S. P. Black Spruce.

[Illustration: Fig. 39]

Leaves slightly incurved above the middle, abruptly contracted at apex
into short callous tips, pale blue-green and glaucous at maturity,
1/4'--3/4' long, hoary on the upper surface from the broad bands of
stomata, and lustrous and slightly stomatiferous on the lower surface.
Flowers: male subglobose, with dark red anthers; female
oblong-cylindric, with obovate purple scales rounded above, and oblong
purple glaucous bracts rounded and denticulate at apex. Fruit ovoid,
pointed, gradually narrowed at the base into short strongly incurved
stalks, 1/2'--1-1/2' long, with rigid puberulous scales rounded or
rarely somewhat pointed at apex and more or less erose on the notched
pale margins, turning as they ripen dull gray-brown and becoming as the
scales gradually open and slowly discharge their seeds almost globose;
sometimes remaining on the branches for twenty or thirty years, the
oldest close to the base of the branches near the trunk; seeds oblong,
narrowed to the acute base, about 1/8' long, very dark brown, with
delicate pale brown wings broadest above the middle, very oblique at the
apex, about 1/2' long, 1/8' wide.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--30 deg. and occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk
6'--12' and rarely 3 deg. in diameter, and comparatively short branches
generally pendulous with upward curves, forming an open irregular crown,
light green branchlets coated with pale pubescence, soon beginning to
grow darker, and during their first winter light cinnamon-brown and
covered with short rusty pubescence, their thin brown bark gradually
becoming glabrous and beginning to break into small thin scales during
their second year; at the extreme north sometimes cone-bearing when only
2 deg.--3 deg. high. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, light reddish brown, puberulous,
about 1/8' long. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick and broken on the surface into
thin rather closely appressed gray-brown scales. Wood light, soft, not
strong, pale yellow-white, with thin sapwood; probably rarely used
outside of Manitoba and Saskatchewan, except in the manufacture of paper
pulp. Spruce-gum, the resinous exudations of the Spruce-trees of
northeastern America, is gathered in considerable quantities principally
in northern New England and Canada, and is used as a masticatory.
Spruce-beer is made by boiling the branches of the Black and Red
Spruces.

Distribution. At the north on well-drained bottom-lands and the slopes
of barren stony hills, and southward in sphagnum-covered bogs, swamps,
and on their borders, from Labrador to the valley of the Mackenzie River
in about latitude 65 deg. north, and, crossing the Rocky Mountains, through
the interior of Alaska to the valley of White River; southward through
Newfoundland, the maritime provinces, eastern Canada and the
northeastern United States to central Pennsylvania, and along the
Alleghany Mountains to northern Virginia; and from the eastern foothills
of the Rocky Mountains in Alberta, through northern Saskatchewan and
northern Manitoba, and south to northeastern and northern Minnesota, and
central Wisconsin and Michigan; very abundant at the far north and the
largest coniferous tree of Saskatchewan and northern Manitoba, covering
here large areas and growing to its largest size; common in Newfoundland
and all the provinces of eastern Canada except southern Ontario; in the
United States less abundant, of small size, and usually only in cold
sphagnum swamps (var. _brevifolia_ Rehd.)

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree, the Black Spruce is
short-lived in cultivation and one of the least desirable of all
Spruce-trees for the decoration of parks and gardens.


                    2. Picea rubra Link. Red Spruce.

                          _Picea rubens_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 40]

Leaves more or less incurved above the middle, acute or rounded and
furnished at the apex with short callous points, dark green often
slightly tinged with yellow, very lustrous, marked on the upper surface
by 4 rows and on the lower less conspicuously by 2 rows of stomata on
each side of the prominent midrib, 1/2'--5/8' long, nearly 1/16' wide.
Flowers: male oval, almost sessile, bright red; female oblong-cylindric,
with thin rounded scales reflexed and slightly erose on their margins,
and obovate bracts rounded and laciniate above. Fruit on very short
straight or incurved stalks, ovoid-oblong, gradually narrowed from near
the middle to the acute apex, 1-1/4'--2' long, with rigid puberulous
scales entire or slightly toothed at the apex; bright green or green
somewhat tinged with purple when fully grown, becoming light reddish
brown and lustrous at maturity, beginning to fall as soon as the scales
open in the autumn or early winter, and generally disappearing from the
branches the following summer; seeds dark brown, about 1/8' long, with
short broad wings full and rounded above the middle.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. and occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg.
in diameter, branches long-persistent on the stem and clothing it to the
ground, forming a narrow rather conical head, or soon disappearing below
from trees crowded in the forest, stout pubescent light green
branchlets, becoming bright reddish brown or orange-brown during their
first winter, glabrous the following year, and covered in their third or
fourth year with scaly bark. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/4'--1/3' long,
with light reddish brown scales. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick, and broken into
thin closely appressed irregularly shaped red-brown scales. Wood light,
soft, close-grained, not strong, pale slightly tinged with red, with
paler sapwood usually about 2' thick; largely manufactured into lumber
in the northeastern states, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, and used for the
flooring and construction of houses, for the sounding-boards of musical
instruments, and in the manufacture of paper-pulp.

Distribution. Well-drained uplands and mountain slopes, often forming a
large part of extensive forests, from Prince Edward Island and the
valley of the St. Lawrence southward to the coast of Massachusetts,
along the interior hilly part of New England, New York, and northern
Pennsylvania and on the slopes of the Alleghany Mountains at elevations
above 2500 feet from West Virginia to North Carolina and Tennessee.

Occasionally planted in the eastern states and in Europe as an
ornamental tree, but growing in cultivation more slowly than any other
Spruce-tree.


                  3. Picea glauca Voss. White Spruce.

                      _Picea canadensis_ B. S. P.

[Illustration: Fig. 41]

Leaves crowded on the upper side of the branches by the twisting of
those on the lower side, incurved, acute or acuminate with rigid callous
tips, pale blue and hoary when they first appear, becoming dark
blue-green or pale blue, marked on each of the 4 sides by 3 or 4 rows of
stomata, 1/3'--3/4' long. Flowers: male pale red, soon appearing yellow
from the thick covering of pollen; female oblong-cylindric, with round
nearly entire pale red or yellow-green scales, broader than long, and
nearly orbicular denticulate bracts. Fruit nearly sessile or borne on
short thin straight stems, oblong-cylindric, slender, slightly narrowed
to the ends, rather obtuse at apex, usually about 2' long, pale green
sometimes tinged with red when fully grown, becoming at maturity pale
brown and lustrous, with nearly orbicular scales, rounded, truncate, and
slightly emarginate, or rarely narrowed at apex, and very thin, flexible
and elastic at maturity, usually deciduous in the autumn or during the
following winter; seeds about 1/8' long, pale brown, with narrow wings
gradually widened from the base to above the middle and very oblique at
the apex.

A tree, with disagreeable smelling foliage, rarely more than 60 deg.--70 deg.
tall, with a trunk not more than 2 deg. in diameter, long comparatively
thick branches densely clothed with stout rigid laterals sweeping out in
graceful upward curves, and forming a broad-based rather open pyramid
often obtuse at the apex, stout glabrous branchlets orange-brown during
their first autumn and winter, gradually growing darker grayish brown.
Winter-buds broadly ovoid, obtuse, covered by light chestnut-brown
scales with thin often reflexed ciliate margins. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick,
separating irregularly into thin plate-like light gray scales more or
less tinged with brown. Wood light, soft, not strong, straight-grained
light yellow, with hardly distinguishable sapwood; manufactured into
lumber in the eastern provinces of Canada and in Alaska, and used in
construction, for the interior finish of buildings, and for paper-pulp.

Distribution. Banks and borders of streams and lakes, ocean cliffs, and
in the north the rocky slopes of low hills, from Labrador along the
northern frontier of the forest nearly to the shores of the Arctic Sea,
reaching Behring Strait in 66 deg. 44' north latitude, and southward down
the Atlantic coast to southern Maine, northern New Hampshire, Vermont,
and New York, shores of Saginaw Bay, Michigan, northern Wisconsin and
Minnesota, and through the interior of Alaska.

The variety (var. _albertiana_ Sarg.) of the Gaspe Peninsula and the
valleys of the Black Hills of South Dakota and of the Rocky Mountains of
northern Wyoming, Montana, Alberta and northward, is a tree with a
narrow pyramidal head, sometimes 150 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg. to 4 deg. in
diameter, and shorter and rather broader cones than those of the typical
White Spruce of the east, although not shorter or as short as the cones
of that tree in the extreme north.

Often planted in Canada, northern New England, and northern Europe as an
ornamental tree; in southern New England and southward suffering from
heat and dryness.


      4. Picea Engelmannii Engelm. White Spruce. Engelmann Spruce.

[Illustration: Fig. 42]

Leaves soft and flexible, with acute callous tips, slender, nearly
straight or slightly incurved on vigorous sterile branches, stouter,
shorter, and more incurved on fertile branches, 1'--1-1/8' long, marked
on each face by 3--5 rows of stomata, covered at first with a glaucous
bloom, soon becoming dark blue-green or pale steel-blue. Flowers: male
dark purple; female bright scarlet, with pointed or rounded and more or
less divided scales, and oblong bracts rounded or acute or acuminate and
denticulate at apex or obovate-oblong and abruptly acuminate. Fruit
oblong-cylindric to ellipsoidal, gradually narrowed to the ends, usually
about 2' long, sessile or very short-stalked, produced in great numbers
on the upper branches, horizontal and ultimately pendulous, light green
somewhat tinged with scarlet when fully grown, becoming light
chestnut-brown and lustrous, with thin flexible slightly concave scales,
generally erose-dentate or rarely almost entire on the margins, usually
broadest at the middle, wedge-shaped below, and gradually contracted
above into a truncate or acute apex, or occasionally obovate and rounded
above; mostly deciduous in the autumn or early in their first winter
soon after the escape of the seeds; seeds obtuse at the base, nearly
black, about 1/8' long and much shorter than their broad very oblique
wings.

A tree, with disagreeable smelling foliage sometimes 120 deg. high, with a
trunk 3 deg. in diameter, spreading branches produced in regular whorls and
forming a narrow compact pyramidal head, gracefully hanging short
lateral branches, and comparatively slender branchlets pubescent for
three or four years, light or dark orange-brown or gray tinged with
brown during their first winter, their bark beginning to separate into
small flaky scales in their fourth or fifth year; at its highest
altitudes low and stunted with elongated branches pressed close to the
ground. Winter-buds conic or slightly obtuse, with pale chestnut-brown
scales scarious and often free and slightly reflexed on the margins.
Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick, light cinnamon-red, and broken into large thin
loose scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained, pale yellow
tinged with red, with thick hardly distinguishable sapwood; largely
manufactured into lumber used in the construction of buildings; also
employed for fuel and charcoal. The bark is sometimes employed in
tanning leather.

Distribution. High mountain slopes, often forming great forests from the
mountains of Alberta, British Columbia and Alaska, southward over the
interior mountain systems of the continent to southern New Mexico (the
Sacramento Mountains) and northern Arizona, from elevations of 5000 deg. at
the north up to 11,500 deg. and occasionally to 12,000 deg. at the south, and
westward through Montana and Idaho to the eastern slopes of the Cascade
Mountains of Washington and Oregon; attaining its greatest size and
beauty north of the northern boundary of the United States.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the New England states and
northern Europe, where it grows vigorously and promises to attain a
large size; usually injured in western Europe by spring frosts.


         5. Picea pungens Englm. Blue Spruce. Colorado Spruce.

                         _Picea Parryana_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 43]

Leaves strongly incurved, especially those on the upper side of the
branches, stout, rigid, acuminate and tipped with long callous sharp
points, 1'--1-1/8' long on sterile branches, often not more than half as
long on the fertile branches of old trees, marked on each side by 4--7
rows of stomata, dull bluish green on some individuals and light or dark
steel-blue or silvery white on others, the blue colors gradually
changing to dull blue-green at the end of three or four years. Flowers:
male yellow tinged with red; female with broad oblong or slightly
obovate pale green scales truncate or slightly emarginate at the
denticulate apex, and acute bracts. Fruit produced on the upper third of
the tree, sessile or short-stalked, oblong-cylindric, slightly narrowed
at the ends, usually about 3' long, green more or less tinged with red
when fully grown at midsummer, becoming pale chestnut-brown and
lustrous, with flat tough rhombic scales flexuose on the margins, and
acute, rounded or truncate at the elongated erose apex; seeds 1/8' long
or about half the length of their wings, gradually widening to above the
middle and full and rounded at apex.

A tree, usually 80 deg.--100 deg. or occasionally 150 deg. high, with a trunk rarely
3 deg. in diameter and occasionally divided into 3 or 4 stout secondary
stems, rigid horizontal branches disposed on young trees in remote
whorls and decreasing regularly in length from below upward, the short
stout stiff branchlets pointing forward and making flat-topped masses of
foliage; branches on old trees short and remote, with stout lateral
branches forming a thin ragged pyramidal crown; branchlets stout, rigid,
glabrous, pale glaucous green, becoming bright orange-brown during the
first winter and ultimately light grayish brown. Winter-buds stout,
obtuse or rarely acute, 1/4'--1/2' long, with thin pale chestnut-brown
scales usually reflexed on the margins. Bark of young trees gray or gray
tinged with cinnamon-red and broken into small oblong plate-like scales,
becoming on the lower part of old trunks 3/4'--1-1/2' thick and deeply
divided into broad rounded ridges covered with small closely appressed
pale gray or occasionally bright cinnamon-red scales. Wood light, soft,
close-grained, weak, pale brown or often nearly white, with hardly
distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams or on the first benches above them singly
or in small groves at elevations between 6500 deg. and 11,000 deg. above the
sea; Colorado and eastern Utah northward to the northern end of the
Medicine Bow Mountains and on the Laramie Range in southern and on the
Shoshone and Teton Mountains in northwestern Wyoming, and southward into
northern New Mexico (Sierra Bianca, alt. 8000 deg.--11,000 deg., Sacramento
Mountains, Pecos River National Forest).

Often planted as an ornamental tree in the eastern and northern states
and in western and northern Europe, especially individuals with blue
foliage; very beautiful in early life but in cultivation soon becoming
unsightly from the loss of the lower branches.


              6. Picea Breweriana S. Wats. Weeping Spruce.

[Illustration: Fig. 44]

Leaves abruptly narrowed and obtuse at apex, straight or slightly
incurved, rounded and obscurely ridged and dark green and lustrous on
the lower surface, flattened and conspicuously marked on the upper
surface by 4 or 5 rows of stomata on each side of the prominent midrib,
3/4'--1-1/8' long, 1/16'--1/10' wide. Flowers: male dark purple; female
oblong-cylindric, with obovate scales rounded above and reflexed on the
entire margins, and oblong bracts laciniately divided at their rounded
or acute apex. Fruit ellipsoidal, gradually narrowed from the middle to
the ends, acute at apex, rather oblique at base, suspended on straight
slender stalks, deep rich purple or green more or less tinged with
purple when fully grown, becoming light orange-brown, 2'--4' long, with
thin broadly ovate flat scales longer than broad, rounded at apex,
opening late in the autumn after the escape of the seeds, often becoming
strongly reflexed and very flexible; usually remaining on the branches
until their second winter; seeds acute at base, full and rounded on the
sides, 1/8' long, dark brown, and about one quarter the length of their
wings broadest toward the full and rounded apex.

A tree, usually 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter above
the swelling of its enlarged and gradually tapering base, and furnished
to the ground with crowded branches, those at the top of the tree short
and slightly ascending, with comparatively short pendulous lateral
branches, those lower on the tree horizontal or pendulous and clothed
with slender flexible whip-like laterals often 7 deg.--8 deg. long and not more
than 1/4' thick and furnished with numerous long thin lateral
branchlets, their ultimate divisions slender, coated with fine
pubescence persistent until their third season, bright red-brown during
their first winter, gradually growing dark gray-brown. Winter-buds
conic, light chestnut-brown, 1/4' long and 1/8' thick. Bark 1/2'--3/4'
thick, broken into long thin closely appressed scales dull red-brown on
the surface. Wood heavy, soft, close-grained, light brown or nearly
white, with thick hardly distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Dry mountain ridges and peaks near the timber-line on both
slopes of the Siskiyou Mountains on the boundary between California and
Oregon, forming small groves at elevations of about 7000 deg. above the sea;
on a high peak west of Marble Mountain in Siskiyou County, California;
on the coast ranges of southwestern Oregon at elevations of
4000 deg.--5000 deg.


        7. Picea sitchensis Carr. Tideland Spruce. Sitka Spruce.

[Illustration: Fig. 45]

Leaves standing out from all sides of the branches and often nearly at
right angles to them, frequently bringing their white upper surface to
view by a twist at their base, straight or slightly incurved, acute or
acuminate with long callous tips, slightly rounded, green, lustrous, and
occasionally marked on the lower surface with 2 or 3 rows of small
conspicuous stomata on each side of the prominent midrib, flattened,
obscurely ridged and almost covered with broad silvery white bands of
numerous rows of stomata on the upper surface, 1/2'--1-1/8' long and
1/16'--1/12' wide, mostly persistent 9--11 years. Flowers: male at the
ends of the pendant lateral branchlets, dark red; female on rigid
terminal shoots of the branches of the upper half of the tree, with
nearly orbicular denticulate scales, often slightly truncate above and
completely hidden by their elongated acuminate bracts. Fruit
oblong-cylindric, short-stalked, yellow-green often tinged with dark red
when fully grown, becoming lustrous and pale yellow or reddish brown,
2-1/2'--4' long, with thin stiff elliptic scales rounded toward the
apex, denticulate above the middle, and nearly twice as long as their
lanceolate denticulate bracts; deciduous mostly during their first
autumn and winter; seeds full and rounded, acute at the base, pale
reddish brown, about 1/8' long, with narrow oblong slightly oblique
wings 1/3'--1/2' in length.

A tree, usually about 100 deg. high, with a conspicuously tapering trunk
often 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter above its strongly buttressed and much-enlarged
base, occasionally 200 deg. tall, with a trunk 15 deg.--16 deg. in diameter,
horizontal branches forming an open loose pyramid and on older trees
clothed with slender pendant lateral branches frequently 2 deg.--3 deg. long,
and stout rigid glabrous branchlets pale green at first, becoming dark
or light orange-brown during their first autumn and winter and finally
dark gray-brown; at the extreme northwestern limits of its range
occasionally reduced to a low shrub. Winter-buds ovoid, acute or
conical, 1/4'--1/2' long, with pale chestnut-brown acute scales, often
tipped with short points and more or less reflexed above the middle.
Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick and broken on the surface into large thin loosely
attached dark red-brown or on young trees sometimes bright cinnamon-red
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, straight-grained, light brown
tinged with red, with thick nearly white sapwood; largely manufactured
into lumber used in the interior finish of buildings, for fencing,
boat-building, aeroplanes, cooperage, wooden-ware, and packing-cases.

Distribution. Moist sandy, often swampy soil, or less frequently at the
far north on wet rocky slopes, from the eastern end of Kadiak Island,
southward through the coast region of Alaska, British Columbia,
Washington, and Oregon to Mendocino County, California; in Washington,
occasionally ranging inland to the upper valley of the Nesqually River.

Often planted in western and central Europe and occasionally in the
middle Atlantic states as an ornamental tree.




                        4. TSUGA Carr. Hemlock.


Tall pyramidal trees, with deeply furrowed astringent bark bright
cinnamon-red except on the surface, soft pale wood, nodding leading
shoots, slender scattered horizontal often pendulous branches, the
secondary branches three or four times irregularly pinnately ramified,
with slender round glabrous or pubescent ultimate divisions, the whole
forming graceful pendant masses of foliage, and minute winter-buds.
Leaves flat or angular, obtuse and often emarginate or acute at apex,
spirally disposed, usually appearing almost 2-ranked by the twisting of
their petioles, those on the upper side of the branch then much shorter
than the others, abruptly narrowed into short petioles jointed on
ultimately woody persistent bases, with stomata on the lower surface; on
one species not 2-ranked, and of nearly equal length, with stomata on
both surfaces. Flowers solitary, the male in the axils of leaves of the
previous year, globose, composed of numerous subglobose anthers, with
connectives produced into short gland-like tips, the female terminal,
erect, with nearly circular scales slightly longer or shorter than their
membranaceous bracts. Fruit an ovoid-oblong, oval, or oblong-cylindric
obtuse usually pendulous nearly sessile green or rarely purple cone
becoming light or dark reddish brown, with concave suborbicular or
ovate-oblong scales thin and entire on the margins, much longer than
their minute bracts, persistent on the axis of the cone after the escape
of the seeds. Seeds furnished with resin-vesicles, ovoid-oblong,
compressed, nearly surrounded by their much longer obovate-oblong wings;
outer seed-coat crustaceous, light brown, the inner membranaceous, pale
chestnut-brown, and lustrous; cotyledons 3--6, much shorter than the
inferior radicle.

Tsuga is confined to temperate North America, Japan, central and
southwestern China, Formosa, and the Himalayas; nine species have been
distinguished.

_Tsuga_ is the Japanese name of the Hemlock-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves flat, obtuse or emarginate at apex, with stomata only on the
        lower surface; cones ovoid, oblong or oblong-ovoid.
    Cones stalked.
      Cone-scales broad-obovate, about as wide as long, their bracts
            broad and truncate.
                                                   1. T. canadensis (A).
      Cone-scales narrow-oval, much longer than wide, their bracts
            obtusely pointed.
                                                  2. T. caroliniana (A).
    Cones sessile; cone-scales oval, often abruptly contracted near the
          middle, their bracts gradually narrowed to an obtuse point.
                                           3. T. heterophylla (B, F, G).
  Leaves convex or keeled above, bluntly pointed, with stomata on both
        surfaces; cones oblong-cylindric, their scales oblong-obovate,
        longer than broad, much longer than their acuminate
        short-pointed bracts.
                                            4. T. Mertensiana (B, F, G).


                   1. Tsuga canadensis Carr. Hemlock.

[Illustration: Fig. 46]

Leaves, rounded and rarely emarginate at apex, dark yellow-green,
lustrous and obscurely grooved especially toward the base on the upper
surface, marked on the lower surface by 5 or 6 rows of stomata on each
side of the low broad midrib, 1/3'--2/3' long, about 1/16' wide,
deciduous in their third season from dark orange-colored persistent
bases. Flowers: male light yellow; female pale green, with broad bracts
coarsely laciniate on the margins and shorter than their scales. Fruit
on slender puberulous stalks often 1/4' long, ovoid, acute, 1/2'--3/4'
long, with broad-obovate scales almost as wide as long, and broad
truncate bracts slightly laciniate on the margins, opening and gradually
losing their seeds during the winter and mostly persistent on the
branches until the following spring; seeds 1/16' long, usually with 2 or
3 large oil-vesicles, nearly half as long as their wings broad at the
base and gradually tapering to the rounded apex.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg., and occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk
2 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, gradually and conspicuously tapering toward the
apex, long slender horizontal or pendulous branches, persistent until
overshadowed by other trees, and forming a broad-based rather obtuse
pyramid, and slender light yellow-brown pubescent branchlets, growing
darker during their first winter and glabrous and dark red-brown tinged
with purple in their third season. Winter-buds obtuse, light
chestnut-brown, slightly puberulous, about 1/16' long. Bark 1/2'--3/4'
thick, deeply divided into narrow rounded ridges covered with thick
closely appressed scales varying from cinnamon-red to gray more or less
tinged with purple. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle,
coarse-grained, difficult to work, liable to wind-shake and splinter,
not durable when exposed to the air, light brown tinged with red, with
thin somewhat darker sapwood; largely manufactured into coarse lumber
employed for the outside finish of buildings. The astringent inner bark
affords the largest part of the material used in the northeastern states
and Canada in tanning leather. From the young branches oil of hemlock is
distilled.

Distribution. Scattered through upland forests and often covering the
northern slopes of rocky ridges and the steep rocky banks of narrow
river-gorges from Nova Scotia to eastern Minnesota (Carleton County),
and southward through the northern states to Newcastle County, Delaware,
cliffs of Tuckahoe Creek, Queen Anne's County, Maryland, southern
Michigan, southern Indiana (bank of Back Creek near Leesville, Laurence
County), southwestern Wisconsin, and along the Appalachian Mountains to
northern Georgia, and in northern Alabama; most abundant and frequently
an important element of the forest in New England, northern New York,
and western Pennsylvania; attaining its largest size near streams on the
slopes of the high mountains of North Carolina and Tennessee.

Largely cultivated with numerous seminal varieties as an ornamental tree
in the northern states, and in western and central Europe.


                 2. Tsuga caroliniana Engelm. Hemlock.

[Illustration: Fig. 47]

Leaves retuse or often emarginate at apex, dark green, lustrous and
conspicuously grooved on the upper surface, marked on the lower surface
by a band of 7 or 8 rows of stomata on each side of the midrib,
1/3'--3/4' long, about 1/12' wide, deciduous from the orange-red bases
during their fifth year. Flowers: male tinged with purple; female
purple, with broadly ovate bracts, scarious and erose on the margins and
about as long as their scales. Fruit on short stout stalks, oblong,
1'--1-1/2' long, with narrow-oval scales gradually narrowed and rounded
at apex, rather abruptly contracted at base into distinct stipes, thin,
concave, puberulous on the outer surface, twice as long as their broad
pale bracts, spreading nearly at right angles to the axis of the cone at
maturity, their bracts rather longer than wide, wedge-shaped, pale,
nearly truncate or slightly pointed at the broad apex; seeds 1/6' long,
with numerous small oil-vesicles on the lower side, and one quarter as
long as the pale lustrous wings broad or narrow at the base and narrowed
to the rounded apex.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg., or occasionally 70 deg. high, with a trunk rarely
exceeding 2 deg. in diameter, short stout often pendulous branches forming a
handsome compact pyramidal head, and slender light orange-brown
pubescent branchlets, usually becoming glabrous and dull brown more or
less tinged with orange during their third year. Winter-buds obtuse,
dark chestnut-brown, pubescent, nearly 1/8' long. Bark of the trunk
3/4'--1-1/4' thick, red-brown, and deeply divided into broad flat
connected ridges covered with thin closely appressed plate-like scales.
Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, coarse-grained, pale brown tinged
with red, with thin nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Rocky banks of streams usually at elevations between 2500 deg.
and 3000 deg. on the Blue Ridge from southwestern Virginia to northern
Georgia, generally singly or in small scattered groves of a few
individuals.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the northern states, and
in western Europe.


                  3. Tsuga heterophylla Sarg. Hemlock.

[Illustration: Fig. 48]

Leaves rounded at apex, conspicuously grooved, dark green and very
lustrous on the upper surface, marked below by broad white bands of 7--9
rows of stomata, abruptly contracted at the base into slender petioles,
1/4'--3/4' long and 1/16'--1/12' wide, mostly persistent 4--7 years.
Flowers: male yellow; female purple and puberulous, with broad bracts
gradually narrowed to an obtuse point and shorter than their broadly
ovate slightly scarious scales. Fruit oblong-ovoid, acute, sessile,
3/4'--1' long, with slightly puberulous oval scales, often abruptly
narrowed near the middle, and dark purple puberulous bracts rounded and
abruptly contracted at apex; seeds 1/8' long, furnished with occasional
oil-vesicles, one third to one half as long as their narrow wings.

A tree, frequently 200 deg. high, with a tall trunk 6 deg.--10 deg. in diameter, and
short slender usually pendulous branches forming a narrow pyramidal
head, and slender pale yellow-brown branchlets ultimately becoming dark
reddish brown, coated at first with long pale hairs, and pubescent or
puberulous for five or six years. Winter-buds ovoid, bright
chestnut-brown, about 1/16' long. Bark on young trunks thin, dark
orange-brown, and separated by shallow fissures into narrow flat plates
broken into delicate scales, becoming on fully grown trees 1'--1-1/2'
thick and deeply divided into broad flat connected ridges covered with
closely appressed brown scales more or less tinged with cinnamon-red.
Wood light, hard and tough, pale brown tinged with yellow, with thin
nearly white sapwood; stronger and more durable than the wood of the
other American hemlocks; now largely manufactured into lumber used
principally in the construction of buildings. The bark is used in large
quantities in tanning leather; from the inner bark the Indians of Alaska
obtain one of their principal articles of vegetable food.

Distribution. Southeastern Alaska, southward near the coast to southern
Mendocino County, California, extending eastward over the mountains of
southern British Columbia, northern Washington, Idaho and Montana, to
the western slopes of the continental divide, and through Oregon to the
western slopes of the Cascade Mountains, sometimes ascending in the
interior to elevations of 6000 deg. above the sea; most abundant and of its
largest size on the coast of Washington and Oregon; often forming a
large part of the forests of the northwest coast.

Frequently planted as an ornamental tree in temperate Europe.


      4. Tsuga Mertensiana Sarg. Mountain Hemlock. Black Hemlock.

[Illustration: Fig. 49]

Leaves standing out from all sides of the branch, remote on leading
shoots and crowded on short lateral branchlets, rounded and occasionally
obscurely grooved or on young plants sometimes conspicuously grooved on
the upper surface, rounded and slightly ribbed on the lower surface,
bluntly pointed, often more or less curved, stomatiferous above and
below, with about 8 rows of stomata on each surface, light bluish green
or on some individuals pale blue, 1/2'--1' long, about 1/16' wide,
abruptly narrowed into nearly straight or slightly twisted petioles
articulate on bases as long or rather longer than the petioles;
irregularly deciduous during their third and fourth years. Flowers: male
borne on slender pubescent drooping stems, violet-purple; female erect,
with delicate lustrous dark purple or yellow-green bracts gradually
narrowed above into slender often slightly reflexed tips and much longer
than their scales. Fruit sessile, oblong-cylindric, narrowed toward the
blunt apex and somewhat toward the base, erect until more than half
grown, pendulous or rarely erect at maturity, 5/8'--3' long, with thin
delicate oblong-obovate scales gradually contracted from above the
middle to the wedge-shaped base, rounded at the slightly thickened more
or less erose margins, puberulous on the outer surface, usually bright
bluish purple or occasionally pale yellow-green, four or five times as
long as their short-pointed dark purple or brown bracts; seeds light
brown, 1/8' long, often marked on the surface next their scales with 1
or 2 large resin-vesicles, with wings nearly 1/2' long, broadest above
the middle, gradually narrowed below, slightly or not at all oblique at
the rounded apex.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--100 deg. but occasionally 150 deg. high, with a slightly
tapering trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, gracefully pendant slender branches
furnished with drooping frond-like lateral branches, their ultimate
divisions erect and forming an open pyramid surmounted by the long
drooping leading shoot, and thin flexible or sometimes stout rigid
branchlets light reddish brown and covered for two or three years with
short pale dense pubescence, becoming grayish brown and very scaly.
Winter-buds acute, about 1/8' long, the scales of the outer ranks
furnished on the back with conspicuous midribs produced into slender
deciduous awl-like tips. Bark 1'--1-1/2' thick, deeply divided into
connected rounded ridges broken into thin closely appressed dark
cinnamon scales shaded with blue or purple. Wood light, soft, not
strong, close-grained, pale brown or red, with thin nearly white
sapwood; occasionally manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. Exposed ridges and slopes at high altitudes along the
upper border of the forest from southeastern Alaska, southward over the
mountain ranges of British Columbia to the Olympic Mountains of
Washington, and eastward to the western slopes of the Selkirk Mountains
in the interior of southern British Columbia, and along the Bitter Root
Mountains to the headwaters of the Clearwater River, Idaho; along the
Cascade Mountains of Washington and Oregon, on the mountain ranges of
northern California, and along the high Sierra Nevada to the canyon of
the south fork of King's River, California; in Alaska occasionally
descending to the sea-level, and toward the southern limits of its range
often ascending to elevations of 10,000 deg.

Often planted as an ornamental tree in western and central Europe, and
rarely in the eastern United States.




                          5. PSEUDOTSUGA Carr.


Pyramidal trees, with thick deeply furrowed bark, hard strong wood, with
spirally marked wood-cells, slender usually horizontal irregularly
whorled branches clothed with slender spreading lateral branches forming
broad flat-topped masses of foliage, ovoid acute leaf-buds, the lateral
buds in the axils of upper leaves, their inner scales accrescent and
marking the branchlets with ring-like scars. Leaves petiolate, linear,
flat, rounded and obtuse or acuminate at apex, straight or incurved,
grooved on the upper side, marked on the lower side by numerous rows of
stomata on each side of the prominent midrib, spreading nearly at right
angles with the branch. Flowers solitary, the male axillary, scattered
along the branches, oblong-cylindric, with numerous globose anthers,
their connectives terminating in short spurs, the female terminal or in
the axils of upper leaves, composed of spirally arranged ovate rounded
scales much shorter than their acutely 2-lobed bracts, with midribs
produced into elongated slender tips. Fruit an ovoid-oblong acute
pendulous cone maturing in one season, with rounded concave rigid scales
persistent on the axis of the cone after the escape of the seeds, and
becoming dark red-brown, much shorter than the 2-lobed bracts with
midribs ending in rigid woody linear awns, those at the base of the cone
without scales and becoming linear-lanceolate by the gradual suppression
of their lobes. Seeds nearly triangular, full, rounded and dark-colored
on the upper side and pale on the lower side, shorter than their oblong
wings infolding the upper side of the seeds in a dark covering; outer
seed-coat thick and crustaceous, the inner thin and membranaceous;
cotyledons 6--12, much shorter than the inferior radicle.

Pseudotsuga is confined to western North America, southern Japan,
southwestern China and Formosa. Four species are recognized.

_Pseudotsuga_, a barbarous combination of a Greek with a Japanese word,
indicates the relation of these trees with the Hemlocks.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves usually rounded and obtuse at apex, dark yellow-green or rarely
        blue-green; cones 2'--4-1/2' long, their bracts much exserted.
                                        1. P. taxifolia (B, E, F, G, H).
  Leaves acuminate at apex, bluish gray; cones 4'--6-1/2' long, their
        bracts slightly exserted.
                                                   2. P. macrocarpa (G).


        1. Pseudotsuga taxifolia Britt. Douglas Spruce. Red Fir.

                     _Pseudotsuga mucronata Sudw._

[Illustration: Fig. 50]

Leaves straight or rarely slightly incurved, rounded and obtuse at apex,
or acute on leading shoots, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, 1/16'--1/12' wide, dark
yellow-green or rarely light or dark bluish green, occasionally
persistent until their sixteenth year. Flowers: male orange-red; female
with slender elongated bracts deeply tinged with red. Fruit pendant on
long stout stems, 4'--6-1/2' long, with thin slightly concave scales
rounded and occasionally somewhat elongated at apex, usually rather
longer than broad, when fully grown at midsummer slightly puberulous,
dark blue-green below, purplish toward the apex, bright red on the
closely appressed margins, and pale green bracts becoming slightly
reflexed above the middle, 1/5'--1/4' wide, often extending 1/2' beyond
the scales; seeds light reddish brown and lustrous above, pale and
marked below with large irregular white spots, 1/4' long, nearly 1/8'
wide, almost as long as their dark brown wings broadest just below the
middle, oblique above and rounded at the apex.

A tree, often 200 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, frequently
taller, with a trunk 10 deg.--12 deg. in diameter, but in the dry interior of
the continent rarely more than 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk hardly
exceeding 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, slender crowded branches densely clothed
with long pendulous lateral branches, forming while the tree is young an
open pyramid, soon deciduous from trees crowded in the forest, often
leaving the trunk naked for two thirds of its length and surmounted by a
comparatively small narrow head sometimes becoming flap-topped by the
lengthening of the upper branches, and slender branchlets pubescent for
three or four years, pale orange color and lustrous during their first
season, becoming bright reddish brown and ultimately dark gray-brown.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, the terminal bud often 1/4' long and nearly
twice as large as the lateral buds. Bark on young trees smooth, thin,
rather lustrous, dark gray-brown, usually becoming on old trunks
10'--12' thick, and divided into oblong plates broken into great broad
rounded and irregularly connected ridges separating on the surface into
small thick closely appressed dark red-brown scales. Wood light, red or
yellow, with nearly white sapwood; very variable in density, quality,
and in the thickness of the sapwood; largely manufactured into lumber in
British Columbia, western Washington and Oregon, and used for all kinds
of construction, fuel, railway-ties, and piles; known commercially as
"Oregon pine." The bark is sometimes used in tanning leather.

Distribution. From about latitude 55 deg. north in the Rocky Mountains and
from the head of the Skeena River in the coast range, southward through
all the Rocky Mountain system to the mountains of western Texas,
southern New Mexico and Arizona, and of northern Mexico, and from the
Big Horn and Laramie Ranges in Wyoming and from eastern base of the
Rocky Mountains of Colorado to the Pacific coast, but absent from the
arid mountains in the great basin between the Wahsatch and the Sierra
Nevada ranges and from the mountains of southern California; most
abundant and of its largest size near the sea-level in the coast region
of southern British Columbia and of Washington and Oregon, and on the
western foothills of the Cascade Mountains; ascending on the California
Sierras to elevations of 5500 deg., and on the mountains of Colorado to
between 6000 deg. and 11,000 deg., above the sea.

Often planted for timber and ornament in temperate Europe, and for
ornament in the eastern and northern states, where only the form from
the interior of the continent flourishes. (_P. glauca Mayr._)


                2. Pseudotsuga macrocarpa Mayr. Hemlock.

[Illustration: Fig. 51]

Leaves acute or acuminate, terminating in slender rigid callous tips,
apparently 2-ranked by the conspicuous twist of their petioles, incurved
above the middle, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, about 1/16' wide, dark bluish gray.
Flowers: male pale yellow, inclosed for half their length in conspicuous
involucres of the lustrous bud-scales; female with pale green bracts
tinged with red. Fruit produced on the upper branches and occasionally
on those down to the middle of the tree, short-stalked, with scales near
the middle of the cone 1-1/2'--2' across, stiff, thick, concave, rather
broader than long, rounded above, abruptly wedge-shaped at the base,
puberulous on the outer surface, often nearly as long as their
comparatively short and narrow bracts with broad midribs produced into
short flattened flexible tips; seeds full and rounded on both sides,
rugose, dark chestnut-brown or nearly black and lustrous above, pale
reddish brown below, 1/2' long, 3/8' wide, with a thick brittle outer
coat, and wings broadest near the middle, about 1/2' long, nearly 1/4'
wide, and rounded at the apex.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg. and rarely 90 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, remote elongated branches pendulous below, furnished with
short stout pendant or often erect laterals forming an open broad-based
symmetrical pyramidal head, slender branchlets dark reddish brown and
pubescent during their first year, becoming glabrous and dark or light
orange-brown and ultimately gray-brown. Winter buds ovoid, acute,
usually not more than 1/8' long, often nearly as broad as long. Bark
3'--6' thick, dark reddish brown, deeply divided into broad rounded
ridges covered with thick closely appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, close-grained, not durable; occasionally manufactured into
lumber; largely used for fuel.

Distribution. Steep rocky mountain slopes in southern California at
elevations of 3000 deg.--5000 deg. above the sea, often forming open groves of
considerable extent, from the Santa Inez Mountains in Santa Barbara
County to the Cuyamaca Mountains.




                          6. ABIES Link. Fir.


Tall pyramidal trees, with bark containing numerous resin-vesicles,
smooth, pale, and thin on young trees, often thick and deeply furrowed
in old age, pale and usually brittle wood, slender horizontal
wide-spreading branches in regular remote 4 or 5-branched whorls,
clothed with twice or thrice forked lateral branches forming flat-topped
masses of foliage gradually narrowed from the base to the apex of the
branch, the ultimate divisions stout, glabrous or pubescent, and small
subglobose or ovoid winter branch-buds usually thickly covered with
resin, or in one species large and acute, with thin loosely imbricated
scales. Leaves linear, sessile, on young plants and on lower sterile
branches flattened and mostly grooved on the upper side, or in one
species 4-sided, rounded and usually emarginate at apex, appearing
2-ranked by a twist near their base or occasionally spreading from all
sides of the branch, only rarely stomatiferous above, on upper fertile
branches and leading shoots usually crowded, more or less erect, often
incurved or falcate, thick, convex on the upper side, or quadrangular in
some species and then obtuse, or acute at apex and frequently
stomatiferous on all sides; persistent usually for eight or ten years,
in falling leaving small circular scars. Flowers axillary, from buds
formed the previous season on branchlets of the year, surrounded at the
base by conspicuous involucres of enlarged bud-scales, the male very
abundant on the lower side of branches above the middle of the tree,
oval or oblong-cylindric with yellow or scarlet anthers surmounted by
short knob-like projections, the female usually on the upper side only
of the topmost branches, or in some species scattered also over the
upper half of the tree, erect, globose, ovoid or oblong, their scales
imbricated in many series, obovate, rounded above, cuneate below, much
shorter than their acute or dilated mucronate bracts. Fruit an erect
ovoid or oblong-cylindric cone, its scales closely imbricated, thin,
incurved at the broad apex and generally narrowed below into long
stipes, decreasing in size and sterile toward the ends of the cone,
falling at maturity with their bracts and seeds from the stout tapering
axis of the cone long-persistent on the branch. Seeds furnished with
large conspicuous resin-vesicles, ovoid or oblong, acute at base,
covered on the upper side and infolded below on the lower side by the
base of their thin wing abruptly enlarged at the oblique apex; seed-coat
thin, of 2 layers, the outer thick, coriaceous, the inner membranaceous;
cotyledons 4--10, much shorter than the inferior radicle.

Abies is widely distributed in the New World from Labrador and the
valley of the Athabasca River to the mountains of North Carolina, and
from Alaska through the Pacific and Rocky Mountain regions to the
highlands of Guatemala, and in the Old World from Siberia and the
mountains of central Europe to southern Japan, central China, Formosa,
the Himalayas, Asia Minor, and the highlands of northern Africa.
Thirty-three species are now recognized. Several exotic species are
cultivated in the northern and eastern states; of these the best known
and most successful as ornamental trees are _Abies Nordmanniana_, Spach,
of the Caucasus, _Abies cilicica_ Carr., of Asia Minor, _Abies
cephalonica_ Loud., a native of Cephalonia, _Abies Veitchii_ Lindl., and
_Abies homolepis_ S. & Z., of Japan, and _Abies pinsapo_, Boiss., of the
Spanish Sierra Nevada.

_Abies_ is the classical name of the Fir-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Winter-buds subglobose, with closely imbricated scales.
    Leaves flat and grooved above, with stomata on the lower surface (in
          Nos. 3 and 5, also on the upper surface), rounded and often
          notched, or on fertile branches frequently acute at apex.
      Leaves on sterile branches spreading, not crowded.
        Cones purple.
          Leaves dark green and lustrous above, pale below.
            Bracts of the cone-scales much longer than their scales,
                  reflexed.
                                                      1. A. Fraseri (A).
            Bracts of the cone-scales shorter or rarely slightly longer
                  than their scales.
                                                     2. A. balsamea (A).
          Leaves pale blue-green, stomatose above.
                                             3. A. lasiocarpa (B, F, G).
        Cones green (green, yellow, and purple in No. 5).
          Leaves dark green and lustrous above, pale below.
                                                   4. A. grandis (B, G).
          Leaves pale blue or glaucous, often stomatose above on the
                upper surface.
                                               5. A. concolor (F, G, H).
      Leaves on sterile branches pointing forward, densely crowded, dark
            green and lustrous above, pale below.
                                                  6. A. amabilis (B, G).
    Leaves often 4-sided, with stomata on all surfaces, blue-green,
          usually glaucous, bluntly pointed or acute, incurved and
          crowded on fertile branches; cones purple.
      Leaves of sterile branches flattened and distinctly grooved above;
            bracts of the cone-scales rounded and fimbriate above,
            long-pointed, incurved, light green, much longer than and
            covering their scales.
                                                      7. A. nobilis (G).
      Leaves of sterile branches 4-sided; bracts of the cone-scales
            acute or acuminate or rounded above, with slender tips
            shorter or longer than their scales.
                                                    8. A. magnifica (G).
  Winter-buds acuminate, with loosely imbricated scales; bracts of the
        cone-scales produced into elongated ridged flat tips many times
        longer than the obtusely pointed scales; leaves acuminate, dark
        yellow-green above, white below, similar on sterile and fertile
        branches.
                                                      9. A. venusta (G).


             1. Abies Fraseri Poir. Balsam Fir. She Balsam.

[Illustration: Fig. 52]

Leaves obtusely short-pointed or occasionally slightly emarginate at
apex, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, marked on the lower
surface by wide bands of 8--12 rows of stomata, 1/2' to nearly 1' long,
about 1/16' wide. Flowers: male yellow tinged with red; female with
scales rounded above, much broader than long and shorter than their
oblong pale yellow-green bracts rounded at the broad apex terminating in
a slender elongated tip. Fruit oblong-ovoid or nearly oval, rounded at
the somewhat narrowed apex, dark purple, puberulous, about 2-1/2' long,
with scales twice as wide as long, at maturity nearly half covered by
their pale yellow-green reflexed bracts; seeds 1/8' long, with dark
lustrous wings much expanded and very oblique at apex.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg. and rarely 70 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally
2-1/2 deg. in diameter, and rather rigid branches forming an open
symmetrical pyramid and often disappearing early from the lower part of
the trunk, and stout branchlets pubescent for three or four years, pale
yellow-brown during their first season, becoming dark reddish brown
often tinged with purple, and obtuse orange-brown winter-buds. Bark
1/4'--1/2' thick, covered with thin closely appressed bright
cinnamon-red scales, generally becoming gray on old trees. Wood light,
soft, not strong, coarse-grained, pale brown, with nearly white sapwood;
occasionally manufactured into lumber.

Distribution: Appalachian Mountains; Cheat Mountain, near Cheat Bridge,
Randolph County, West Virginia, and from southwestern Virginia to
western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee, often forming forests of
considerable extent at elevations between 4000 deg. and 6000 deg. above the
sea-level.

Occasionally planted in the parks and gardens of the northern states and
of Europe, but short-lived in cultivation and of little value as an
ornamental tree.


                  2. Abies balsamea Mill. Balsam Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 53]

Leaves dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, silvery white on
the lower surface, with bands of 4--8 rows of stomata, 1/2' long on
cone-bearing branches to 1-1/4' long on the sterile branches of young
trees, straight, acute or acuminate, with short or elongated rigid
callous tips, spreading at nearly right angles to the branch on young
trees and sterile branches, on the upper branches of older trees often
broadest above the middle, rounded or obtusely short-pointed at apex,
occasionally emarginate on branches at the top of the tree. Flowers:
male yellow, more or less deeply tinged with reddish purple; female with
nearly orbicular purple scales much shorter than their oblong-obovate
serrulate pale yellow-green bracts emarginate with a broad apex abruptly
contracted into a long slender recurved tip. Fruit oblong-cylindric,
gradually narrowed to the rounded apex, puberulous, dark rich purple,
2'--4' long, with scales usually longer than broad, generally almost
twice as long; rarely not as long as their bracts, (var. _phanerolepis_
Fern.); seeds about 1/4' long and rather shorter than their light brown
wings.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk usually 12'--18'; or rarely 30' in
diameter, spreading branches forming a handsome symmetrical
slender-pyramid, the lower branches soon dying from trees crowded in the
forest, and slender branchlets pale yellow-green and coated with fine
pubescence at first, becoming light gray tinged with red, and often when
four or five years old with purple. Winter-buds nearly globose,
1/8'--1/4' in diameter, with lustrous dark orange-green scales. Bark on
old trees often 1/2' thick, rich brown, much broken on the surface into
small plates covered with scales. Wood light, soft, not strong,
coarse-grained, perishable, pale brown streaked with yellow, with thick
lighter colored sapwood; occasionally made into lumber principally used
for packing-cases. From the bark of this tree oil of fir used in the
arts and in medicine is obtained.

Distribution. From the interior of the Labrador peninsula westward to
the shores of Lesser Slave Lake, southward through Newfoundland, the
maritime provinces of Canada, Quebec and Ontario, northern New England,
northern New York, northern Michigan to the shores of Saginaw Bay, and
northern Minnesota and northeastern Iowa, and along the Appalachian
Mountains from western Massachusetts and the Catskills of New York to
the high mountains of southwestern Virginia; common and often forming a
considerable part of the forest on low swampy ground; on well-drained
hillsides sometimes singly in forests of spruce or forming small almost
impenetrable thickets; in northern Wisconsin and vicinity occurs a form
with longer and more crowded leaves and larger cones (var. _macrocarpa_
Kent); near the timber-line on the mountains of New England and New York
reduced to a low almost prostrate shrub.

Sometimes planted in the northern states in the neighborhood of
farmhouses, but usually short-lived and of little value as an ornamental
tree in cultivation; formerly but now rarely cultivated in European
plantations; a dwarf form (var. _hudsonica_ Englm.) growing only a few
inches high and spreading into broad nests is often cultivated.


                 3. Abies lasiocarpa Nutt. Balsam Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 54]

Leaves marked on the upper surface but generally only above the middle
with 4 or 5 rows of stomata on each side of the conspicuous midrib and
on the lower surface by 2 broad bands each of 7 or 8 rows, crowded,
nearly erect by the twist at their base, on lower branches 1'--1-3/4'
long, about 1/12' wide, and rounded and occasionally emarginate at apex,
on upper branches somewhat thickened, usually acute, generally not more
than 1/2' long, on leading shoots flattened, closely appressed, with
long slender rigid points. Flowers: male dark indigo-blue, turning
violet when nearly ready to open; female with dark violet-purple obovate
scales much shorter than their strongly reflexed bracts contracted into
slender tips. Fruit oblong-cylindric, rounded, truncate or depressed at
the narrowed apex, dark purple, puberulous, 2-1/2'--4' long, with scales
gradually narrowed from the broad rounded or nearly truncate apex to the
base, usually longer than broad, about three times as long as their
oblong-obovate red-brown bracts laciniately cut on the margins, rounded,
emarginate and abruptly contracted at the apex into long slender tips;
seeds 1/4' long, with dark lustrous wings covering nearly the entire
surface of the scales.

A tree, usually 80 deg.--100 deg., occasionally 175 deg., or southward rarely more
than 50 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, short crowded tough
branches, usually slightly pendulous near the base of the tree,
generally clothing the trunks of the oldest trees nearly to their base
and forming dense spire-like slender heads, and comparatively stout
branchlets coated for three or four years with fine rufous pubescence,
or rarely glabrous before the end of their first season, pale
orange-brown, ultimately gray or silvery white. Winter-buds subglobose,
1/8'--1/4' thick, covered with light orange-brown scales. Bark becoming
on old trees 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, divided by shallow fissures and
roughened by thick closely appressed cinnamon-red scales; on the San
Francisco Mountains, Arizona, thicker and spongy (var. _arizonica_
Lem.). Wood light, soft, not strong, pale brown or nearly white, with
light-colored sapwood; little used except for fuel.

Distribution. High mountain slopes and summits from about latitude 61 deg.
in Alaska, southward along the coast ranges to the Olympic Mountains of
Washington, over all the high mountain ranges of British Columbia and
Alberta, and southward along the Cascade Mountains of Washington and
Oregon to the neighborhood of Crater Lake, over the mountain ranges of
eastern Washington and Oregon, and of Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah
to the San Francisco peaks of northern Arizona, and on the Sandia and
Mogollon Mountains of New Mexico.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the northern United States
and in northern Europe, but of little value in cultivation.


                   4. Abies grandis Lindl. White Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 55]

Leaves thin and flexible, deeply grooved very dark green and lustrous on
upper surface, silvery white on lower surface, with two broad bands of
7--10 rows of stomata, on sterile branches remote, rounded and
conspicuously emarginate at apex, 1-1/2'--2-1/4' long, usually about
1/8' wide, spreading in two ranks nearly at right angles to the branch,
on cone-bearing branches more crowded, usually 1'--1-1/2' long, less
spreading or nearly erect, blunt-pointed or often notched at apex, on
vigorous young trees 1/2'--3/4' long, acute or acuminate, usually
persistent 4--10 years. Flowers: male pale yellow sometimes tinged with
purple; female light yellow-green, with semiorbicular scales and
short-oblong bracts emarginate and denticulate at the broad obcordate
apex furnished with a short strongly reflexed tip. Fruit cylindric,
slightly narrowed to the rounded and sometimes retuse apex, puberulous,
bright green, 2'--4' long, with scales usually about two thirds as long
as wide, gradually or abruptly narrowed from their broad apex and three
or four times as long as their short pale green bracts; seeds 3/8' in
length, light brown, with pale lustrous wings 1/2'--5/8' long and nearly
as broad as their abruptly widened rounded apex.

A tree, in the neighborhood of the coast 250 deg.--300 deg. high, with a
slightly tapering trunk often 4 deg. in diameter, long somewhat pendulous
branches sweeping out in graceful curves, and comparatively slender pale
yellow-green puberulous branchlets becoming light reddish brown or
orange-brown and glabrous in their second season; on the mountains of
the interior rarely more than 100 deg. tall, with a trunk usually about 2 deg.
in diameter, often smaller and much stunted at high elevations.
Winter-buds subglobose, 1/8'--1/4' thick. Bark becoming sometimes 2'
thick at the base of old trees and gray-brown or reddish brown and
divided by shallow fissures into low flat ridges broken into oblong
plates roughened by thick closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft,
coarse-grained, not strong nor durable, light brown, with thin lighter
colored sapwood; occasionally manufactured into lumber in western
Washington and Oregon and used for the interior finish of buildings,
packing-cases, and wooden-ware.

Distribution. Northern part of Vancouver Island southward in the
neighborhood of the coast to northern Sonoma County, California, and
along the mountains of northern Washington and Idaho to the western
slopes of the continental divide in northern Montana, and to the
mountains of eastern Oregon; near the coast scattered on moist ground
through forests of other conifers; common in Washington and northern
Oregon from the sea up to elevations of 4000 deg.; in the interior on moist
slopes in the neighborhood of streams from 2500 deg. up to 7000 deg. above the
sea; in California rarely ranging more than ten miles inland or
ascending to altitudes of more than 1500 deg. above the sea.

Occasionally planted in the parks and gardens of temperate Europe, where
it grows rapidly and promises to attain a large size; rarely planted in
the United States.


              5. Abies concolor Lindl. & Gord. White Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 56]

Leaves crowded, spreading in 2 ranks and more or less erect from the
strong twist at their base, pale blue or glaucous, becoming dull green
at the end of two or three years, with 2 broad bands of stomata on the
lower, and more or less stomatiferous on the upper surface, on lower
branches flat, straight, rounded, acute or acuminate at apex, 2'--3'
long, about 1/16' wide, on fertile branches and on old trees frequently
thick, keeled above, usually falcate, acute or rarely notched at apex,
3/4'--1-1/2' long, often 1/8' wide. Flowers: male dark red or rose
color; female with broad rounded scales, and oblong strongly reflexed
obcordate bracts laciniate above the middle and abruptly contracted at
apex into short points. Fruit oblong, slightly narrowed from near the
middle to the ends, rounded or obtuse at apex, 3'--5' long, puberulous,
grayish green, dark purple or bright canary-yellow, with scales much
broader than long, gradually and regularly narrowed from the rounded
apex, rather more than twice as long as their emarginate or nearly
truncate bracts broad at the apex and terminating in short slender tips;
seeds 1/3'--1/2' long, acute at base, dark dull brown, with lustrous
rose-colored wings widest near the middle and nearly truncate at apex.

A tree, on the California sierras 200 deg.--250 deg. high, with a trunk often 6 deg.
in diameter or in the interior of the continent rarely more than 125 deg.
tall, with a trunk seldom exceeding 3 deg. in diameter, a narrow spire-like
crown of short stout branches clothed with long lateral branches
pointing forward and forming great frond-like masses of foliage, and
glabrous lustrous comparatively stout branchlets dark orange color
during their first season, becoming light grayish green or pale reddish
brown, and ultimately gray or grayish brown. Winter-buds subglobose,
1/8'--1/4' thick. Bark becoming on old trunks sometimes 5'--6' thick
near the ground and deeply divided into broad rounded ridges broken on
the surface into irregularly shaped plate-like scales. Wood very light,
soft, coarse-grained and not strong nor durable, pale brown or sometimes
nearly whiter occasionally manufactured into lumber, in northern
California used for packing-cases and butter-tubs.

Distribution. Rocky Mountains of southern Colorado, westward to the
mountain ranges of California, extending northward into northern Oregon,
and southward over the mountains of New Mexico and Arizona into northern
Mexico and Lower California (Mt. San Pedro Martir Mountains); the only
Fir-tree in the arid regions of the Great Basin, of southern New Mexico
and Arizona, and of the mountain forests of southern California.

Often planted as an ornamental tree in Europe (the California form
usually as _A. Lowiana_ Murr.) and in the eastern states where it grows
more vigorously than other Fir-trees.


                  6. Abies amabilis Forbes. White Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 57]

Leaves deeply grooved, very dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface, silvery white on the lower, with broad bands of 6 or 8 rows of
stomata between the prominent midribs and incurved margins, on sterile
branches obtuse and rounded, or notched or occasionally acute at apex,
3/4'--1-1/4' long, 1/16'--1/12' wide, often broadest above the middle,
erect by a twist at their base, very crowded, those on the upper side of
the branch much shorter than those on the lower and usually parallel
with and closely appressed against it, on fertile branches acute or
acuminate with callous tips, occasionally stomatiferous on the upper
surface near the apex, 1/2'--3/4' long; on vigorous leading shoots
acute, with long rigid points, closely appressed or recurved near the
middle, about 3/4' long and nearly 1/8' wide. Flowers: male red; female
with broad rounded scales and rhombic dark purple lustrous bracts erose
above the middle and gradually contracted into broad points. Fruit
oblong, slightly narrowed to the rounded and often retuse apex, deep
rich purple, puberulous, 3-1/2'--6' long, with scales 1'--1-1/8' wide,
nearly as long as broad, gradually narrowed from the rounded apex and
rather more than twice as long as their reddish rhombic or
oblong-obovate bracts terminating in long slender tips; seeds light
yellow-brown, 1/2' long, with oblique pale brown lustrous wings about
3/4' long.

A tree, often 250 deg. tall, or at high altitudes and in the north usually
not more than 70 deg.--80 deg. tall, with a trunk 4 deg.--6 deg. in diameter, in thick
forests often naked for 150 deg., but in open situations densely clothed to
the ground with comparatively short branches sweeping down in graceful
curves, and stout branchlets clothed for four or five years with soft
fine pubescence, light orange-brown in their first season, becoming dark
purple and ultimately reddish brown. Winter-buds nearly globose,
1/8'--1/4' thick, with closely imbricated lustrous purple scales. Bark
on trees up to 150 years old thin, smooth, pale or silvery white,
becoming near the ground on old trees 1-1/2'--2-1/2' thick, and
irregularly divided into comparatively small plates covered with small
closely appressed reddish brown or reddish gray scales. Wood light,
hard, not strong, close-grained, pale brown, with nearly white sapwood;
in Washington occasionally manufactured into lumber used in the interior
finish of buildings.

Distribution. High mountain slopes and benches from southeastern Alaska
(Boca de Quadra Inlet and Sandfly Bay), to Vancouver Island and
southward along the coast ranges to Saddle Mountain near Astoria,
Oregon, and on the Cascade Mountains to the slopes of Old Bailey
Mountain, Oregon, ranging from the sea level at the north to elevations
of from 3000 deg.--6000 deg. southward; attaining its largest size on the
Olympic Mountains of Washington, where it is the most common Fir-tree.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern states and
in western Europe, but without developing the beauty which distinguishes
this species in its native forests.


                    7. Abies nobilis Lindl. Red Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 58]

Leaves marked on the upper surface with a deep sharply defined groove,
rounded and obscurely ribbed on the lower surface, stomatiferous above
and below, dark or light blue-green, often very glaucous during their
first season, crowded in several rows, those on the lower side of the
branch two-ranked by the twisting of their bases, the others crowded,
strongly incurved, with the points erect or pointing away from the end
of the branch, on young plants and on the lower sterile branches of old
trees flat, rounded, usually slightly notched at apex, 1'--1-1/2' long,
about 1/16' wide, on fertile branches much thickened and almost equally
4-sided, acuminate, with long rigid callous tips, 1/2'--3/4' long, on
leading shoots flat, gradually narrowed from the base, acuminate, with
long rigid points, about 1' long. Flowers: male reddish purple; female
often scattered over the upper part of the tree, with broad rounded
scales much shorter than their nearly orbicular bracts erose on the
margins and contracted above into slender elongated strongly reflexed
tips. Fruit oblong-cylindric, slightly narrowed but full and rounded at
apex, 4'--5' long, purple or olive-brown, pubescent, with scales about
one third wider than long, gradually narrowed from the rounded apex to
the base, or full at the sides, rounded and denticulate above the middle
and sharply contracted and wedge-shaped below, nearly or entirely
covered by their strongly reflexed pale green spatulate bracts full and
rounded above, fimbriate on the margins, with broad midribs produced
into short broad flattened points; seeds 1/2' long, pale reddish brown,
about as long as their wings, gradually narrowed from below to the
nearly truncate slightly rounded apex.

A tree, in old age with a comparatively broad somewhat rounded head,
usually 150 deg.--200 deg. and occasionally 250 deg. high, with a trunk 6 deg.--8 deg. in
diameter, short rigid branches, short stout remote lateral branches
standing out at right angles, and slender reddish brown branchlets
puberulous for four or five years and generally pointing forward.
Winter-buds ovoid-oblong, red-brown, about 1/8' long. Bark becoming on
old trunks 1'--2' thick, bright red-brown, and deeply divided into broad
flat ridges irregularly broken by cross fissures and covered with thick
closely appressed scales. Wood light, hard, strong, rather
close-grained, pale brown streaked with red, with darker colored
sapwood; occasionally manufactured into lumber and used under the name
of larch for the interior finish of buildings and for packing-cases.

Distribution. Slopes of Mt. Baker in northern Washington and southward
to the valley of the Mackenzie River, Oregon, and the Siskiyou
Mountains, California, at elevations of from 2000 deg.--5000 deg. above the sea;
most abundant and often forming extensive forests on the Cascade
Mountains of Washington; less abundant and of smaller size on the
eastern and northern slopes of these mountains. In Oregon sometimes
called Larch.

Often planted in western and central Europe as an ornamental tree, and
in the eastern states hardy in sheltered positions as far north as
Massachusetts.


                  8. Abies magnifica A. Murr. Red Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 59]

Leaves almost equally 4-sided, ribbed above and below, with 6--8 rows of
stomata on each of the 4 sides, pale and very glaucous during their
first season, later becoming blue-green, persistent usually for about
ten years; on young plants and lower branches oblanceolate, somewhat
flattened, rounded, bluntly pointed, 3/4'--1-1/2' long, 1/16' wide,
those on the lower side of the branch spreading in 2 nearly horizontal
ranks by the twist at their base, on upper, especially on fertile
branches, much thickened, with more prominent midribs, acute, with short
callous tips, 1/3' long on the upper side of the branch to 1-1/4' long
on the lower side, crowded, erect, strongly incurved, completely hiding
the upper side of the branch, on leading shoots 3/4' long, erect and
acuminate, with long rigid points pressed against the stem. Flowers:
male dark reddish purple; female with rounded scales much shorter than
their oblong pale green bracts terminating in elongated slender tips
more or less tinged with red. Fruit oblong-cylindric, slightly narrowed
to the rounded, truncate, or retuse apex, dark purplish brown,
puberulous, from 6'--9' long, with scales often 1-1/2' wide and about
two thirds as wide as long, gradually narrowed to the cordate base,
somewhat longer or often two thirds as long as their spatulate acute or
acuminate bracts slightly serrulate above the middle and often sharply
contracted and then enlarged toward the base; seeds dark reddish brown,
3/4' long, about as wide as their lustrous rose-colored obovate cuneate
wings nearly truncate and often 3/4' wide at apex.

A tree, in old age occasionally somewhat round-topped, frequently 200 deg.
high, with a trunk 8 deg.--10 deg. in diameter and often naked for half the
height of the tree, comparatively short small branches, the upper
somewhat ascending, the lower pendulous, and stout light yellow-green
branchlets pointing forward, slightly puberulous during their first
season, becoming light red-brown and lustrous and ultimately gray or
silvery white. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/4'-1/3' long, their bright
chestnut-brown scales with prominent midribs produced into short tips.
Bark becoming 4'--6' thick near the ground, deeply divided into broad
rounded ridges broken by cross fissures and covered by dark red-brown
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, comparatively durable, light
red-brown, with thick somewhat darker sapwood; largely used for fuel,
and in California occasionally manufactured into coarse lumber employed
in the construction of cheap buildings and for packing-cases.

Distribution. Cascade Mountains of southern Oregon, southward over the
mountain ranges of northern California (summits of the Trinity and
Salmon Mountains and on the inner north coast ranges), and along the
western slope of the Sierra Nevada to the divide between White and Kern
Rivers; common in southern Oregon at elevations between 5000 deg. and 7000 deg.
above the sea, forming sometimes nearly pure forests; very abundant on
the Sierra Nevada, and the principal tree in the forest belt at
elevations between 6000 deg. and 9000 deg.; ascending towards the southern
extremity of its range to over 10,000 deg. Small stunted trees from the
neighborhood of Meadow Lake, Sierra County, California, with yellowish
cones have been described as var. _xancocarpa_ Lemm.

Often planted as an ornamental tree in western and central Europe, and
sometimes hardy in the United States as far north as eastern
Massachusetts.

A distinct form is


             Abies magnifica var. shastensis Lemm. Red Fir.

[Illustration: Fig. 60]

On the mountains of southern Oregon and at high elevations on those of
northern California, and on the southern Sierra Nevada, occurs this form
distinguished only by the longer rounded or obtusely pointed (not acute)
bright yellow bracts which sometimes cover nearly half their scales.


                 9. Abies venusta K. Koch. Silver Fir.

                       _Abies bracteata_ D. Don.

[Illustration: Fig. 61]

Leaves thin, flat, rigid, linear or linear-lanceolate, gradually or
abruptly narrowed toward the base, often falcate, especially on fertile
branches, acuminate, with long slender callous tips, dark yellow-green,
lustrous and slightly rounded on the upper surface marked below the
middle with an obscure groove, silvery white or on old leaves pale on
the lower surface, with bands of 8--10 rows of stomata between the broad
midrib and the thickened strongly revolute margins, 2-ranked from the
conspicuous twist near their base and spreading at nearly right angles
to the branch, or pointing forward on upper fertile branches,
1-1/2'--2-1/4' long, on leading shoots standing out at almost right
angles, rounded on the upper surface, more or less incurved above the
middle, 1-1/2'--1-3/4' long, about 1/8' wide. Flowers: male produced in
great numbers near the base of the branchlets on branches from the
middle of the tree upward, pale yellow; female near the ends of the
branchlets of the upper branches only, with oblong scales rounded above
and nearly as long as their cuneate obcordate yellow-green bracts ending
in slender elongated awns. Fruit on stout peduncles sometimes 1/2' long,
oval or subcylindric, full and rounded at apex, glabrous, pale
purple-brown, 3'--4' long, with thin scales strongly incurved above,
obtusely short-pointed at apex, obscurely denticulate on the thin
margins, about one third longer than their oblong-obovate obcordate pale
yellow-brown bracts terminating in flat rigid tips 1'--1-3/4' long,
above the middle of the cone pointing toward its apex and often closely
appressed to its sides, below the middle spreading toward its base and
frequently much recurved, firmly attached to the cone-scales and
deciduous with them from the thick conical sharp-pointed axis of the
cone; seeds dark red-brown, about 3/8' long, and nearly as long as their
oblong-obovate pale reddish brown lustrous wings rounded at the apex.

A tree, 100 deg.--150 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 3 deg. in diameter,
comparatively short slender usually pendulous branches furnished with
long sinuous rather remote lateral branches sparsely clothed with
foliage, forming a broad-based pyramid abruptly narrowed 15 deg.--20 deg. from
the top of the tree into a thin spire-like head, and stout glabrous
light reddish brown branchlets covered at first with a glaucous bloom.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 3/4'--1' long, 1/4'--1/3' thick, with very
thin, loosely imbricated, pale chestnut-brown, acute, boat-shaped
scales. Bark becoming near the base of the tree 1/2'--3/4' thick, light
reddish brown, slightly and irregularly fissured and broken into thick
closely appressed scales. Wood heavy, not hard, coarse-grained, light
brown tinged with yellow, with paler sapwood.

Distribution. In the moist bottoms of canyons and on dry rocky summits,
usually at elevations of about 3000 deg. above the sea on both slopes of the
outer western ridge of the Santa Lucia Mountains, Monterey County,
California.

Occasionally and successfully grown as an ornamental tree in the milder
parts of Great Britain and in northern Italy; not hardy in the eastern
United States.




                            7. SEQUOIA Endl.


Resinous aromatic trees, with tall massive lobed trunks, thick bark of 2
layers, the outer composed of fibrous scales, the inner thin, close and
firm, soft, durable, straight-grained red heartwood, thin nearly white
sapwood, short stout horizontal branches, terete lateral branchlets
deciduous in the autumn, and scaly or naked buds. Leaves
ovate-lanceolate or linear and spreading in 2 ranks especially on young
trees and branches, or linear, acute, compressed, keeled on the back and
closely appressed or spreading at apex, the two forms appearing
sometimes on the same branch or on different branches of the same tree.
Flowers minute, solitary, monoecious, appearing in early spring from
buds formed the previous autumn, the male terminal in the axils of upper
leaves, oblong or ovoid, surrounded by an involucre of numerous
imbricated ovate, acute, and apiculate bracts, with numerous spirally
disposed filaments dilated into ovoid acute subpeltate denticulate
connectives bearing on their inner face 2--5 pendulous globose 2-valved
anther-cells; the female terminal, ovoid or oblong, composed of numerous
spirally imbricated ovate scales abruptly keeled on the back, the keels
produced into short or elongated points closely adnate to the short
ovule-bearing scales rounded above and bearing below their upper margin
in 2 rows 5--7 ovules at first erect, becoming reversed. Fruit an ovoid
or short-oblong pendulous cone maturing during the first or second
season, persistent after the escape of the seeds, its scales formed by
the enlargement of the united flower and ovuliferous scales, becoming
woody, bearing large deciduous resin-glands, gradually enlarged upward
and widening at the apex into a narrow thickened oblong disk
transversely depressed through the middle and sometimes tipped with a
small point. Seeds 5--7 under each scale, oblong-ovoid, compressed;
seed-coat membranaceous, produced into broad thin lateral wings;
cotyledons 4--6, longer than the inferior radicle.

Sequoia, widely scattered with several species over the northern
hemisphere during the cretaceous and tertiary epochs, is now confined to
the coast of Oregon and California and the mountains of California,
where two species exist.

The name of the genus is formed from Sequoiah, the inventor of the
Cherokee alphabet.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves mostly spreading in 2 ranks; cones maturing in one season; buds
        scaly.
                                                 1. S. sempervirens (G).
  Leaves slightly spreading or appressed; cones maturing in their second
        season; buds naked.
                                                     2. S. gigantea (G).


                 1. Sequoia sempervirens Endl. Redwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 62]

Leaves of secondary branches and of lower branches of young trees
lanceolate, more or less falcate, acute or acuminate and usually tipped
with slender rigid points, slightly thickened on the revolute margins,
decurrent at the base, spreading in 2 ranks by a half-turn at their
base, 1/4'--1/2' long, about 1/8' wide, obscurely keeled and marked
above by 2 narrow bands of stomata, glaucous and stomatiferous below on
each side of their conspicuous midrib, on leading shoots disposed in
many ranks, more or less spreading or appressed, ovate or ovate-oblong,
incurved at the rounded apiculate apex, thickened, rounded, and
stomatiferous on the lower surface, concave, prominently keeled and
covered with stomata on the upper surface, usually about 1/4' long;
dying and turning reddish brown at least two years before falling.
Flowers opening in December or January; male oblong, obtuse; female with
about 20 broadly ovate acute scales tipped with elongated and incurved
or short points. Fruit ripening in October, oblong, 3/4'--1' long, 1/2'
broad, its scales gradually enlarged from slender stipes abruptly
dilated above into disks penetrated by deep narrow grooves, and usually
without tips; seeds about 1/16' long, light brown, with wings as broad
as their body.

A tree, from 200 deg.--340 deg. high, with a slightly tapering and irregularly
lobed trunk usually free of branches for 75 deg.--100 deg., usually 10 deg.--15 deg.,
rarely 28 deg. in diameter at the much buttressed base, slender branches,
clothed with branchlets spreading in 2 ranks and forming while the tree
is young an open narrow pyramid, on old trees becoming stout and
horizontal, and forming a narrow rather compact and very irregular head
remarkably small in proportion to the height and size of the trunk, and
slender leading branchlets covered at the end of three or four years
after the leaves fall with cinnamon-brown scaly bark; when cut producing
from the stump numerous vigorous long-lived shoots. Buds with numerous
loosely imbricated ovate acute scales persistent on the base of the
branchlet. Bark 6'--12' thick, divided into rounded ridges and separated
on the surface into long narrow dark brown fibrous scales often broken
transversely and in falling disclosing the bright cinnamon-red inner
bark. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained, easily split and
worked, very durable in contact with the soil, clear light red; largely
manufactured into lumber and used for shingles, fence-posts,
railway-ties, wine-butts, and in buildings.

Distribution. Valley of the Chetco River, Oregon, 8 miles north of the
California state line, southward near the coast to Monterey County,
California; rarely found more than twenty or thirty miles from the
coast, or beyond the influence of the ocean fogs, or over 3000 deg. above
the sea-level; often forming in northern California pure forests
occupying the sides of ravines and the banks of streams; southward
growing usually in small groves scattered among other trees; most
abundant and of its largest size north of Cape Mendocino.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the temperate countries of
Europe, and occasionally in the southeastern United States.


                  2. Sequoia gigantea Decne. Big Tree.

                      _Sequoia Wellingtonia_ Seem.

[Illustration: Fig. 63]

Leaves ovate and acuminate, or lanceolate, rounded and thickened on the
lower surface, concave on the upper surface, marked by bands of stomata
on both sides of the obscure midrib, rigid, sharp-pointed, decurrent
below, spreading or closely appressed above the middle, 1/8'--1/4' or on
leading shoots 1/2' long. Flowers opening in late winter and early
spring; male in great profusion over the whole tree, oblong-ovoid, with
ovate acute or acuminate connectives; female with 25--40 pale yellow
scales slightly keeled on the back and gradually narrowed into long
slender points. Fruit maturing in the second year, ovoid-oblong,
2'--3-1/2' long, 1-1/2'--2-1/4' wide, dark reddish brown, the scales
gradually thickened upward from the base to the slightly dilated apex,
3/4'--1-1/4' long, and 1/4'--1/2' wide, deeply pitted in the middle,
often furnished with an elongated reflexed tip and on the upper side
near the base with two or three large deciduous resin-glands; seeds
linear-lanceolate, compressed, 1/8'--1/4' long, light brown, surrounded
by laterally united wings broader than the body of the seed, apiculate
at the apex, often very unequal.

A tree, at maturity usually about 275 deg. high, with a trunk 20 deg. in
diameter near the ground, occasionally becoming 320 deg. tall, with a trunk
35 deg. in diameter, much enlarged and buttressed at base, fluted with broad
low rounded ridges, in old age naked often for 150 deg. with short thick
horizontal branches, slender leading branchlets becoming after the
disappearance of the leaves reddish brown more or less tinged with
purple and covered with thin close or slightly scaly bark and naked
buds. Bark 1 deg.--2 deg. thick, divided into rounded lobes 4 deg.--5 deg. wide,
corresponding to the lobes of the trunk, separating into loose light
cinnamon-red fibrous scales, the outer scales slightly tinged with
purple. Wood very light, soft, not strong, brittle and coarse-grained,
turning dark on exposure; manufactured into lumber and used for fencing,
in construction, and for shingles.

Distribution. Western slopes of the Sierra Nevada of California, in an
interrupted belt at elevations of 5000 deg.--8400 deg. above the level of the
sea, from the middle fork of the American River to the head of Deer
Creek just south of latitude 36 deg.; north of King's River in isolated
groves, southward forming forests of considerable extent, and best
developed on the north fork of the Tule River.

Universally cultivated as an ornamental tree in all the countries of
western and southern Europe; and occasionally in the middle eastern
United States.




                    8. TAXODIUM Rich. Bald Cypress.


Resinous trees, with furrowed scaly bark, light brown durable heartwood,
thin white sapwood, erect ultimately spreading branches, deciduous
usually 2-ranked lateral branchlets, scaly globose buds, and stout
horizontal roots often producing erect woody projections (_knees_).
Leaves spirally disposed, pale and marked with stomata below on both
sides of the obscure midrib, dark green above, linear-lanceolate,
spreading in 2 ranks, or scale-like and appressed on lateral branchlets,
the two forms appearing on the same or on different branches of the same
tree or on separate trees, deciduous. Flowers unisexual, from buds
formed the previous year; male in the axils of scale-like bracts in long
terminal drooping panicles, with 6--8 stamens opposite in 2 ranks, their
filaments abruptly enlarged into broadly ovate peltate yellow
connectives bearing on their inner face in 2 rows 4--9 2-valved
pendulous anther-cells; female scattered near the ends of the branches
of the previous year, subglobose, composed of numerous ovate spirally
arranged long-pointed scales, adnate below to the thickened fleshy
ovuliferous scales bearing at their base 2 erect bottle-shaped ovules.
Fruit a globose or obovoid short-stalked woody cone maturing the first
year and persistent after the escape of the seeds, formed from the
enlargement and union of the flower and ovule-bearing scales abruptly
dilated from slender stipes into irregularly 4-sided disks often
mucronate at maturity, bearing on the inner face, especially on the
stipes, large dark glands filled with blood-red fragrant liquid resin.
Seeds in pairs under each scale, attached laterally to the stipes,
erect, unequally 3-angled; seed-coat light brown and lustrous, thick,
coriaceous or corky, produced into 3 thick unequal lateral wings and
below into a slender elongated point; cotyledons 4--9, shorter than the
superior radicle.

Taxodium, widely distributed through North America and Europe in Miocene
and Pliocene times, is now confined to the southern United States and
Mexico. Two species are distinguished.

The generic name, from {taxos} and {eidos}, indicates a resemblance of
the leaves to those of the Yew-tree.


      1. Taxodium distichum Rich. Bald Cypress. Deciduous Cypress.

[Illustration: Fig. 64]

Leaves on distichously spreading branchlets, apiculate, 1/2'--3/4' long,
about 1/12' wide, light bright yellow-green or occasionally silvery
white below; or on the form with pendulous compressed branchlets
long-pointed, keeled and stomatiferous below, concave above more or less
spreading at the free apex, about 1/2' long; in the autumn turning with
the branchlets dull orange-brown before falling. Flowers: panicles of
staminate flowers 4'--5' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, with slender red-brown
stems, obovoid flower-buds nearly 1/8' long, pale silvery-gray during
winter and purple when the flowers expand in the spring. Fruit usually
produced in pairs at the end of the branch or irregularly scattered
along it for several inches, nearly globose or obovoid, rugose, about 1'
in diameter, the scales generally destitute of tips; seeds with wings
nearly 1/4' long, 1/8' wide.

A tree, with a tall lobed gradually tapering trunk, rarely 12 deg. and
generally 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter above the abruptly enlarged strongly
buttressed usually hollow base, occasionally 150 deg. tall, in youth
pyramidal, with slender branches often becoming elongated and slightly
pendulous, in old age spreading out into a broad low rounded crown often
100 deg. across, and slender branchlets light green when they first appear,
light red-brown and rather lustrous during their first winter, becoming
darker the following year, the lateral branchlets deciduous, 3'--4'
long, spreading at right angles to the branch, or in the form with
acicular leaves pendulous or erect and often 6' long. Bark 1'--2' thick,
light cinnamon-red and divided by shallow fissures into broad flat
ridges separating on the surface into long thin closely appressed
fibrous scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, easily worked, light or
dark brown, sometimes nearly black; largely used for construction,
railway-ties, posts, fences, and in cooperage.

Distribution. River swamps usually submerged during several months of
the year, low wet banks of streams, and the wet depressions of
Pine-barrens from southern New Jersey and southern Delaware southward
generally near the coast to the Everglade Keys, southern Florida, and
through the Gulf-coast region to the valley of Devil River, Texas,
through Louisiana to southern Oklahoma, through southern and western
Arkansas to southeastern Missouri, and through western and northern
Mississippi to Tishomingo County, and in western Tennessee and Kentucky
to southern Illinois and southwestern Indiana; most common and of its
largest size in the south Atlantic and Gulf states, often covering with
nearly pure forests great river swamps. From the coast of North Carolina
to southern Florida, southern Alabama and eastern and western Louisiana
the form with acicular leaves (_Taxodium distichum_ var. _imbricarium_,
Sarg.) is not rare as a small tree in Pine-barren ponds and swamps.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the northern United States,
and in the countries of temperate Europe, especially the var.
_imbricarium_ (as _Glyptostrobus sinensis_ Hort. not Endl.).




                          9. LIBOCEDRUS Endl.


Tall resinous aromatic trees, with scaly bark, spreading branches,
flattened branchlets disposed in one horizontal plane and forming an
open 2-ranked spray and often ultimately deciduous, straight-grained
durable fragrant wood, and naked buds. Leaves scale-like, in 4 ranks, on
leading shoots nearly equally decussate, closely compressed or
spreading, dying and becoming woody before falling, on lateral flattened
branchlets much compressed, conspicuously keeled, and nearly covering
those of the other ranks; on seedling plants linear-lanceolate and
spreading. Flowers monoecious, solitary, terminal, the two sexes on
different branchlets; male oblong, with 12--16 decussate filaments
dilated into broad connectives usually bearing 4 subglobose
anther-cells; female oblong, subtended at base by several pairs of
leaf-like scales slightly enlarged and persistent under the fruit,
composed of 6 acuminate short-pointed scales, those of the upper and
middle ranks much larger than those of the lower rank, ovate or oblong,
fertile and bearing at the base of a minute accrescent ovuliferous scale
2 erect ovules. Fruit an oblong cone maturing in one season, with
subcoriaceous scales marked at the apex by the free thickened
mucronulate border of the enlarged flower-scales, those of the lowest
pair ovate, thin, reflexed, much shorter than the oblong thicker scales
of the second pair widely spreading at maturity; those of the third pair
confluent into an erect partition. Seeds in pairs, erect on the base of
the scale; seed-coat membranaceous, of 2 layers, produced into thin
unequal lateral wings, one narrow, the other broad, oblique, nearly as
long as the scale; cotyledons 2, about as long as the superior radicle.

Libocedrus is confined to western North America, western South America,
where it is distributed from Chile to Patagonia, New Zealand, New
Caledonia, New Guinea, Formosa, and southwestern China. Eight species
are distinguished.

_Libocedrus_, from {libas} and _Cedrus_, relates to the resinous
character of these trees.


              1. Libocedrus decurrens Torr. Incense Cedar.

[Illustration: Fig. 65]

Leaves oblong-obovate, decurrent and closely adnate on the branchlets
except at the callous apex, 1/8' long on the ultimate lateral branchlets
to nearly 1/2' long on leading shoots, those of the lateral ranks
gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex, keeled and glandular on the
back, and nearly covering the flattened obscurely glandular-pitted and
abruptly pointed leaves of the inner ranks. Flowers appearing in January
on the ends of short lateral branchlets of the previous year; male
tingeing the tree with gold during the winter and early spring, ovate,
nearly 1/4' long, with nearly orbicular or broadly ovate connectives,
rounded, acute or acuminate at the apex and slightly erose on the
margins; female subtended by 2--6 pairs of leaf-like scales, with ovate
acute light yellow-green slightly spreading scales. Fruit ripening and
discharging its seeds in the autumn, oblong, 3/4'--1' long, pendulous,
light red-brown; seeds oblong-lanceolate, 1/3'--1/2' long, semiterete
and marked below by a conspicuous pale basal hilum; inner layer of the
seed-coat penetrated by elongated resin-chambers, filled with red liquid
balsamic resin.

A tree, usually 80 deg.--100 deg. or rarely 150 deg. high, with a tall straight
slightly and irregularly lobed trunk tapering from a broad base, 3 deg. or
4 deg. or occasionally 6 deg. or 7 deg. in diameter, slender branches erect at the
top of the tree, below sweeping downward in bold curves, forming a
narrow open feathery crown becoming in old age irregular in outline by
the greater development of a few ultimately upright branches forming
secondary stems, and stout branchlets somewhat flattened and light
yellow-green at first, turning light red-brown during the summer and
ultimately brown more or less tinged with purple, the lateral branchlets
much flattened, 4'--6' long, and usually deciduous at the end of the
second or third season. Bark 1/2'--1' thick, bright cinnamon-red, and
broken into irregular ridges covered with closely appressed plate-like
scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained very durable in contact with the
soil, light reddish brown, with thin nearly white sapwood; often injured
by dry rot but largely used for fencing, laths and shingles, the
interior finish of buildings, for furniture, and in the construction of
flumes.

Distribution. Singly or in small groves from the southeastern slope of
Mt. Hood, Oregon, and southward along the Cascade Mountains; on the high
mountains of northern California, on the western slopes of the Sierra
Nevada, and in Alpine County on their eastern slope, on the Washoe
Mountains, western Nevada, in the California coast ranges from the Santa
Lucia Mountains, Monterey County to the high mountains in the southern
part of the state; on the Sierra del Pinal and the San Pedro Martir
Mountains, Lower California; most abundant and of its largest size on
the Sierra Nevada, of central California at elevations of 5000 deg.--7000 deg.
above the sea.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in western and central Europe,
where it grows rapidly and promises to attain a large size; hardy and
occasionally planted in the New England and middle Atlantic states.




                        10. THUJA L. Arbor-vitae.


Resinous aromatic trees, with thin scaly bark, soft durable
straight-grained heartwood, thin nearly white sapwood, slender spreading
or erect branches, pyramidal heads, flattened lateral pendulous
branchlets disposed in one horizontal plane, forming a flat frond-like
spray and often finally deciduous, and naked buds. Leaves decussate,
scale-like, acute, stomatiferous on the back, on leading shoots
appressed or spreading, rounded or slightly keeled on the back, narrowed
into long slender points, on lateral branchlets much compressed in the
lateral ranks, prominently keeled and nearly covering those of the other
ranks; on seedling plants linear-lanceolate, acuminate, spreading or
reflexed. Flowers minute, monoecious, from buds formed the previous
autumn, terminal, solitary, the two sexes usually on different
branchlets; male ovoid, with 4--6 decussate filaments, enlarged into
suborbicular peltate connectives bearing on their inner face 2--4
subglobose anther-cells; female oblong, with 8--12 oblong acute scales
opposite in pairs, the ovuliferous scales at their base bearing usually
2 erect bottle-shaped ovules. Fruit an ovoid-oblong erect pale
cinnamon-brown cone maturing in one season, its scales thin (thick in
one species), leathery, oblong, acute, marked near the apex by the
thickened free border of the enlarged flower-scales, those of the 2 or 3
middle ranks largest and fertile. Seeds usually 2, erect on the base of
the scale, ovoid, acute, compressed, light chestnut-brown; seed-coat
membranaceous, produced except in one species into broad lateral wings
distinct at the apex; cotyledons 2, longer than the superior radicle.

Thuja is confined to northeastern and northwestern America, to Japan,
Korea and northern China. Five species are recognized. Of the exotic
species the Chinese _Thuja orientalis_, L., with many varieties produced
by cultivation, is frequently planted in the United States, especially
in the south and west, for the decoration of gardens, and is
distinguished from the other species by the thick umbonate scales of the
cone, only the 4 lower scales being fertile, and by the thick rounded
dark red-purple seeds without wings.

_Thuja_ is the classical name of some coniferous tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Fruit with usually 4 fertile scales.
                                                 1. T. occidentalis (A).
  Fruit with usually 6 fertile scales.
                                                2. T. plicata (B, F, G).


           1. Thuja occidentalis L. White Cedar. Arbor-vitae.

[Illustration: Fig. 66]

Leaves on leading shoots often nearly 1/4' long, long-pointed and
usually conspicuously glandular, on lateral branchlets much flattened,
rounded and apiculate at apex, without glands or obscurely
glandular-pitted, about 1/8' long. Flowers opening in April and May,
liver color. Fruit ripening and discharging its seeds in the early
autumn, 1/3'--1/2' long; seeds 1/8' long, the thin wings as wide as the
body.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a short often lobed and buttressed trunk,
occasionally 6 deg. although usually not more than 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, often
divided into 2 or 3 stout secondary stems, short horizontal branches
soon turning upward and forming a narrow compact pyramidal head, light
yellow-green branchlets paler on the lower surface than on the upper,
changing with the death of the leaves during their second season to
light cinnamon-red, growing darker the following year, gradually
becoming terete and abruptly enlarged at the base and finally covered
with smooth lustrous dark orange-brown bark, and marked by conspicuous
scars left by the falling of the short pendulous lateral branchlets.
Bark 1/4'--1/3' thick, light red-brown often tinged with orange color
and broken by shallow fissures into narrow flat connected ridges
separating into elongated more or less persistent scales. Wood light,
soft, brittle, very coarse-grained, durable, fragrant, pale
yellow-brown; largely used in Canada and the northern states for
fence-posts, rails, railway-ties, and shingles. Fluid extracts and
tinctures made from the young branchlets are sometimes used in medicine.

Distribution. Frequently forming nearly impenetrable forests on swampy
ground or often occupying the rocky banks of streams, from Nova Scotia
and New Brunswick, northwestward to the mouth of the Saskatchewan, and
southward through eastern Canada to southern New Hampshire, central
Massachusetts, New York, central Ohio, northern Indiana and Illinois,
and Minnesota; occasionally on the high mountains of Virginia, West
Virginia, and northeastern Tennessee, and on the mountains of western
Burke County, North Carolina, at an altitude of 3000 feet; very common
at the north, less abundant and of smaller size southward.

Often cultivated, with many, often dwarf, forms produced in nurseries,
as an ornamental tree and for hedges; and in Europe from the middle of
the sixteenth century.


            2. Thuja plicata D. Don. Red Cedar. Canoe Cedar.

[Illustration: Fig. 67]

Leaves on leading shoots ovate, long-pointed, often conspicuously
glandular on the back, frequently 1/4' long, on lateral branchlets
ovate, apiculate, without glands or obscurely glandular-pitted, usually
not more than 1/8' long, mostly persistent 2--5 years. Flowers about
1/12' long, dark brown. Fruit ripening early in the autumn, clustered
near the ends of the branches, much reflexed, 1/2' long, with thin
leathery scales, conspicuously marked near the apex by the free border
of the flower-scale furnished with short stout erect or recurved dark
mucros; seeds often 3 under each fertile scale, rather shorter than
their usually slightly unequal wings about 1/4' long.

A tree, frequently 200 deg. high, with a broad gradually tapering buttressed
base sometimes 15 deg. in diameter at the ground and in old age often
separating toward the summit into 2 or 3 erect divisions, short
horizontal branches, usually pendulous at the ends, forming a dense
narrow pyramidal head, and slender much compressed branchlets often
slightly zigzag, light bright yellow-green during their first year, then
cinnamon-brown, and after the falling of the leaves, lustrous and dark
reddish brown often tinged with purple, the lateral branchlets 5'--6'
long, light green and lustrous on the upper surface, somewhat paler on
the lower surface, turning yellow and falling generally at the end of
their second season. Bark bright cinnamon-red, 1/2'--3/4' thick,
irregularly divided by narrow shallow fissures into broad ridges rounded
on the back and broken on the surface into long narrow rather loose
plate-like scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle,
coarse-grained, easily split, dull brown tinged with red; largely used
in Washington and Oregon for the interior finish of buildings, doors,
sashes, fences, shingles, and in cabinet-making and cooperage. From this
tree the Indians of the northwest coast split the planks used in the
construction of their lodges, carved the totems which decorate their
villages, and hollowed out their great war canoes, and from the fibres
of the inner bark made ropes, blankets, and thatch for their cabins.

Distribution. Singly and in small groves on low moist bottom-lands or
near the banks of mountain streams, from the sea-level to elevations of
6000 deg. in the interior, from Baranoff Island, Alaska, southward along the
coast ranges of British Columbia, western Washington, and Oregon, where
it is the most abundant and grows to its largest size, and through the
California-coast region to Mendocino County, ranging eastward along many
of the interior ranges of British Columbia, northern Washington, Idaho,
and Montana to the western slope of the continental divide.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the parks and gardens of
western and central Europe where it has grown rapidly and vigorously,
and occasionally in the middle and north Atlantic states.




                       11. CUPRESSUS L. Cypress.


Resinous trees, with bark often separating into long shred-like scales,
fragrant durable usually light brown heartwood, pale yellow sapwood,
stout erect branches often becoming horizontal in old age, slender
4-angled branchlets, and naked buds. Leaves scale-like, ovate, acute,
acuminate, or bluntly pointed at apex, with slender spreading or
appressed tips, thickened, rounded, and often glandular on the back,
opposite in pairs, becoming brown and woody before falling; on vigorous
leading shoots and young plants needle-shaped or linear-lanceolate and
spreading. Flowers minute, monoecious, terminal, yellow, the two sexes
on separate branchlets; the male oblong, of numerous decussate stamens,
with short filaments enlarged into broadly ovate connectives bearing
2--6 globose pendulous anther-cells; female oblong or subglobose,
composed of 6--10 thick decussate scales bearing in several rows at the
base of the ovuliferous scale numerous erect bottle-shaped ovules. Fruit
an erect nearly globose cone maturing in the second year, composed of
the much thickened ovule-bearing scales of the flower, abruptly dilated,
clavate and flattened at the apex, bearing the remnants of the
flower-scales developed into a short central more or less thickened
mucro or boss; long-persistent on the branch after the escape of the
seeds. Seeds numerous, in several rows, erect, thick, and acutely angled
or compressed, with thin lateral wings; seed-coat of 2 layers, the outer
thin and membranaceous, the inner thicker and crustaceous; cotyledons 3
or 4, longer than the superior radicle.

Cupressus with ten or twelve species is confined to Pacific North
America and Mexico in the New World and to southeastern Europe,
southwestern Asia, the Himalayas, and China in the Old World. Of the
exotic species _Cupressus sempervirens_ L., of southeastern Europe and
southwestern Asia, and especially its pyramidal variety, are often
planted for ornament in the south Atlantic and Pacific states.

_Cupressus_ is the classical name of the Cypress-tree.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES

  Leaves dark green.
    Leaves eglandular or obscurely glandular on the back.
      Leaves obtusely pointed; cones puberulous, 1'--1-1/2' in diameter;
            seeds light chestnut-brown.
                                                   1. C. macrocarpa (G).
      Leaves acutely pointed; cones 1/2'--2/3' in diameter; seeds dark
            brown or black.
                                                    2. C. Goveniana (G).
    Leaves glandular-pitted on the back, acute.
      Cones 2/3'--1' in diameter; seeds brown, often glaucous.
                                                    3. C. Sargentii (G).
      Cones 1/2'--1' in diameter, often covered with a glaucous bloom;
            seeds dark chestnut-brown.
                                                   4. C. Macnabiana (G).
  Leaves pale bluish green.
    Leaves obtusely pointed, with small gland-pits; bark of the trunk
          smooth, lustrous, mahogany brown; branches bright red.
                                               5. C. guadaloupensis (G).
    Leaves acute, eglandular or occasionally obscurely glandular (in
          var. _glabra_ conspicuously glandular); bark of the trunk dark
          brown, separating into long narrow persistent fibres;
          branchlets gray.
                                                    6. C. arizonica (H).


            1. Cupressus macrocarpa Gord. Monterey Cypress.

[Illustration: Fig. 68]

Leaves dark green, bluntly pointed, eglandular, and 1/4'--1/2' long;
deciduous at the end of three or four years. Flowers opening late in
February or early in March, yellow. Fruit clustered on short stout stems
subglobose, slightly puberulous, 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, composed of 4
or 6 pairs of scales, with broadly ovoid thickened or occasionally on
the upper scales subconical bosses, the scales of the upper and lower
pairs being smaller than the others and sterile; seeds about 20 under
each fertile scale, angled, light chestnut-brown, about 1/16' long.

A tree, often 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a short trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. or exceptionally
5 deg.--6 deg. in diameter, slender erect branches forming a narrow or broad
bushy pyramidal head, becoming stout and spreading in old age into a
broad flat-topped crown, and stout branchlets covered when the leaves
fall at the end of three or four years with thin light or dark reddish
brown bark separating into small papery scales. Bark 3/4'--1' thick and
irregularly divided into broad flat connected ridges separating freely
into narrow elongated thick persistent scales, dark red-brown on young
stems and upper branches, becoming at last almost white on old and
exposed trunks. Wood heavy, hard and strong, very durable,
close-grained.

Distribution. Coast of California south of the Bay of Monterey,
occupying an area about two miles long and two hundred yards wide from
Cypress Point to the shores of Carmel Bay, with a small grove on Point
Lobos, the southern boundary of the bay.

Universally cultivated in the Pacific states from Vancouver Island to
Lower California, and often used in hedges and for wind-breaks;
occasionally planted in the southeastern states; much planted in western
and southern Europe, temperate South America, and in Australia and New
Zealand.


                      2. Cupressus Goveniana Gord.

                        _Cupressus pygmaea_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 69]

Leaves acutely pointed, dark green. Flowers: male obscurely 4-angled,
with broadly ovate peltate connectives: female with 6--10 ovate pointed
scales. Fruit usually sessile, subglobose 1/4'--7/8' in diameter, its
scales terminating in small bosses; seeds compressed, black, or dark
brown, papillose, about 1/8' long.

A tree rarely 75 deg. high, with a tall trunk up to 2 deg.10' in diameter, often
not more than 25 deg. high, more often a shrub with numerous stems 1 deg.--15 deg.
tall, ascending branches, and comparatively stout bright reddish brown
branchlets, becoming purple and ultimately dark reddish brown; often
beginning to produce fertile cones when only 1 deg. or 2 deg. tall. Bark bright
reddish brown, about 1/4' thick, and divided by shallow fissures into
flat ridges separating on the surface into long thread-like scales. Wood
soft, very coarse-grained, pale reddish brown.

Distribution. California: pine barrens on the western slope of Point
Pinos Ridge two miles west of Monterey, and on alkaline soil in a narrow
belt beginning about three quarters of a mile from the shore of
Mendocino County and extending inland for three or four miles from Ten
Mile Run on the north to the Navarro River on the south; arborescent and
also of its smallest size only in this northern station.


            3. Cupressus Sargentii Jeps. Sargent's Cypress.

_Cupressus Goveniana_ Engelm., not Gord. (_Silva N. Am._ x. 107 t. 527)

[Illustration: Fig. 70]

Leaves obscurely glandular or without glands, dark green, pungently
aromatic, 1/16'--1/8' long, turning bright red-brown in drying and
falling at the end of three or four years; on young plants 1/8'--1/4'
long. Flowers: male with thin slightly erose connectives: female of 6 or
8 acute slightly spreading scales. Fruit often in crowded clusters,
short-stalked, subglobose, 1/2'--1' in diameter, reddish brown or
purple, lustrous, puberulous, its 6 or 8 scales with broadly ovoid
generally rounded and flattened and rarely short-obconic bosses; seeds
brown, lustrous, often glaucous, with an acute margin, 1/6' long, about
20 under each fertile scale.

A tree, shrub, or small bushy tree rarely more than 15 deg. or 16 deg. high,
with a short trunk 2 deg. in diameter, slender erect or spreading branches
forming a handsome open head, and thin branchlets covered with close
smooth bark, at first orange-colored, becoming bright reddish brown, and
ultimately purple or dark brown. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick, dark grayish
brown, irregularly divided into narrow ridges covered with thin
persistent oblong scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, light brown,
with thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. California: dry mountain slopes usually between altitudes
of 1300 deg. and 2300 deg. in few widely isolated stations, Red Mountain,
Mendocino County, to Mt. Tamalpais, Marin County; Cedar Mountain,
Alameda County; Santa Cruz Mountains, Santa Cruz County; Santa Lucia
Mountains, Monterey County; often covering great areas on the hills of
Marin County with dense thickets only a few feet high.

Occasionally cultivated as _C. Goveniana_ in western and southern Europe
as an ornamental tree.


               4. Cupressus Macnabiana A. Murr. Cypress.

                        _Cupressus Bakeri_ Jeps.
                     _Cupressus nevadensis_ Abrams.

[Illustration: Fig. 71]

Leaves acute or rounded at apex, rounded and conspicuously glandular on
the back, deep green, often slightly glaucous, usually not more than
1/16' long. Flowers in March and April, male nearly cylindric, obtuse,
with broadly ovate rounded connectives: female subglobose, with broadly
ovate scales short-pointed and rounded at apex. Fruit oblong, subsessile
or raised on a slender stalk, 1/2'--1' long, dark reddish brown more or
less covered with a glaucous bloom, slightly puberulous, especially
along the margins of the 6 or rarely 8 scales, their prominent bosses
thin and recurved on the lower scales, and much thickened, conical, and
more or less incurved on the upper scales; seeds dark chestnut-brown,
usually rather less than 1/16' long, with narrow wings.

A tree in Oregon occasionally 80 deg. high with a tall trunk sometimes
3-1/2 deg. in diameter, southward rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a short
trunk 12'--15' in diameter, slender branches covered with close smooth
compact bark, bright purple after the falling of the leaves, soon
becoming dark brown; more often a shrub with numerous stems 6 deg.--12 deg. tall
forming a broad open irregular head. Bark thin, dark reddish brown,
broken into brown flat ridges, and separating on the surface into
elongated thin slightly attached long-persistent scales. Wood light,
soft, very close-grained.

Distribution. Rare and local, usually in small groves; dry ridges of
Mount Steve and adjacent mountains up to altitudes of 5300 deg., Josephine
County, southwestern Oregon; California; on lava beds, southeastern
Siskiyou and southwestern Mono Counties (_C. Bakeri_); dry hills and low
slopes, Mt. AEtna, in central Napa County; through Lake County to Red
Mountain on the east side of Ukiah Valley, Mendocino County; in Trinity
County between Shasta and Whiskeytown; and on the Sierra Nevada (Red
Hill, Piute Mountains near Bodfish) Kern County, at an altitude of 5000 deg.
(_C. nevadensis_).

Occasionally cultivated in western and southern Europe as an ornamental
tree.


          5. Cupressus guadaloupensis S. Wats. Tecate Cypress.

[Illustration: Fig. 72]

Leaves acute, rounded and minutely glandular-pitted or eglandular on the
back, light blue-green, about 1/16' long. Fruit on stout stems
1/4'--1/3' in length, subglobose to short-oblong, 3/4'--1-1/4' in
diameter, puberulous especially along the margins of the six or eight
scales, with prominent flattened or conic acute often incurved bosses;
seeds about 70 under each scale, short-oblong, nearly square, light
chestnut-brown up to 1/4' in length, with a narrow wing.

A tree in California sometimes 20 deg.--25 deg. in height, with a short slender
or on exposed mountain slopes a trunk occasionally 2 deg. or 3 deg. in diameter,
few short spreading or ascending branches forming an open head, and
light red-brown lustrous branchlets becoming purplish. Bark smooth,
lustrous, without resin or fibres, mahogany brown, the thin scales in
falling leaving pale marks.

Distribution. San Diego County, California, rare and local; valley of
the San Luis Rey River between Valley Centre and Pala; at altitudes
between 1100 deg. and 4000 deg. in the gulches and on the summit of Mt. Tecate
on the border between the United States and Lower California; on a
mountain below Descanso and Pine Valley; in Cedar Canyon between El-nido
and Dulzura; in Lower California on San Pedro Martir Mountain and
Guadaloupe Island. The insular form is a larger tree often with larger
gland-pits on the leaves, and now often cultivated in California,
western Europe, and in other countries with temperate climates.


                6. Cupressus arizonica Greene. Cypress.

[Illustration: Fig. 73]

Leaves obtusely pointed, rounded, eglandular or rarely glandular-pitted
on the back, pale green, 1/16' long, dying and turning red-brown in
their second season, generally falling four years later. Flowers: male
oblong, obtuse, their 6 or 8 stamens with broadly ovate acute yellow
connectives slightly erose on the margins: female not seen. Fruit on
stout pedicels 1/4'--1/2' in length, subglobose, rather longer than
broad, wrinkled, dark red-brown and covered with a glaucous bloom, the
six or eight scales with stout flattened incurved prominent bosses;
seeds oblong to nearly triangular, dark red-brown, 1/16'--1/8' long with
a thin narrow wing.

A conical tree 40 deg.--70 deg. high with a trunk 2 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, and stout
spreading branches covered with bark separating into thin plates,
leaving a smooth red surface, and branchlets dark gray after the leaves
fall. Bark on young trunks separating into large irregular curling thin
scales, on old trees becoming dark red-brown and fibrous.

Distribution. Mountains above Clifton, Greenlee County, eastern Arizona;
on the San Francisco Mountains, Socorro County, and San Luis Mountains,
Grant County, western New Mexico; and in Chihuahua. Passing into


                 Cupressus arizonica var. bonita Lemm.

                        _Cupressus glabra_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 74]

Differing from the type in the prominent oblong or circular glandular
depressions on the backs of the leaves.

A tree 30 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 18'--24' or rarely 5 deg. in diameter,
erect branches forming a rather compact conical head. Bark of the trunk
and large branches thin, smooth, dark reddish brown, separating into
small curled scale-like plates, becoming on old trees dark gray and
fibrous. Wood heavy, hard, pale straw color with lighter-colored
sapwood, durable in contact with the ground, somewhat used for
fence-posts, corral-piles, mine-timbers and in log cabins.

Distribution. Gravelly slopes and moist gulches often in groups of
considerable size at altitudes between 4000 deg. and 7000 deg., Arizona; near
Camp Verde, Tonto Basin; Natural Bridge, Payson, etc.; on the Chiracahua
Mountains (_J. W. Toumey_, July, 1894); on the Santa Rita and Santa
Catalina Mountains, and in Oak Creek Canyon twenty miles south of
Flagstaff (_P. Lowell_, June, 1911).

Now often cultivated in western Europe as _C. arizonica_.




                           12. CHAMAECYPARIS.


Tall resinous pyramidal trees, with thin scaly or deeply furrowed bark,
nodding leading shoots, spreading branches, flattened, often deciduous
or ultimately terete branchlets 2-ranked in one horizontal plane, pale
fragrant durable heartwood, thin nearly white sapwood, and naked buds.
Leaves scale-like, ovate, acuminate, with slender spreading or appressed
tips, opposite in pairs, becoming brown and woody before falling, on
vigorous sterile branches and young plants needle-shaped or
linear-lanceolate and spreading. Flowers minute, monoecious, terminal,
the two sexes on separate branchlets; the male oblong, of numerous
decussate stamens, with short filaments enlarged into ovate connectives
decreasing in size from below upward and bearing usually 2 pendulous
globose anther-cells; the female subglobose, composed of usually 6
decussate peltate scales bearing at the base of the ovuliferous scales
2--5 erect bottle-shaped ovules. Fruit an erect globose cone maturing at
the end of the first season, surrounded at the base by the sterile lower
scales of the flowers, and formed by the enlargement of the
ovule-bearing scales, abruptly dilated, club-shaped and flattened at the
apex, bearing the remnants of the flower-scales as short prominent
points or knobs; persistent on the branches after the escape of the
seeds. Seeds 1--5, erect on the slender stalk-like base of the scale,
subcylindric and slightly compressed; seed-coat of 2 layers, the outer
thin and membranaceous, the inner thicker and crustaceous, produced into
broad lateral wings; cotyledons 2, longer than the superior radicle.

Chamaecyparis is confined to the Atlantic and Pacific coast regions of
North America, and to Japan and Formosa. Six species are distinguished.
Of exotic species the Japanese Retinosporas, _Chamaecyparis obtusa_
Endl., and _Chamaecyparis pisifera_ Endl., with their numerous abnormal
forms are familiar garden plants in all temperate regions.

_Chamaecyparis_ is from {chamai}, on the ground, and {kyparissos},
cypress.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Bark thin, divided into flat ridges;
    Branchlets slender, often compressed; leaves dull blue-green,
          usually conspicuously glandular.
                                                  1. C. thyoides (A, C).
    Branchlets stout, slightly flattened or terete; leaves dark
          blue-green, usually without glands.
                                              2. C. nootkatensis (B, G).
  Bark thick, divided into broad rounded ridges; branchlets slender,
        compressed; leaves bright green, conspicuously glandular.
                                                   3. C. Lawsoniana (G).


             1. Chamaecyparis thyoides B. S. P. White Cedar.

                        _Cupressus thyoides_ L.

[Illustration: Fig. 75]

Leaves closely appressed, or spreading at the apex especially on
vigorous leading shoots, keeled and glandular or conspicuously
glandular-punctate on the back, dark dull blue-green or pale below, at
the north becoming russet-brown during the winter, 1/16'--1/8' long,
dying during the second season and then persistent for many years.
Flowers: male composed of 5 or 6 pairs of stamens, with ovate
connectives rounded at apex, dark brown below the middle, nearly black
toward the apex: female subglobose, with ovate acute spreading pale
liver-colored scales and black ovules. Fruit 1/4' in diameter, sessile
on a short leafy branch, light green, covered with a glaucous bloom when
fully grown, later bluish purple and very glaucous, finally becoming
dark red-brown, its scales terminating in ovate acute, often reflexed
bosses; seeds 1 or 2 under each fertile scale, ovoid, acute, full and
rounded at the base, slightly compressed, gray-brown, about 1/8' long,
with wings as broad as the body of the seed and dark red-brown.

A tree, 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a tall trunk usually about 2 and
occasionally 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, or northward much smaller, slender
horizontal branches forming a narrow spire-like head, and 2-ranked
compressed branchlets disposed in an open fan-shaped more or less
deciduous spray, the persistent branchlets gradually becoming terete,
light green tinged with red, light reddish brown during their first
winter, and then dark brown, their thin close bark separating slightly
at the end of three or four years into small papery scales. Bark
3/4'--1' thick, light reddish brown, and divided irregularly into narrow
flat connected ridges often spirally twisted round the stem, separating
on the surface into elongated loose or closely appressed plate-like
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained, slightly fragrant,
light brown tinged with red; largely used in boat-building and
cooperage, for wooden ware, shingles, the interior finish of houses,
fence-posts, and railway-ties.

Distribution. Cold swamps usually immersed during several months of the
year, often forming dense pure forests; near Concord, New Hampshire,
southern Maine, southward only near the coast to northern Florida, and
westward to southwestern Mississippi; most abundant south of
Massachusetts Bay; comparatively rare east of Boston and west of Mobile
Bay.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the eastern states and in
the countries of temperate Europe.


   2. Chamaecyparis nootkatensis Sudw. Yellow Cypress. Sitka Cypress.

                     _Cupressus nootkatensis_ Lamb.

[Illustration: Fig. 76]

Leaves rounded, eglandular or glandular-pitted on the back, dark
blue-green, closely appressed, about 1/8' long, on vigorous leading
branchlets somewhat spreading and often 1/4' long, with more elongated
and sharper points, beginning to die at the end of their second year and
usually falling during the third season. Flowers: male on lateral
branchlets of the previous year, composed of 4 or 5 pairs of stamens,
with ovate rounded slightly erose light yellow connectives: female
clustered near the ends of upper branchlets, dark liver color, the
fertile scales each bearing 2--4 ovules. Fruit ripening in September and
October. nearly 1/2' in diameter, dark red-brown, with usually 4 or 6
scales tipped with prominent erect pointed bosses and frequently covered
with conspicuous resin-glands; seeds 2--4 under each scale, ovoid,
acute, slightly flattened, about 1/4' long, dark red-brown, with thin
light red-brown wings often nearly twice as wide as the body of the
seed.

A tree, frequently 120 deg. high, with a tall trunk 5 deg.--6 deg. in diameter,
horizontal branches forming a narrow pyramidal head, stout distichous
somewhat flattened or terete light yellow branchlets often tinged with
red at first, dark or often bright red-brown during their third season,
ultimately paler and covered with close thin smooth bark. Bark
1/2'--3/4' thick, light gray tinged with brown, irregularly fissured,
and separated on the surface into large thin loose scales. Wood hard,
rather brittle, very close-grained, exceedingly durable, bright clear
yellow, with very thin nearly white sapwood; fragrant with an agreeable
resinous odor; used in boat and shipbuilding, the interior finish of
houses, and the manufacture of furniture.

Distribution. Islands of Prince William Sound, Alaska, and southward
over the coast mountains of Alaska and British Columbia, and along the
Cascade Mountains of Washington and Oregon to the northeastern slopes of
Mt. Jefferson, extending eastward to the headwaters of the Yakima River
on the eastern slope of the range; on Whiskey Peak of the Siskiyou
Mountains in the southeastern corner of Josephine County, Oregon and
about two miles from the California line; most abundant and of its
largest size near the coast of Alaska and northern British Columbia,
ranging from the sea-level up to altitudes of 3000 deg.; at high elevations
on the Cascade Mountains sometimes a low shrub.

Occasionally cultivated, with its several abnormal forms, as an
ornamental tree in the middle Atlantic states and in California, and
commonly in the countries of western and central Europe.


  3. Chamaecyparis Lawsoniana Parl. Port Orford Cedar. Lawson Cypress.

                    _Cupressus Lawsoniana_ A. Murr.

[Illustration: Fig. 77]

Leaves bright green or pale below, conspicuously glandular on the back,
usually not more than 1/16' long on lateral branchlets, on leading
shoots often spreading at the apex, 1/8' to nearly 1/4' long, usually
dying, turning bright red-brown and falling during their third year.
Flowers: male with bright red connectives bearing usually 2 pollen-sacs:
female with dark ovate acute spreading scales, each bearing 2--4 ovules.
Fruit clustered on the upper lateral branchlets and produced in great
profusion, ripening in September and October, about 1/3' in diameter,
green and glaucous when full grown, red-brown and often covered with a
bloom at maturity, its scales with thin broadly ovate acute reflexed
bosses; seeds 2--4 under each fertile scale, ovoid, acute, slightly
compressed, 1/8' long, light chestnut-brown, with broad thin wings.

A tree, often 200 deg. high, with a tall trunk frequently 12 deg. in diameter
above its abruptly enlarged base, a spire-like head of small horizontal
or pendulous branches clothed with remote flat spray frequently 6'--8'
long. Bark often 10' thick at the base of old trees and 3'--4' thick on
smaller stems, dark reddish brown, with 2 distinct layers, the inner
1/8'--1/4' thick, darker, more compact, and firmer than the outer,
divided into great broad-based rounded ridges separated on the surface
into small thick closely appressed scales. Wood light, hard, strong,
very close-grained, abounding in fragrant resin, durable, easily worked,
light yellow, or almost white, with hardly distinguishable sapwood;
largely manufactured into lumber used for the interior finish and
flooring of buildings, railway-ties, fence-posts, and boat and
shipbuilding, and on the Pacific coast almost exclusively for matches.
The resin is a powerful diuretic.

Distribution. Usually scattered in small groves from the shores of Coos
Bay, southwestern Oregon, south to the mouth of the Klamath River,
California, ranging inland usually for about thirty miles; near Waldorf,
in Josephine County, Oregon, on the slopes of the Siskiyou Mountains,
and on the southern flanks of Mt. Shasta, California; most abundant
north of Rogue River on the Oregon coast and attaining its largest size
on the western slopes of the Coast Range foothills, forming between
Point Gregory and the mouth of the Coquille River a nearly continuous
forest belt twenty miles long.

Often cultivated with the innumerable forms originated in nurseries, in
the middle Atlantic states and California, in all the temperate
countries of Europe, and in New Zealand.




                       13. JUNIPERUS L. Juniper.


Pungent aromatic trees or shrubs, with usually thin shreddy bark, soft
close-grained durable wood, slender branches, and scaly or naked buds.
Leaves sessile, in whorls of 3, persistent for many years, convex on the
lower side, concave and stomatiferous above, linear-subulate,
sharp-pointed, without glands (_Oxycedrus_); or scale-like, ovate,
opposite in pairs or ternate, closely imbricated, appressed and adnate
to the branch, glandular or eglandular on the back, becoming brown and
woody on the branch, but on young plants and vigorous shoots often free
and awl-shaped (_Sabina_). Flowers minute, dioecious, axillary or
terminal on short axillary branches from buds formed the previous autumn
on branches of the year; the male solitary, oblong-ovoid, with numerous
stamens decussate or in 3's, their filaments enlarged into ovate or
peltate yellow scale-like connectives bearing near the base 2--6 globose
pollen-sacs; the female ovoid, surrounded at the base by many minute
scale-like bracts persistent and unchanged under the fruit, composed of
2--6 opposite or ternate pointed scales alternate with or bearing on
their inner face at the base on a minute ovuliferous scale 1 or 2
ovules. Fruit a berry-like succulent fleshy blue, blue-black, or red
strobile formed by the coalition of the flower-scales, inclosed in a
membranaceous skin covered with a glaucous bloom, ripening during the
first, second, or rarely during the third season, smooth or marked by
the ends of the flower-scales, or by the pointed tips of the ovules,
closed, or open at the top and exposing the apex of the seeds. Seeds
1--12, ovoid, acute or obtuse, terete or variously angled, often
longitudinally grooved by depressions caused by the pressure of
resin-cells in the flesh of the fruit, smooth or roughened and
tuberculate, chestnut-brown, marked below by the large conspicuous
usually 2-lobed hilum; seed-coat of 2 layers, the outer thick and bony,
the inner thin, membranaceous or crustaceous; cotyledons 2, or 4--6,
about as long as the superior radicle.

Juniperus is widely scattered over the northern hemisphere from the
Arctic Circle to the highlands of Mexico, Lower California, and the West
Indies in the New World, and to the Azores and Canary Islands, northern
Africa, Abyssinia, the mountains of east tropical Africa, Sikkim,
central China, Formosa, Japan and the Bonin Islands in the Old World.
About thirty-five species are now distinguished. Of the exotic species
cultivated in the United States the most common are European forms of
_Juniperus communis_ L. with fastigiate branches, and dwarf forms of the
European _Juniperus Sabina_ L., and of _Juniperus chinensis_ L.

_Juniperus_ is the classical name of the Juniper.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers axillary; stamens decussate; ovules 3, alternate with the
        scales of the flower, their tips persistent on the fruit; seeds
        usually 3; leaves ternate, linear-lanceolate, prickle-pointed,
        jointed at the base, eglandular, dark yellow-green, channeled,
        stomatose, and glaucous above; fruit maturing in the third year,
        subglobose, bright blue, covered with a glaucous bloom; buds
        scaly (_Oxycedrus_).
                                                         1. J. communis.
  Flowers terminal on short axillary branchlets; stamens decussate or in
        3's; ovules in the axils of small fleshy scales often enlarged
        and conspicuous on the fruit; seeds 1--12; leaves ternate or
        opposite, mostly scale-like, crowded, generally closely
        appressed, free and awl-shaped on vigorous shoots and young
        plants; buds naked (_Sabina_).
    Fruit red or reddish brown.
      Bark of the trunk separating into long thin persistent scales;
            fruit maturing in one season.
        Leaves closely appressed to the branchlet, obtusely pointed.
          Leaves conspicuously glandular-pitted, ternate or opposite;
                fruit red, subglobose, 1/4' in diameter.
                                                 2. J. Pinchotii (C, H).
          Leaves eglandular or slightly glandular; fruit reddish brown.
            Leaves ternate, rarely opposite; fruit short-oblong,
                  1/4'--1/2' in diameter.
                                                  3. J. californica (G).
            Leaves opposite, rarely ternate; fruit subglobose,
                  1/8'--1/4', in one form 3/4' in diameter.
                                                 4. J. utahensis (F, G).
        Leaves not closely appressed, spreading at the apex,
              long-pointed, glandular or eglandular; fruit subglobose,
              1/3'--1/2' in diameter.
                                                     5. J. flaccida (L).
      Bark of the trunk divided into thick nearly square plates; leaves
            eglandular or occasionally glandular-pitted; fruit
            subglobose to short-oblong, 1/2' in diameter, ripening at
            the end of its second season.
                                                   6. J. pachyphlaea (H).
    Fruit blue or blue-black, with resinous juicy flesh, subglobose to
          short-oblong, 1/12'--1/3' in diameter; seeds, 1--4; cotyledons
          2.
      Leaves denticulately fringed, opposite or ternate; fruit maturing
            in one season.
        Branchlets about 1/12' in diameter; leaves acute, conspicuously
              glandular; fruit short-oblong, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter;
              seeds 2 or 3.
                                              7. J. occidentalis (B, G).
        Branchlets not more than 1/24' in diameter; leaves usually
              ternate; fruit short-oblong.
          Seeds 1 or rarely 2, pale chestnut-brown, obtuse, prominently
                ridged; leaves acute or acuminate, usually glandular.
                                                   8. J. monosperma (F).
          Seeds 1 or 2, dark chestnut-brown, acute, obscurely ridged;
                leaves obtusely pointed, often eglandular.
                                                     9. J. mexicana (C).
      Leaves naked on the margins, mostly opposite, glandular or
            eglandular; fruit subglobose.
        Fruit ripening at the end of the first season.
          Fruit 1/4'--1/3' in diameter; seeds 1 or 2, rarely 3 or 4;
                leaves acute or acuminate; branches spreading or erect.
                                               10. J. virginiana (A, C).
          Fruit 1/12'--1/6' in diameter; seeds 1 or 2; leaves acute;
                branches usually pendulous.
                                                    11. J. lucayana (C).
        Fruit ripening at the end of the second season, 1/4'--1/3' in
              diameter; seeds 1 or 2; leaves acute or acuminate.
                                               12. J. scopulorum (B, F).


                   1. Juniperus communis L. Juniper.

[Illustration: Fig. 78]

Leaves spreading nearly at right angles to the branchlets, 1/3'--1/2'
long, about 1/32' wide, turning during winter a deep rich bronze color
on the lower surface, persistent for many years. Flowers: male composed
of 5 or 6 whorls each of 3 stamens, with broadly ovate acute and
short-pointed connectives, bearing at the very base 3 or 4 globose
anther-cells; female surrounded by 5 or 6 whorls of ternate leaf-like
scales, composed of 3 slightly spreading ovules abruptly enlarged and
open at the apex, with 3 minute obtuse fleshy scales below and alternate
with them. Fruit maturing in the third season, subglobose or
short-oblong, about 1/4' in diameter, with soft mealy resinous sweet
flesh and 1--3 seeds; often persistent on the branches one or two years
after ripening; seeds ovoid, acute, irregularly angled or flattened,
deeply penetrated by numerous prominent thin-walled resin-glands, about
1/8' long, the outer coat thick and bony, the inner membranaceous.

In America only occasionally tree-like and 10 deg.--20 deg. tall, with a short
eccentric irregularly lobed trunk rarely a foot in diameter, erect
branches forming an irregular open head, slender branchlets, smooth,
lustrous, and conspicuously 3-angled between the short nodes during
their first and second years, light yellow tinged with red, gradually
growing darker, their dark red-brown bark separating in the third season
into small thin scales, and ovoid acute buds about 1/8' long and loosely
covered with scale-like leaves; more often a shrub, with many short
slender stems prostrate at the base and turning upward and forming a
broad mass sometimes 20 deg. across and 3 deg. or 4 deg. high (var. _depressa_
Pursh.); at high elevations and in the extreme north prostrate, with
long decumbent stems and shorter and more crowded leaves (var. _montana_
Ait.) passing into the var. _Jackii_ Rehdr. with long trailing branches
and broader incurved leaves. Bark about 1/16' thick, dark reddish brown,
separating irregularly into many loose papery persistent scales. Wood
hard, close-grained, very durable in contact with the soil, light brown,
with pale sapwood. In northern Europe the sweet aromatic fruit of this
tree is used in large quantities to impart its peculiar flavor to gin;
occasionally employed in medicine.

Distribution. Occasionally arborescent in New England, eastern
Pennsylvania, and on the high mountains of North Carolina; the var.
_depressa_, common in poor rocky soil, Newfoundland to southern New
England, and to the shores of the Great Lakes and northwestward; the
var. _montana_ from the coast of Greenland to northern New England, on
the high Appalachian Mountains, North Carolina, and to northern
Nebraska, along the Rocky Mountains from Alberta to western Texas, and
on the Pacific coast from Alaska, southward along mountain ranges to the
high Sierras of central California, extending eastward to the mountains
of eastern Washington and Oregon, and on the high peaks of northern
Arizona up to altitudes of 10,000 deg.--11,500 deg. (_P. Lowell_); the var.
_Jackii_ on the coast mountains from northern California to Vancouver
Island; in the Old World widely distributed in many forms through all
the northern hemisphere from arctic Asia and Europe to Japan, the
Himalayas and the mountains of the Mediterranean Basin.

Often planted, especially in several of its pyramidal and dwarf forms,
in the eastern United States and in the countries of western, central,
and northern Europe.


                      2. Juniperus Pinchotii Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 79]

Leaves ternate, obtusely pointed, rounded and glandular-pitted on the
back, 1/16' long, dark yellow-green, turning light red-brown before
falling; on vigorous shoots and seedling plants linear-lanceolate, thin,
acuminate, eglandular, 1/4'--1/3' in length. Fruit ripening in one
season, subglobose, bright red, 1/4' in diameter, with a thin skin and
thick dry mealy resinous flesh and 1 seed; seed ovoid, bluntly pointed,
deeply grooved, irregularly marked by the usually two-lobed hilum,
1/6'--1/4' long and 2 cotyledons.

A tree rarely 20 feet high, with a trunk 1 foot in diameter, stout
wide-spreading branches forming an open irregular head and thick
branchlets covered with dark gray-brown scaly bark, their ultimate
divisions about 1/12' in diameter; more often a shrub with several stems
1 deg. to 12 deg. tall. Bark thin, light brown, separating into long narrow
persistent scales.

Distribution. Dry rocky slopes and the rocky sides of canyons, Panhandle
of western Texas (Armstrong, Potter and Hartley Counties), and in
Hardaman, Garza, Tom Green, Kemble, Valverde and Menard Counties; on
Comanche Peak near Granbury, Hood County, Texas; in central and on the
mountains of southern Arizona.


3. Juniperus californica Carr. Desert White Cedar. Sweet-berried Cedar.

[Illustration: Fig. 80]

Leaves usually in 3's, closely appressed, thickened, slightly keeled and
conspicuously glandular-pitted on the back, pointed at apex,
cartilaginously fringed on the margins, light yellow-green, about 1/8'
long, dying and turning brown on the branch at the end of two or three
years; on vigorous shoots linear-lanceolate, rigid, sharp-pointed,
1/4'--1/2' long, whitish on the upper surface. Flowers from January to
March; male of 18--20 stamens, disposed in 3's, with rhomboidal
short-pointed connectives; scales of the female flower usually 6, ovate,
acute, spreading, obliterated or minute on the fruit. Fruit short-oblong
or ovoid, 1/2'--3/4' long, reddish brown, with a membranaceous loose
skin covered with a thick glaucous bloom, thick fibrous dry sweet flesh,
and 1 or 2 seeds; seeds ovoid, obtusely pointed, irregularly lobed and
angled, and 4--6 cotyledons.

A conical tree, occasionally 40 deg. high, with a straight, large-lobed
unsymmetrical trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in diameter; more often shrubby, with many
stout irregular usually contorted stems forming a broad open head. Bark
thin and divided into long loose plate-like scales ashy gray on the
outer surface and persistent for many years. Wood soft, close-grained,
durable in contact with the soil, light brown slightly tinged with red,
with thin nearly white sapwood; used for fencing and fuel. The fruit is
eaten by Indians fresh or ground into flour.

Distribution. Dry mountain slopes and hills at altitudes between 400 deg.
and 4000 deg., from Moraga Pass and Mt. Diabolo, Contra Costa County,
California, southward on the coast ranges, spreading inland to their
union with the Sierra Nevada, and northward at low altitudes along the
western slopes of the Sierras to Kern and Mariposa Counties; on the
desert slopes of the Tehachapi Mountains, the northern foothills of the
San Bernardino Mountains, on the western slopes of the San Jacinto and
Cayamaca Ranges, and southward in Lower California to Agua Dulce;
arborescent and probably of its largest size on the Mohave Desert.


                 4. Juniperus utahensis Lemm. Juniper.

[Illustration: Fig. 81]

Leaves opposite or in 3's, rounded, usually glandular, acute or often
acuminate, light yellow-green, rather less than 1/8' long, persistent
for many years. Flowers: male with 18--24 opposite or ternate stamens,
their connectives rhomboidal; scales of the female flower acute,
spreading, often in pairs. Fruit ripening during the autumn of the
second season, subglobose or short-oblong, marked by the more or less
prominent tips of the flower-scales, reddish brown, with a thick firm
skin covered with a glaucous bloom and closely investing the thin dry
sweet flesh, 1/4'--1/3' long, with 1 or rarely 2 seeds; seeds ovoid,
acute, obtusely angled, marked to the middle by the hilum, with a hard
bony shell, and 4--6 cotyledons.

A bushy tree, rarely exceeding 20 deg. in height, with a short usually
eccentric trunk sometimes 2 deg. in diameter, generally divided near the
ground by irregular deep fissures into broad rounded ridges, many erect
contorted branches forming a broad open head, slender light yellow-green
branchlets covered after the falling of the leaves with thin light
red-brown scaly bark; more often with numerous stems spreading from the
ground and frequently not more than 8 deg.--10 deg. high. Bark about 1/4' thick,
ashy gray or sometimes nearly white, and broken into long thin
persistent scales. Wood light brown, slightly fragrant, with thick
nearly white sapwood; largely used locally for fuel and fencing. The
fruit is eaten by Indians fresh, or ground and baked into cakes.

Distribution. Southwestern Wyoming (_J. Knightii_ A. Nels.),
southwestern Idaho (Pocatello, Bannock County), western Colorado,
eastern Utah, and western New Mexico to northern Arizona and
southeastern California at altitudes from 5000 deg. to 8000 deg.; the most
abundant and generally distributed tree of the Great Basin, forming in
the valleys open forests of stunted trees and shrubs, and on arid slopes
more numerous and of larger size in dense nearly pure forests.

A variety (var. _megalancocarpa_ Sarg.) occurs in eastern New Mexico and
northern Arizona, with fruit sometimes 3/4' in diameter. A tree often
40 deg. high with a single erect stem sometimes 3 deg. in diameter.


                5. Juniperus flaccida Schlecht. Juniper.

[Illustration: Fig. 82]

Leaves opposite, acuminate and long-pointed, spreading at the apex,
glandular or eglandular on the back, light yellow-green, about 1/8'
long, turning cinnamon-red and dying on the branch; on vigorous young
shoots ovate-lanceolate, sometimes 1/2' long, with elongated rigid
callous tips. Flowers: male slender, composed of 16--20 stamens, with
ovate pointed connectives prominently keeled on the back; female with
acute or acuminate spreading scales. Fruit subglobose, dull red-brown,
more or less covered with a glaucous bloom, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, with
a close firm skin and thick resinous flesh; seeds 4--12, pointed at
apex, slightly ridged, often abortive and distorted, 1/8'--1/4' long,
with 2 cotyledons.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with gracefully spreading branches and
long slender drooping branchlets, covered after the leaves fall with
thin bright cinnamon-brown bark separating into thin loose papery
scales; often a shrub. Bark about 1/2' thick, reddish brown, separating
into long narrow loosely attached scales.

Distribution. In the United States only on the slopes of the Chisos
Mountains, in Brewster County, southern Texas; common in northeastern
Mexico, growing at elevations of 6000 deg.--8000 deg. on the hills east of the
Mexican table-lands.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of southern France and of
Algeria.


     6. Juniperus pachyphlaea Torr. Juniper. Checkered-bark Juniper.

[Illustration: Fig. 83]

Leaves appressed, acute and apiculate at apex, thickened, obscurely
keeled and glandular on the back, bluish green, rather less than 1/8'
long; on vigorous shoots and young branchlets linear-lanceolate, tipped
with slender elongated points, and pale blue-green like the young
branchlets. Flowers opening in February and March: the male stout, 1/8'
long, with 10 or 12 stamens, their connectives broadly ovate, obscurely
keeled on the back, short-pointed: scales of the female flower, ovate,
acuminate, and spreading. Fruit ripening in the autumn of its second
season, subglobose to short-oblong, irregularly tuberculate, 1/3'--1/2'
in diameter, usually marked with the short tips of the flower-scales,
occasionally opening and discharging the seeds at the apex, dark
red-brown, more or less covered with a glaucous bloom, especially during
the first season and then occasionally bluish in color, with a thin skin
closely investing the thick dry mealy flesh, and usually 4 seeds; seeds
acute or obtusely pointed, conspicuously ridged and gibbous on the back,
with a thick shell and 2 cotyledons.

A tree, often 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a short trunk 3 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, long
stout spreading branches forming a broad-based pyramidal or ultimately a
compact round-topped head, and slender branchlets covered after the
disappearance of the leaves with thin light red-brown usually smooth
close bark occasionally broken into large thin scales. Bark 3/4'--4'
thick, on young stems reddish brown becoming on old trunks whitish,
deeply fissured and divided into nearly square plates 1'--2' long, and
separating on the surface into small thin closely appressed scales. Wood
light, soft, not strong, brittle, close-grained, clear light red often
streaked with yellow, with thin nearly white sapwood; often producing
vigorous shoots from the base of the trunk or from the stumps of felled
trees.

Distribution. Dry arid mountain slopes usually at elevations of
4000 deg.--6000 deg. above the sea, from the Eagle and Limpio mountains in
southwestern Texas, westward along the desert ranges of New Mexico and
Arizona, extending northward to the lower slopes of many of the high
mountains of northern Arizona, and southward into Mexico.


                7. Juniperus occidentalis Hook. Juniper.

[Illustration: Fig. 84]

Leaves opposite or ternate, closely appressed, acute or acuminate,
rounded and conspicuously glandular on the back, denticulately fringed,
gray-green, about 1/8' long. Flowers: male stout, obtuse, with 12--18
stamens, their connectives broadly ovoid, rounded, acute or apiculate
and scarious or slightly ciliate on the margins: scales of the female
flower ovate, acute, spreading, mostly obliterated from the fruit. Fruit
subglobose or short-oblong, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter, with a thick firm
blue-black skin coated with a glaucous bloom, thin dry flesh filled with
large resin-glands, and 2 or 3 seeds; seeds ovoid, acute, rounded and
deeply grooved or pitted on the back, flattened on the inner surface,
about 1/8' long, with a thick bony shell, a thin brown inner seed-coat,
and 2 cotyledons.

A tree, occasionally 60 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, more often not more than 20 deg. in height, with a short trunk
sometimes 10 deg. in diameter, enormous branches, spreading at nearly right
angles and forming a broad low head, and stout branchlets covered after
the leaves fall with thin bright red-brown bark broken into loose papery
scales; frequently when growing on dry rocky slopes and toward the
northern limits of its range a shrub, with many short erect or
semiprostrate stems. Bark about 1/2' thick, bright cinnamon-red, divided
by broad shallow fissures into wide flat irregularly connected ridges
separating on the surface into thin lustrous scales. Wood light, soft,
very close-grained, exceedingly durable, light red or brown, with thick
nearly white sapwood; used for fencing and fuel. The fruit is gathered
and eaten by the California Indians.

Distribution. Mountain slopes and high prairies of western Idaho and of
eastern Washington to the eastern slopes of the Cascade Mountains;
eastern and southern Oregon up to altitudes of 4500 deg.; along the summits
and upper slopes of the Sierra Nevada of California, and southward to
the San Bernardino Mountains, here abundant in Bear and Holcomb valleys;
attaining its greatest trunk diameter on the wind-swept peaks of the
California sierras, usually at altitudes between 6000 deg. and 10,000 deg. above
the sea.


                 8. Juniperus monosperma Sarg. Juniper.

[Illustration: Fig. 85]

Leaves opposite or ternate, often slightly spreading at apex, acute or
occasionally acuminate, much thickened and rounded on the back, usually
glandular, denticulately fringed, gray-green, rather less than 1/8'
long, turning bright red-brown before falling; on vigorous shoots and
young plants ovate, acute, tipped with long rigid points, thin,
conspicuously glandular on the back, often 1/2' long. Flowers: male with
8--10 stamens, their broadly ovate, rounded or pointed connectives
slightly erose on the margins: female with spreading pointed scales.
Fruit subglobose or short-oblong, 1/8'--1/4' long, dark blue or perhaps
occasionally light chestnut-brown with a thick firm skin covered with a
thin glaucous bloom, thin flesh, and 1 or rarely 2 seeds; seeds often
protruding from the top of the fruit, ovoid, often 4-angled, somewhat
obtuse at apex, with a small hilum, and 2 cotyledons.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a stout much-lobed and
buttressed trunk sometimes 3 deg. in diameter, short stout branches forming
an open very irregular head, and slender branchlets covered after the
falling of the leaves with light red-brown bark spreading freely into
thin loose scales; more often a much branched shrub sometimes only a few
feet high. Bark ashy gray, divided into irregularly connected ridges,
separating into long narrow persistent shreddy scales. Wood heavy,
slightly fragrant, light reddish brown, with nearly white sapwood and
eccentric layers of annual growth; largely used for fencing and fuel.
The fruit is ground into flour and baked by the Indians, who use the
thin strips of fibrous bark in making saddles, breechcloths, and
sleeping-mats.

Distribution. Along the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains from the
valley of the Platte River, Wyoming (near Alcova, Natrona County) and
the divide between the Platte and Arkansas rivers in Colorado; western
Oklahoma (near Kenton, Cimarron County, common) and western Texas; on
the Colorado plateau, northern Arizona; over the mountain ranges of
southwestern Wyoming, Nevada, southern New Mexico and Arizona, and
southward into northern Mexico; often covering, with the Nut Pine, in
southern Colorado and Utah, and in northern and central New Mexico and
Arizona, great areas of rolling hills 6000 deg.--7000 deg. above the sea-level;
reaching its largest size in northern Arizona.


            9. Juniperus mexicana Spreng. Cedar. Rock Cedar.

                      _Juniperus sabinoides_ Nees.

[Illustration: Fig. 86]

Leaves usually opposite or ternate, thickened and keeled on the back,
obtuse or acute at apex, mostly without glands, denticulately fringed,
rather more than 1/16' long, dark blue-green, on vigorous young shoots
and seedling plants lanceolate, long-pointed, rigid, 1/4'--1/2' long.
Flowers: male with 12--18 stamens, their connectives ovoid, obtuse, or
slightly cuspidate: scales of the female flower ovate, acute, and
spreading, very conspicuous when the fruit is half grown, becoming
obliterated at its maturity. Fruit short-oblong to subglobose,
1/4'--1/2' in diameter, dark blue, with a thin skin covered with a
glaucous bloom, sweet resinous flesh, and 1 or 2 seeds; seeds ovoid,
acute, slightly ridged, rarely tuberculate, dark chestnut-brown, with a
small hilum, a thin outer seed-coat, a membranaceous dark brown inner
coat, and 2 cotyledons.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. but generally not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. high,
with a short or elongated slightly lobed trunk seldom exceeding a foot
in diameter, small spreading branches forming a wide round-topped open
and irregular or a narrow pyramidal head, slender sharply 4-angled
branchlets becoming terete after the falling of the leaves, light
reddish brown or ashy gray, with smooth or slightly scaly bark; often a
shrub, with numerous spreading stems. Bark on old trees 1/4'--1/2'
thick, brown tinged with red, and divided into long narrow slightly
attached scales persistent for many years and clothing the trunk with a
loose thatch-like covering. Wood light, hard, not strong, slightly
fragrant, brown streaked with red; largely used for fencing, fuel,
telegraph-poles, and railway-ties.

Distribution. From Brazos County over the low limestone hills of western
and southern Texas, and southward into Mexico; forming great thickets
and growing to its largest size on the San Bernardo River; much smaller
farther westward, and usually shrubby at the limits of vegetation on the
high mountains of central Mexico.


             10. Juniperus virginiana L. Red Cedar. Savin.

[Illustration: Fig. 87]

Leaves usually opposite, acute or acuminate or occasionally obtuse,
rounded and glandular or eglandular on the back, about 1/16' long, dark
blue-green or glaucous (var. _glauca_ Carr.), at the north turning
russet or yellow-brown during the winter, beginning in their third
season to grow hard and woody, and remaining two or three years longer
on the branches, on young plants and vigorous branchlets
linear-lanceolate, long-pointed, light yellow-green, without glands,
1/2'--3/4' long. Flowers: dioecious or very rarely monoecious: male with
10 or 12 stamens, their connectives rounded and entire, with 4 or
occasionally 5 or 6 pollen-sacs; scales of the female flower violet
color, acute and spreading, becoming obliterated from the fruit. Fruit
subglobose, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter, pale green when fully grown, dark
blue and covered with a glaucous bloom at maturity, with a firm skin,
thin sweetish resinous flesh, and 1 or 2 or rarely 3 or 4 seeds; seeds
acute and occasionally apiculate at apex, 1/6'--1/8' long, with a
comparatively small 2-lobed hilum, and 2 cotyledons.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, often
lobed and eccentric, and frequently buttressed toward the base,
generally not more than 40 deg.--50 deg. tall, with short slender branches
horizontal on the lower part of the tree, erect above, forming a narrow
compact pyramidal head, in old age usually becoming broad and
round-topped or irregular, and slender branchlets terete after the
disappearance of the leaves and covered with close dark brown bark
tinged with red or gray; on exposed cliffs on the coast of Maine,
sometimes only a few inches high with long branches forming broad dense
mats. Bark 1/8'--1/4' thick, light brown tinged with red, and separated
into long narrow scales fringed on the margins, and persistent for many
years. Wood light, close-grained, brittle, not strong, dull red, with
thin nearly white sapwood, very fragrant, easily worked; largely used
for posts, the sills of buildings, the interior finish of houses, the
lining of closets and chests for the preservation of woolens against the
attacks of moths, and largely for pails and other small articles of
wooden ware. A decoction of the fruit and leaves is used in medicine,
and oil of red cedar distilled from the leaves and wood as a perfume.

Distribution. Dry gravelly slopes and rocky ridges, often immediately on
the seacoast, from southern Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to the coast
of Georgia, the interior of southern Alabama and Mississippi, and
westward to the valley of the lower Ottawa River, southern Michigan,
eastern North and South Dakota, Nebraska and Kansas, and eastern Texas,
not ascending the mountains of New England and New York nor the high
southern Alleghanies; in middle Kentucky and Tennessee, and northern
Alabama and Mississippi, covering great areas of low rolling limestone
hills with nearly pure forests of small bushy trees.

Often cultivated, in several forms, in the northern and eastern states
as an ornamental tree and occasionally in the gardens of western and
central Europe.


                11. Juniperus lucayana Britt. Red Cedar.

                 _Juniperus barbadensis_ Sarg., not L.

[Illustration: Fig. 88]

Leaves usually opposite, narrow, acute, or gradually narrowed above the
middle and acuminate, marked on the back by conspicuous oblong glands.
Flowers opening in early March: male elongated, 1/8' to nearly 1/4'
long, with 10 or 12 stamens, their connectives rounded, entire, and
bearing usually 3 pollen-sacs: female with scales gradually narrowed
above the middle, acute at apex, and obliterated from the ripe fruit.
Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, dark blue, covered when ripe with a
glaucous bloom, about 1/24' in diameter, with a thin skin, sweet
resinous flesh, and 1 or 2 seeds; seeds acute, prominently ridged.

A tree, sometimes 50 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 2 deg. in diameter,
small branches erect when the tree is crowded in the forest, spreading
when it has grown in open ground and forming a broad flat-topped head
often 30 deg. or 40 deg. in diameter, long thin secondary branches erect at the
top of the tree and pendulous below, and pendulous branchlets about
1/24' in diameter, becoming light red-brown or ashy gray at the end of
four or five years after the disappearance of the leaves. Bark thin,
light red-brown, separating into long thin scales. Wood light, close,
straight-grained, fragrant, dull red; formerly exclusively used in the
manufacture of the best lead pencils.

Distribution. Inundated river swamps from southern Georgia, southward to
the shores of the Indian River, Florida, and on the west coast of
Florida from the northern shores of Charlotte Harbor to the valley of
the Apalachicola River, often forming great thickets under the shade of
larger trees; along streams and creeks in low woods near Houston, Harris
County, and Milano, Milano County, Texas (_E. J. Palmer_); common in the
Bahamas, San Domingo, eastern Cuba, and on the mountains of Jamaica and
Antigua.

Often planted for the decoration of squares and cemeteries in the cities
and towns in the neighborhood of the coast from Florida to western
Louisiana, and now often naturalized beyond the limits of its natural
range on the Gulf coast; occasionally cultivated in the temperate
countries of Europe, and in cultivation the most beautiful of the
Junipers.


               12. Juniperus scopulorum Sarg. Red Cedar.

[Illustration: Fig. 89]

Leaves usually opposite, closely appressed, acute or acuminate,
generally marked on the back by obscure elongated glands, dark green, or
often pale and very glaucous. Flowers: male with about 6 stamens, their
connectives rounded and entire, bearing 4 or 5 anther-sacs: scales of
the female flower spreading, acute or acuminate, and obliterated from
the mature fruit. Fruit ripening at the end of the second season, nearly
globose, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter, bright blue, with a thin skin covered
with a glaucous bloom, sweet resinous flesh, and 1 or usually 2 seeds;
seeds acute, prominently grooved and angled, about 3/16' long, with a
thick bony outer coat and a small 2-lobed hilum.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short stout trunk sometimes 3 deg. in
diameter, often divided near the ground into a number of stout spreading
stems, thick spreading and ascending branches covered with scaly bark,
forming an irregular round-topped head, and slender 4-angled branchlets
becoming at the end of three or four years terete and clothed with
smooth pale bark separating later into thin scales. Bark dark reddish
brown or gray tinged with red, divided-by shallow fissures into narrow
flat connected ridges broken on the surface into persistent shredded
scales.

Distribution. Scattered often singly over dry rocky ridges, usually at
altitudes of 5000 deg. or 6000 deg. but occasionally ascending in Colorado to
9000 deg. above the sea, from the eastern foothill region of the Rocky
Mountains from Alberta to the Black Hills of South Dakota, the valley of
the Niobrara River, Sheridan County, northwestern Nebraska (_J. M.
Bates_) and to western Texas and eastern and northern New Mexico, and
westward to eastern Oregon, Nevada, and northern Arizona; descending to
the sea-level in Washington on the shores of the northern part of Puget
Sound and on the islands and mainland about the Gulf of Georgia, British
Columbia.




                              II. TAXACEAE.


Slightly resinous trees and shrubs, producing when cut vigorous stump
shoots, with fissured or scaly bark, light-colored durable close-grained
wood, slender branchlets, linear-lanceolate entire rigid acuminate
spirally disposed leaves, usually appearing 2-ranked by a twist in their
short compressed petioles and persistent for many years, and small ovoid
acute buds. Flowers opening in early spring from buds formed the
previous autumn, dioecious or monoecious, axillary and solitary,
surrounded by the persistent decussate scales of the buds, the male
composed of numerous filaments united into a column, each filament
surmounted by several more or less united pendant pollen-cells; the
female of a single erect ovule, becoming at maturity a seed with a hard
bony shell, raised upon or more or less surrounded by the enlarged and
fleshy aril-like disk of the flower; embryo axile, in fleshy ruminate or
uniform albumen; cotyledons 2, shorter than the superior radicle. Of the
ten genera widely distributed over the two hemispheres, two occur in
North America.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN GENERA.

  Filaments dilated into 4 pollen-sacs united into a half ring; seeds
        drupe-like, green or purple, ripening at the end of the second
        season; albumen ruminate.
                                                             1. Torreya.
  Filaments dilated into a globose head of 4--8 connate pollen-sacs;
        seeds berry-like, scarlet, ripening at the end of the first
        season; albumen uniform.
                                                               2. Taxus.




                            1. TORREYA ARN.


                             _Tumion_ Raf.

Glabrous foetid or pungent aromatic trees, with fissured bark and
verticillate or opposite spreading or drooping branches. Leaves thin,
long-pointed, abruptly contracted at base, dark green, lustrous and
slightly rounded above, thickened and revolute on the margins, with pale
bands of stomata on each side of the midvein on the lower surface.
Flowers dioecious; the male crowded in the axils of adjacent leaves, on
shoots of the previous year, oval or oblong, composed of 6 or 8 close
whorls each of 4 stamens, subverticillately arranged on a slender axis;
filaments stout and expanded above into 4 globose yellow pollen-sacs
united into a half ring, their connectives produced above the cells; the
female on shoots of the year less numerous and scattered, sessile, the
ovule surrounded by and finally inclosed in an ovoid urn-shaped fleshy
sac, and becoming at the end of the second season an oblong-ovate
yellow-brown seed, rounded and apiculate at apex, acute and marked at
base by the large dark hilum; seed-coat thick and woody, its inner layer
folded into the thick white albumen, surrounded and finally inclosed in
the thick green or purple enlarged disk of the flower composed of thin
flat easily separable fibers, splitting longitudinally when ripe into
two parts and separating from the basal scales persistent on the short
stout stalk of the seed.

Torreya is now confined to Florida and Georgia, western California,
Japan, the island of Quelpart, and central and northern China. Four
species are recognized. Of the exotic species the Japanese _Torreya
nucifera_ S. & Z. is occasionally cultivated in the eastern states.

The genus is named in honor of Dr. John Torrey, the distinguished
American botanist.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves slightly rounded on the back, pale below; leaves, branches, and
        wood foetid; branchlets gray or yellowish green.
                                                    1. T. taxifolia (C).
  Leaves nearly flat, green below; leaves, branches and wood
        pungent-aromatic; branchlets reddish brown.
                                                  2. T. californica (G).


           1. Torreya taxifolia Arn. Stinking Cedar. Torreya.

                      _Tumion taxifolium_ Greene.

[Illustration: Fig. 90]

Leaves slightly falcate, 1-1/2' long, about 1/8' wide, somewhat rounded,
dark green and lustrous above, paler and marked below with broad bands
of stomata. Flowers appearing in March and April; male with pale yellow
anthers; female broadly ovoid, with a dark purple fleshy covering to the
ovule, 1/8' long, and inclosed at the base by broad thin rounded scales.
Seed fully grown at midsummer, slightly obovoid, dark purple, 1'--1-1/4'
long, 3/4' thick, with a thin leathery covering, a light red-brown
seed-coat furnished on the inner surface with 2 opposite longitudinal
thin ridges extending from the base toward the apex, and conspicuously
ruminate albumen.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg. high, with a short trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in diameter,
whorls of spreading slightly pendulous branches forming a rather open
pyramidal head tapering from a broad base. Bark 1/2' thick, brown
faintly tinged with orange color, and irregularly divided by broad
shallow fissures into wide low ridges slightly rounded on the back and
covered with thin closely appressed scales. Wood hard, strong, clear
bright yellow, with thin lighter colored sapwood; largely used for
fence-posts.

Distribution. On bluffs along the eastern bank of the Apalachicola
River, Florida, from River Junction to the neighborhood of Bristol,
Liberty County, and in the southwestern corner of Decatur County,
Georgia (_R. M. Harper_). Rare and local.

Now often planted in the public grounds and gardens of Tallahassee,
Florida.


            2. Torreya californica Torr. California Nutmeg.

                     _Tumion californicum_ Greene.

[Illustration: Fig. 91]

Leaves slightly falcate, nearly flat, dark green and lustrous on the
upper, somewhat paler and marked below with a narrow band of stomata,
tipped with slender callous points, 1'--3-1/2' long, 1/16'--1/8' wide.
Flowers appearing in March and April; male with broadly ovate acute
scales; female nearly 1/4' long, with oblong-ovate rounded scales. Seed
ovoid or oblong-ovoid, 1'--1-1/2' long, light green more or less
streaked with purple.

A tree, 50 deg.--70 deg. but occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. or
rarely 4 deg. in diameter, and whorls of spreading slender slightly
pendulous branches forming a handsome pyramidal and in old age a
round-topped head. Bark 1/3'--1/2' thick, gray-brown tinged with orange
color, deeply and irregularly divided by broad fissures into narrow
ridges covered with elongated loosely appressed plate-like scales. Wood
light, soft, close-grained, clear light yellow, with thin nearly white
sapwood; occasionally used for fence-posts.

Distribution. Borders of mountain streams, California, nowhere common
but widely distributed from Mendocino County to the Santa Cruz Mountains
in the coast region and along the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada
from Eldorado to Tulare Counties at altitudes of 3000 deg.--5000 deg. above the
sea; most abundant and of its largest size on the northern coast ranges.

Rarely cultivated as an ornamental tree in California and western
Europe.




                            2. TAXUS L. Yew.


Trees or shrubs, with brown or dark purple scaly bark, and spreading
usually horizontal branches. Leaves flat, often falcate, gradually
narrowed at the base, dark green, smooth and keeled on the upper
surface, paler, papillate, and stomatiferous on the lower surface, their
margins slightly thickened and revolute. Flowers dioecious or
monoecious: the male composed of a slender stipe bearing at the apex a
globular head of 4--8 pale yellow stamens consisting of 4--6 conic
pendant pollen-sacs peltately connate from the end of a short filament;
the female sessile in the axils of the upper scale-like bracts of a
short axillary branch, the ovule erect, sessile on a ring-like disk,
ripening in the autumn into an ovoid-oblong seed gradually narrowed and
short-pointed at apex, marked at base by the much-depressed hilum, about
1/3' long, entirely or nearly surrounded by but free from the now
thickened succulent translucent sweet scarlet aril-like disk of the
flower open at apex; seed-coat thick, of two layers, the outer thin and
membranaceous or fleshy, the inner much thicker and somewhat woody;
albumen uniform.

Taxus with six or seven species, which can be distinguished only by
their leaf characters and habit, is widely distributed through the
northern hemisphere, and is found in eastern North America where two
species occur, in Pacific North America, Mexico, Europe, northern
Africa, western and southern Asia, China, and Japan. Of the exotic
species the European, African, and Asiatic _Taxus baccata_ L., and its
numerous varieties, is often cultivated in the United States, especially
in the more temperate parts of the country, and is replaced with
advantage by the hardier _Taxus cuspidata_ S. & Z., of eastern Asia in
the northern states, where the native shrubby _Taxus canadensis_ Marsh,
with _monoecious_ flowers is sometimes cultivated.

_Taxus_, from {taxos}, is the classical name of the Yew-tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves usually short, yellow-green.
                                                   1. T. brevifolia (G).
  Leaves elongated, usually falcate, dark green.
                                                    2. T. floridana (C).


                     1. Taxus brevifolia Nutt. Yew.

[Illustration: Fig. 92]

Leaves 1/2'--1' long, about 1/16' wide, dark yellow-green above, rather
paler below, with stout midribs, and slender yellow petioles 1/12' long,
persistent for 5--12 years. Flowers and fruit as in the genus.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg. but occasionally 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a tall
straight trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. or rarely 4-1/2 deg. in diameter, frequently
unsymmetrical, with one diameter much exceeding the other, and
irregularly lobed, with broad rounded lobes, and long slender horizontal
or slightly pendulous branches forming a broad open conical head. Bark
about 1/4' thick and covered with small thin dark red-purple scales.
Wood heavy, hard, strong, bright red, with thin light yellow sapwood;
used for fence-posts and by the Indians of the northwest coast for
paddles, spear-handles, bows, and other small articles.

Distribution. Banks of mountain streams, deep gorges, and damp ravines,
growing usually under large coniferous trees; nowhere abundant, but
widely distributed usually in single individuals or in small clumps from
the extreme southern part of Alaska, southward along the coast ranges of
British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon, where it attains its greatest
size; along the coast ranges of California as far south as the Bay of
Monterey, and along the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada to Tulare
County at altitudes between 5000 deg. and 8000 deg. above the sea-level, ranging
eastward in British Columbia to the Selkirk Mountains, and over the
mountains of Washington and Oregon to the western slopes of the
continental divide in northern Montana; in the interior much smaller
than near the coast and often shrubby in habit.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of western Europe.


                     2. Taxus floridana Chapm. Yew.

[Illustration: Fig. 93]

Leaves usually conspicuously falcate, 3/4' to nearly 1' long,
1/16'--1/12' wide, dark green above, pale below, with obscure midribs
and slender petioles about 1/16' in length. Flowers appearing in March.
Fruit ripening in October.

A bushy tree, rarely 25 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 1 deg. in
diameter, and numerous stout spreading branches; more often shrubby in
habit and 12 deg.--15 deg. tall. Bark 1/8' thick, dark purple-brown, smooth,
compact, occasionally separating into large thin irregular plate-like
scales. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained, dark brown tinged with
red, with thin nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. River bluffs and ravines on the eastern bank of the
Apalachicola River, in Gadsden County, Florida, from Aspalaga to the
neighborhood of Bristol.




                         Class 2. ANGIOSPERMAE.


Carpels or pistils consisting of a closed cavity containing the ovules
and becoming the fruit.




                      Division 1. Monocotyledons.


Stems with woody fibres distributed irregularly through them, but
without pith or annual layers of growth. Parts of the flower in 3's;
ovary superior; embryo with a single cotyledon. Leaves parallel-veined,
alternate, long-persistent, without stipules.




                              III. PALMAE.


Trees, growing by a single terminal bud, with stems covered with a thick
rind, usually marked below by the ring-like scars of fallen leaf-stalks,
and clothed above by their long-persistent sheaths; occasionally
stemless. Leaves clustered at the top of the stem, plaited in the bud,
fan-shaped or pinnate, their rachis sometimes reduced to a narrow
border, long-stalked, with petioles dilated into clasping sheaths of
tough fibres (_vaginas_); on fan-shaped leaves, furnished at the apex on
the upper side with a thickened concave body (_ligule_). Flowers minute,
perfect or unisexual, in the axils of small thin mostly deciduous
bracts, in large compound clusters (_spadix_) surrounded by boat-shaped
bracts (_spathes_); sepals and petals free or more or less united;
stamens usually 6; anthers 2-celled, introrse, opening longitudinally;
ovary 3-celled, with a single ovule in each cell; styles 1--3. Fruit a
drupe or berry; embryo cylindric in a cavity of the hard albumen near
the circumference of the seed. Of the 130 genera now usually recognized
and chiefly inhabitants of the tropics, seven have arborescent
representatives in the United States.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Leaves fan-shaped.
    Leaf-stalks unarmed.
      Calyx and corolla united into a short 6-lobed perianth.
        Fruit white, drupaceous; albumen even.
                                                             1. Thrinax.
        Fruit black, baccate; albumen channeled.
                                                        2. Coccothrinax.
      Calyx and corolla distinct; fruit baccate.
                                                               3. Sabal.
    Leaf-stalks armed with marginal spines.
      Filaments slender, free; fruit baccate.
                                                        4. Washingtonia.
      Filaments triangular, united into a cup adnate to the base of the
            corolla; fruit drupaceous.
                                                        5. Acoelorraphe.
  Leaves pinnate.
    Flower-clusters produced on the stem below the leaves; fruit
          violet-blue.
                                                           6. Roystonea.
    Flower-clusters produced from among the leaves; fruit bright
          orange-scarlet.
                                                       7. Pseudophoenix.




                             1. THRINAX Sw.


Small unarmed trees, with stems covered with pale gray rind. Leaves
orbicular, or truncate at the base, thick and firm, usually silvery
white on the lower surface, divided to below the middle into narrow
acuminate parted segments with thickened margins and midribs; rachis a
narrow border, with thin usually undulate margins; ligule thick,
concave, pointed, lined while young with hoary tomentum; petioles
compressed, rounded above and below, thin and smooth on the margins,
with large clasping bright mahogany-red sheaths of slender matted fibres
covered with thick hoary tomentum. Spadix interfoliar, stalked, its
primary branches short, alternate, flattened, incurved, with numerous
slender rounded flower-bearing branchlets; spathes numerous, tubular,
coriaceous, cleft and more or less tomentose at the apex. Flowers
opening in May and June, and occasionally irregularly in the autumn,
solitary, perfect; perianth 6-lobed; stamens inserted on the base of the
perianth, with subulate filaments thickened and only slightly united at
the base, or nearly triangular and united into a cup adnate to the
perianth, and oblong anthers; ovary 1-celled, gradually narrowed into a
stout columnar style crowned by a large funnel-formed flat or oblique
stigma; ovule basilar, erect. Fruit a globose drupe with juicy bitter
ivory-white flesh easily separable from the thin-shelled tawny brown
nut. Seed free, erect, slightly flattened at the ends, with an oblong
pale conspicuous subbasilar hilum, a short-branched raphe, a thin coat,
and uniform albumen more or less deeply penetrated by a broad basal
cavity; embryo lateral.

Thrinax is confined to the tropics of the New World and is distributed
from southern Florida through the West Indies to the shores of Central
America. Seven or eight species are now generally recognized.

The wood of the Florida species is light and soft, with numerous small
fibro-vascular bundles, the exterior of the stem being much harder than
the spongy interior. The stems are used for the piles of small wharves
and turtle-crawls, and the leaves for thatch, and in making hats,
baskets, and small ropes.

_Thrinax_, from {thrinax}, is in allusion to the shape of the leaves.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers on elongated pedicels; perianth obscurely lobed; stamens much
        exserted, their filaments subulate, barely united at base;
        stigma oblique; cavity of the seed extending to the apex.
    Perianth obscurely lobed; style abruptly enlarged into a large
          oblique stigma; leaves silvery white on the lower surface.
                                                    1. T. floridana (D).
    Perianth deeply lobed; style narrowed gradually into a small oblique
          stigma; leaves green on both surfaces.
                                                 2. T. Wendlandiana (D).
  Flowers on short pedicels; lobes of the perianth ovate, acuminate;
        filaments nearly triangular, united below into a cup; stigma
        flat; cavity of the seed extending only to the middle.
    Seeds pale chestnut-brown; spadix about 6 deg. long; leaves 3 deg.--4 deg. in
          diameter.
                                                     3. T. keyensis (D).
    Seeds dark chestnut-brown; spadix less than 3 deg. long; leaves not over
          2 deg. in diameter.
                                                   4. T. microcarpa (D).


                   1. Thrinax floridana Sarg. Thatch.

[Illustration: Fig. 94]

Leaves 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, rather longer than broad, yellow-green
and lustrous on the upper surface, silvery white on the lower surface,
with a long-pointed, bright orange-colored ligule 3/4' long and broad;
petioles 4 deg.--4-1/2 deg. long, pale yellow-green or orange color toward the
apex, coated at first with hoary deciduous tomentum, much thickened and
tomentose toward the base. Flowers: spadix 3 deg.--3-1/2 deg. long, the primary
branches 6'--8' long and ivory-white, flower-bearing branches 1-1/2'--2'
in length; flowers on slender pedicels nearly 1/8' long, ivory-white,
very fragrant, with an obscurely-lobed perianth, much exserted stamens
barely united at the base, and a large stigma. Fruit 3/8' in diameter,
somewhat depressed at the ends; seed from 1/8' to nearly 1/4' in
diameter, dark chestnut-brown.

A tree, with a slightly tapering stem 20 deg.--30 deg. high and 4'--6' in
diameter, clothed to the middle and occasionally almost to the ground
with the sheaths of dead leaf-stalks.

Distribution. Florida, dry coral ridges and sandy shores of keys from
Long Key to Torch Key, and on the mainland from Cape Romano to Cape
Sable.


                 2. Thrinax Wendlandiana Becc. Thatch.

[Illustration: Fig. 95]

Leaves 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, orbicular, pale yellow-green, lustrous
above, with a thick concave ligule, acuminate or rarely rounded at apex;
petioles 2 deg.--4 deg. long, much thickened and tomentose toward the base.
Flowers: spadix stalked, 2 deg.--4 deg. long, its primary branches short,
flattened, incurved, with numerous terete flower-bearing branchlets;
flowers on slender pedicels 1/10'--1/8' long, with a deeply lobed
perianth, the lobes nearly triangular, acuminate, and a small stigma.
Fruit 1/4'--3/8' in diameter, globose; seed from 1/8'--1/4' in diameter,
dark chestnut-brown.

A tree, in Florida, with a smooth pale trunk 20 deg.--25 deg. high and 3'--4' in
diameter.

Distribution. Florida: Dade County, Madeira Hummock, Pumpkin Key,
Flamingo, and northwest of Cape Sable; also in Cuba and on Mugueres
Island, Gulf of Honduras.


                   3. Thrinax keyensis Sarg. Thatch.

[Illustration: Fig. 96]

Leaves rather longer than broad, 3 deg.--4 deg. long, the lowest segments
parallel with the petiole or spreading from it nearly at right angles,
light yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface, with bright
orange-colored margins, below coated while young with deciduous hoary
tomentum and pale blue-green and more or less covered with silvery white
pubescence at maturity, with a thick pointed ligule 1' long and wide,
lined at first with hoary tomentum; petioles flattened above, obscurely
ridged on the lower surface, tomentose while young, pale blue-green,
3 deg.--4 deg. long. Flowers: spadix usually about 6 deg. long, spreading and
gracefully incurved, with spathes more or less coated with hoary
tomentum, large compressed primary branches, and short bright
orange-colored flower-bearing branches; flowers on short thick disk-like
pedicels, about 1/8' long, white, slightly fragrant, with a tubular
perianth, the lobes broadly ovate and acute, stamens with nearly
triangular filaments united at the base, and a flat stigma. Fruit 1/16'
to nearly 1/4' in diameter; seed brown, 3/16' in diameter.

A tree, with a stem often 25 deg. high and 10'--14' in diameter, raised on a
base of thick matted roots 2 deg.--3 deg. high and 18'--20' in diameter, and a
broad head of leaves, the upper erect, the lower pendulous and closely
pressed against the stem.

Distribution. Dry, sandy soil close to the beach on the north side of
the largest of the Marquesas Keys, and on Crab Key, a small island to
the westward of Torch Key, one of the Bahia Honda group, Florida; on the
Bahamas.


    4. Thrinax microcarpa Sarg. Silvertop Palmetto. Brittle Thatch.

[Illustration: Fig. 97]

Leaves 2 deg.--3 deg. across, pale green above, silvery white below, more or
less thickly coated while young with hoary tomentum, especially on the
lower surface, divided near the base almost to the rachis, with an
orbicular thick concave ligule lined with a thick coat of white
tomentum; petioles thin and flexuose. Flowers: spadix elongated, with
short, compressed erect branches slightly spreading below, numerous
slender pendulous flower-bearing branches, and long acute spathes deeply
parted at the apex, coriaceous and coated above the middle with thick
hoary tomentum; flowers on short thick disk-like pedicels, with a
cupular perianth, the lobes broadly ovate and acute, stamens with thin
nearly triangular exserted filaments slightly united at base and oblong
anthers becoming reversed and extrorse at maturity, and a deep
orange-colored ovary narrowed above into a short thick style dilated
into a large funnel-formed stigma. Fruit globose, 1/8' in diameter; seed
subglobose, bright to dark chestnut-brown, depressed.

A tree, rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter.

Distribution. Dry coral soil, on the shores of Sugar Loaf Sound, and on
No Name and Bahia Honda keys, Florida; in Cuba.




                         2. COCCOTHRINAX Sarg.


Small unarmed trees, with simple or clustered stems or rarely stemless.
Leaves orbicular, or truncate at base, pale or silvery white on the
lower surface, divided into narrow obliquely folded segments acuminate
and divided at apex; rachis narrow; ligules thin, free, erect, concave,
pointed at the apex; petioles compressed, slightly rounded and ridged
above and below, thin and smooth on the margins, gradually enlarged
below into elongated sheaths of coarse fibres forming an open network
covered while young by thick hoary tomentum. Spadix interfoliar,
paniculate, shorter than the leaf-stalks, its primary branches furnished
with numerous short slender pendulous flower-bearing secondary branches;
spathes numerous, papery, cleft at the apex. Flowers solitary, perfect,
jointed on elongated slender pedicels; perianth cup-shaped, obscurely
lobed; stamens 9, inserted on the base of the perianth, with subulate
filaments enlarged and barely united at the base, and oblong anthers;
ovary 1-celled, narrowed into a slender style crowned by a funnel-formed
oblique stigma; ovule basilar, erect. Fruit a subglobose berry raised on
the thickened torus of the flower, with thick juicy black flesh. Seed
free, erect, depressed-globose, with a thick hard vertically grooved
shell deeply infolded in the bony albumen; hilum subbasilar, minute;
raphe hidden in the folds of the seed-coat; embryo lateral.

Coccothrinax is confined to the tropics of the New World. Two species,
of which one is stemless, inhabit southern Florida, and at least two
other species are scattered over several of the West Indian islands.

_Coccothrinax_, from {kokkos} and _Thrinax_, is in allusion to the
berry-like fruit.


             1. Coccothrinax jucunda Sarg. Brittle Thatch.

[Illustration: Fig. 98]

Leaves nearly orbicular, the lower segments usually parallel with the
petiole, thin and brittle, 18'--24' in diameter, divided below the
middle of the leaf or toward its base nearly to the ligule, with
much-thickened bright orange-colored midribs and margins, pale
yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface, bright silvery white and
coated at first on the lower surface with hoary deciduous pubescence,
with a thin undulate obtusely short-pointed dark orange-colored rachis,
and a thin concave crescent-shaped often oblique slightly undulate
short-pointed and light or dark orange-colored ligule 3/4' wide, 1/3'
deep; petioles slender, pale yellow-green, 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. long. Flowers:
spadix 18'--24' long, with flattened stalks, slender much-flattened
primary branches 8'--10' long, light orange-colored slender terete
flower-bearing branches 1-1/2'--3' long, and pale reddish brown spathes
coated toward the ends with pale pubescence; flowers opening in June and
irregularly also in the autumn on ridged spreading pedicels 1/8' long,
with an orange-colored ovary surmounted by an elongated style dilated
into a rose-colored stigma. Fruit ripening at the end of six months,
from 1/2'--3/4' in diameter, bright green at first when fully grown,
becoming deep violet color, with succulent very juicy flesh, ultimately
black and lustrous; seed light tawny brown.

A tree, with a stem slightly enlarged from the ground upward, 15 deg.--25 deg.
high, 4'--6' thick, covered with pale blue rind, and surmounted by a
broad head of leaves at first erect, then spreading and ultimately
pendulous. Wood used for the piles of small wharves and turtle-crawls.
The soft tough young leaves are made into hats and baskets.

Distribution. Dry coral ridges and sandy flats from the shores of Bay
Biscayne along many of the southern keys to the Marquesas group (var.
_marquesensis_ Becc.) Florida; and on the Bahamas (var. _macrosperma_
Becc.).




                       3. SABAL Adans. Palmetto.


Unarmed trees, with stout columnar stems covered with red-brown rind.
Leaves flabellate, tough and coriaceous, divided into many narrow
long-pointed parted segments plicately folded at base, often separating
on the margins into narrow threads; rachis extending nearly to the
middle of the leaves, rounded and broadly winged toward the base on the
lower side, thin and acute on the upper side; ligule adnate to the
rachis, acute, concave, with thin incurved entire margins; petioles
rounded and concave on the lower side, conspicuously ridged on the upper
side, acute and entire on the margins, with elongated chestnut-brown
shining sheaths of stout fibres. Spadix interfoliar, stalked,
decompound, with a flattened stem, short branches, slender densely
flowered ultimate branches, and numerous acuminate spathes, the outer
persistent and becoming broad and woody. Flowers solitary, perfect;
calyx tabular, unequally lobed, the lobes slightly imbricated in the
bud; corolla deeply lobed, with narrow ovate-oblong concave acute lobes
valvate at the apex in the bud; stamens 6, those opposite the corolla
lobes rather longer than the others, with subulate filaments united
below into a shallow cup adnate to the tube of the corolla, and ovoid
anthers, their cells free and spreading at the base; ovary of 3 carpels,
3-lobed, 3-celled, gradually narrowed into an elongated 3-lobed style
truncate and stigmatic at the apex; ovule basilar, erect. Fruit a small
black 1 or 2 or 3-lobed short-stemmed berry with thin sweet dry flesh.
Seed depressed-globose, marked on the side by the prominent micropyle,
with a shallow pit near the minute basal hilum, a thin seed-coat, and a
ventral raphe; embryo minute, dorsal, in horny uniform albumen
penetrated by a hard shallow basal cavity filled by the thickening of
the seed-coat.

Sabal belongs to the New World, and is distributed from the Bermuda
Islands and the South Atlantic and Gulf states of North America through
the West Indies to Venezuela and Mexico.

Of the eight species now recognized four inhabit the United States; of
these two are small stemless plants.

The generic name is of uncertain origin.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Spadix short; fruit subglobose, 1-celled; seed-coat light chestnut
        color.
                                                     1. S. Palmetto (C).
  Spadix elongated; fruit often 2 or 3-lobed, with 2 or 3 seeds;
        seed-coat dark chestnut-brown.
                                                       2. S. texana (E).


       1. Sabal Palmetto R. & S. Cabbage Tree. Cabbage Palmetto.

[Illustration: Fig. 99]

Leaves 5 deg.--6 deg. long and 7 deg.--8 deg. broad, dark green and lustrous, deeply
divided into narrow parted recurved segments, with ligules 4' long and
more or less unsymmetrical at apex; petioles 6 deg.--7 deg. long and 1-1/2' wide
at apex. Flowers: spadix 2 deg.--2-1/2 deg. long, with slender incurved
branches, slender ultimate divisions, and thin secondary spathes flushed
with red at apex and conspicuously marked by pale slender longitudinal
veins; flowers in the axils of minute deciduous bracts much shorter than
the perianth, opening in June. Fruit ripening late in the autumn,
subglobose or slightly obovoid, gradually narrowed at base, 1-seeded,
about 1/3' in diameter; seed light bright chestnut-colored, 1/4' broad.

A tree, often 40 deg.--50 deg. and occasionally 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a tall clear
trunk often 2 deg. in diameter, sometimes branched by the destruction of the
terminal bud, divided by shallow irregular interrupted fissures into
broad ridges, with a short pointed knob-like underground stem surrounded
by a dense mass of contorted roots often 4 deg. or 5 deg. in diameter and 5 deg. or
6 deg. deep, from which tough light orange-colored roots often nearly 1/2'
in diameter penetrate the soil for a distance of 15 deg. or 20 deg., and a broad
crown of leaves at first upright, then spreading nearly at right angles
with the stem, and finally pendulous. Wood light, soft, pale brown, or
occasionally nearly black, with numerous hard fibro-vascular bundles,
the outer rim about 2' thick and much lighter and softer than the
interior. In the southern states the trunks are used for wharf-piles,
and polished cross sections of the stem sometimes serve for the tops of
small tables; the wood is largely manufactured into canes. From the
sheaths of young leaves the bristles of scrubbing-brushes are made. The
large succulent leaf-buds are cooked and eaten as a vegetable, and
coarse hats, mats, and baskets are made from the leaves. Pieces of the
spongy bark of the stem are used as a substitute for scrubbing-brushes.

Distribution. Sandy soil in the immediate neighborhood of the coast from
the neighborhood of Cape Hatteras and Smith Island at the mouth of Cape
Fear River, North Carolina, southward near the coast to northern
Florida; in Florida extending across the peninsula and south to Upper
Metacomb Key, and along the west coast to Saint Andrews Bay; most
abundant and of its largest size on the west coast of the Florida
peninsula.

Often planted as a street tree in the cities of the southern states.


                    2. Sabal texana Becc. Palmetto.

                  _Sabal mexicana_ S. Wats., not Mart.

[Illustration: Fig. 100]

Leaves dark yellow-green and lustrous, 5 deg.--6 deg. long, often 7 deg. wide,
divided nearly to the middle into narrow divided segments, with
thickened pale margins separating into long thin fibres, with ligules
about 6' long; petioles 7 deg.--8 deg. long, 1-1/2' wide at the apex. Flowers:
spadix 7 deg.--8 deg. long, with stout ultimate divisions; flowers in Texas
appearing in March or April in the axils of persistent bracts half as
long as the perianth. Fruit ripening early in the summer, globose, often
2 or 3-lobed; seeds nearly 1/2' broad and 1/4' wide, dark
chestnut-brown, with a broad shallow basal cavity, and a conspicuous
orange-colored hilum.

A tree, with a trunk 30 deg.--50 deg. high, often 2-1/2 deg. in diameter, and a
broad head of erect ultimately pendulous leaves. Wood light, soft, pale
brown tinged with red, with thick light-colored rather inconspicuous
fibro-vascular bundles, the outer rim 1' thick, soft, and light colored.
On the Gulf coast the trunks are used for wharf-piles, and on the lower
Rio Grande the leaves for the thatch of houses.

Distribution. Rich soil of the bottom-lands on the Bernado River,
Cameron County, and near the mouth of the Rio Grande, Texas, and
southward in Mexico in the neighborhood of the coast.

Frequently planted as a street tree in the towns in the lower Rio Grande
valley.




                       4. WASHINGTONIA H. Wendl.


Trees, with stout columnar stems and broad crowns of erect and spreading
finally pendulous leaves. Leaves flabellate, divided nearly to the
middle into many narrow deeply parted recurved segments separating on
the margins into numerous slender pale fibres; rachis short, slightly
rounded on the back, gradually narrowed from a broad base, with concave
margins furnished below with narrow erect wings, and slender and acute
above; ligule elongated, oblong, thin and laciniate on the margins;
petioles elongated, broad and thin, flattened or slightly concave on the
upper side, rounded on the lower, armed irregularly with broad thin
large and small straight or hooked spines confluent into a thin bright
orange-colored cartilaginous margin, gradually enlarged at base into
thick broad concave bright chestnut-brown sheaths composed of a network
of thin strong fibres. Spadix interfoliar, stalked, elongated,
paniculate, with pendulous flower-bearing ultimate divisions and
numerous long spathes. Flowers perfect, jointed on thick disk-like
pedicels; calyx tubular, scarious, thickened at base, gradually enlarged
and slightly lobed at apex, the lobes imbricated in the bud; corolla
funnel-formed, with a fleshy tube inclosed in the calyx and about half
as long as the lanceolate lobes thickened and glandular on the inner
surface at the base, imbricated in the bud; stamens inserted on the tube
of the corolla, with free filaments thickened near the middle and
linear-oblong anthers; ovary 3-lobed, 3-celled, with slender elongated
flexuose styles stigmatic at apex; ovules lateral, erect. Fruit a small
ellipsoidal short-stalked black berry with thin dry flesh. Seed free,
erect, oblong-ovoid, concave above, with a flat base depressed in the
centre, a minute sublateral hilum, a broad conspicuous rachis, a minute
lateral micropyle, and a thin pale chestnut-brown inner coat closely
investing the simple horny albumen; embryo minute, lateral, with the
radicle turned toward the base of the fruit.

Three species of Washingtonia are known: one inhabits the interior dry
region of southern California and the adjacent parts of Lower
California, and the others the mountain canyons of western Sonora and
southern Lower California.

The genus is named for George Washington.


     1. Washingtonia filamentosa O. Kuntze. Desert Palm. Fan Palm.

[Illustration: Fig. 101]

Leaves 5 deg.--6 deg. long and 4 deg.--5 deg. wide, light green, slightly tomentose on
the folds; petioles 4 deg.--6 deg. long and about 2' broad at apex, with sheaths
16'--18' long and 12'--14' wide, and ligules 4' long and cut irregularly
into long narrow lobes. Flowers: spadix 10 deg.--12 deg. long, 3 or 4 being
produced each year from the axils of upper leaves, the outer spathe
inclosing the bud, narrow, elongated, and glabrous, those of the
secondary branches coriaceous, yellow tinged with brown, and laciniate
at apex; flowers slightly fragrant, opening late in May or early in
June. Fruit produced in great profusion, ripening in September, 1/3'
long; seed 1/4' long, 1/8' thick.

A tree, occasionally 75 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 50 deg.--60 deg. tall and
2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, covered with a thick light red-brown scaly rind and
clothed with a thick thatch of dead pendant leaves descending in a
regular cone from the broad crown of living leaves sometimes nearly to
the ground. Wood light and soft, with numerous conspicuous dark
orange-colored fibro-vascular bundles. The fruit is gathered and used as
food by the Indians.

Distribution. Often forming extensive groves or small isolated clumps in
wet usually alkali soil in depressions along the northern and
northwestern margins of the Colorado Desert in southern California,
sometimes extending for several miles up the canyons of the San
Bernardino and San Jacinto mountains; and in Lower California.

Now largely cultivated in southern California, New Orleans, southern
Europe, and other temperate regions.




                       5. ACOELORRAPHE H. Wendl.


Trees, with tall slender often clustered stems clothed for many years
with the sheathing bases of the petioles of fallen leaves. Leaves
suborbicular, divided into numerous two-parted segments plicately folded
at the base; rachis short, acute; ligule thin, concave, furnished with a
broad membranaceous dark red-brown deciduous border; petioles slender,
flat or slightly concave on the upper side, rounded and ridged on the
lower side, with a broad high rounded ridge, thickened and cartilaginous
on the margins, more or less furnished with stout or slender flattened
teeth; vagina thin and firm, bright mahogany red, lustrous, closely
infolding the stem, its fibres thin and tough. Spadix paniculate,
interpetiolar, its rachis slender, compressed, ultimate branches,
numerous, slender, elongated, gracefully drooping, hoary-tomentose, the
primary branches flattened, the secondary terete in the axils of ovate
acute chestnut-brown bracts; spathes flattened, thick and firm, deeply
two-cleft and furnished at apex with a red-brown membranaceous border,
inclosing the rachis of the panicle, each primary branch with its spathe
and the node of the rachis below it inclosed in a separate spathe, the
whole surrounded by the larger spathe of the node next below. Flowers
perfect, minute, sessile on the ultimate branches of the spadix, in the
axils of ovate acute chestnut-brown caducous bracts, solitary toward the
end of the branches and in two- or three-flowered clusters near their
base; calyx truncate at base, divided into three broadly ovate sepals
dentate on the margins, valvate in aestivation, enlarged and persistent
under the fruit; corolla three-parted nearly to the base, its divisions
valvate in aestivation, oblong-ovate, thick, concave and thickened at
apex, deciduous; stamens six, included; filaments nearly triangular,
united below into a cup adnate to the short tube of the corolla; anthers
short-oblong, attached on the back below the middle, introrse,
two-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary obovoid, of three
carpels, each with two deep depressions on their outer face, united into
a slender style; stigma minute, terminal, persistent on the fruit; ovule
solitary, erect from the bottom of the cell, anatropous. Fruit
drupaceous, subglobose, one-seeded, black and lustrous; exocarp thin and
fleshy; endocarp thin, crustaceous; seed erect, free, subglobose, light
chestnut-brown; testa thin and hard; hilum small, suborbicular; raphe
ventral, oblong, elongated, black, slightly prominent, without
ramifications; embryo lateral; albumen homogeneous.

Two species of Acoelorraphe have been distinguished; they inhabit
southern Florida, and one species occurs also in Cuba and on the Bahama
Islands.

The generic name, from {a} priv., {Koilos} and {rhaphe}, refers to the
character of the seed.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Petioles furnished with stout marginal teeth throughout their entire
        length; leaves green on both surfaces, their primary divisions
        extending to the middle, secondary divisions only from
        3-1/2'--9' long; stems forming large thickets.
                                                     1. A. Wrightii (D).
  Petioles furnished with thinner teeth, usually unarmed toward the
        apex; leaves green or glaucescent on the lower surface, their
        primary divisions extending nearly to the base, secondary
        divisions often 10' long or more; stems often prostrate.
                                                  2. A. arborescens (D).


                     1. Acoelorraphe Wrightii Becc.

[Illustration: Fig. 102]

Leaves 30'--36' in diameter, thin, light green, divided only to the
middle, the divisions of the primary lobes 3-1/2'--9' long; petioles
thin, gradually tapering from the base, 40'--60' in length, armed
throughout with stout straight or incurved teeth. Flowers: spadix 4 deg.--6 deg.
long; flowers 1/8'--1/6' long, with a light chestnut-brown calyx and a
pale yellow-green corolla. Fruit 1/4' in diameter.

A tree with numerous stems, in Florida sometimes 10 metres high, forming
great thickets.

Distribution. Dade County, Florida, from the rear of Madeira Hummock to
Cape Sable, in swamps of fresh or brackish water at some distance from
the coast; also in Cuba and on the Bahamas.


                   2. Acoelorraphe arborescens Becc.

                      _Serenoa arborescens_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 103]

Leaves about 2 deg. in diameter, light yellow-green on the upper surface,
blue-green or glaucescent on the lower surface, divided nearly to the
base into numerous lobes slightly thickened at the pale yellow midribs
and margins; petioles 18'--24' long, armed, except toward the apex, with
stout flattened curved orange-colored teeth. Flowers: spadix 3 deg.--4 deg.
long, with a slender much-flattened stalk, panicled lower branches
18'--20' in length, and 6--8 thick firm pale green conspicuously ribbed
spathes dilated at apex into a narrow border; flowers with a light
chestnut-brown calyx and a pale yellow-green corolla. Fruit globose,
1/3' in diameter; seed somewhat flattened below, with a pale vertical
mark on the lower side, and a hilum joined to the micropyle by a pale
band.

A tree, from 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with 1 or several clustered erect inclining
or occasionally semiprostrate stems 3'--4' in diameter, covered almost
to the ground by the closely clasping bases of the leaf-stalks and below
with a thick pale rind.

Distribution. Low undrained soil covered for many months of every year
in water from 1'--18' deep, occasionally occupying almost exclusively
areas of several acres in extent or more often scattered among
Cypress-trees or Royal Palms, in the swamps and along the hummocks
adjacent to the Chokoloskee River and its tributaries and at the head of
East River, Whitewater Bay, in southwestern Florida.




                     6. ROYSTONEA Cook. Royal Palm.


Unarmed trees, with massive stems enlarged near the middle, and
terminating in long slender bright green cylinders formed by the densely
imbricated sheaths of the leaf-stalks. Leaves equally pinnate, with
linear-lanceolate long-pointed unequally cleft plicately-folded pinnae
inserted obliquely on the upper side of the rachis, folded together at
the base, with thin midribs and margins; rachis convex on the back,
broad toward the base of the leaf and acute toward its apex; petioles
semicylindric, gradually enlarged into thick elongated green sheaths.
Spadix large, decompound, produced near the base of the green part of
the stem, with long pendulous branches and 2 spathes, the outer
semicylindric and as long as the spadix, the inner splitting ventrally
and inclosing the branches of the spadix. Flowers monoecious, in a loose
spiral, toward the base of the branch in 3-flowered clusters, with a
central staminate and smaller lateral pistillate flowers, higher on the
branch the staminate in 2-flowered clusters; calyx of the staminate
flower of minute broadly ovate obtuse scarious sepals imbricated in the
bud, much shorter than the corolla; petals nearly equal, valvate in the
bud, ovate or obovate, acute, slightly united at the base, coriaceous;
stamens 6, 9, or 12, with subulate filaments united below and adnate to
the base of the corolla, and large ovate-sagittate anthers, the cells
free below; ovary rudimentary, subglobose or 3-lobed; pistillate flowers
much smaller, ovoid-conic; sepals obtuse; corolla erect, divided to the
middle into acute erect lobes incurved at apex; staminodia 6,
scale-like, united into a cup adnate to the corolla; ovary subglobose,
obscurely 2 or 3-lobed, 2 or 3-celled, gibbous, the cells crowned with a
3-lobed stigma becoming subbasilar on the fruit; ovule ascending. Fruit
a short-stalked drupe with thin crustaceous flesh. Seed oblong-reniform,
marked by the conspicuous fibrous reticulate branches of the raphe
radiating from the narrow basal hilum, and covered with a thin
crustaceous coat; embryo minute, cylindric, lateral, in uniform albumen.

Roystonea is confined to the tropics of the New World, where two or
three species occur.

The genus as here limited was named for General Roy Stone of the United
States army.


                  1. Roystonea regia Cook. Royal Palm.

                       _Oreodoxa regia_ H. B. K.

[Illustration: Fig. 104]

Leaves 10 deg.--12 deg. long, closely pinnate, the pinnae, 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. long,
1-1/2' wide near the base of the leaf, and gradually decreasing in size
toward its apex, deep green with slender conspicuous veins, and covered
below with minute pale glandular dots; petioles almost terete, concave
near the base, with thin edges separating irregularly into pale fibres,
and enlarged into bright green cylindrical clasping bases 8 deg. or 9 deg. long
and more or less covered with dark chaffy scales. Flowers: spadix about
2 deg. long, with a nearly terete stem and slightly ridged primary and
secondary branches compressed above, abruptly enlarged at the base, and
simple slender flexuose long-pointed flower-bearing branchlets 3'--6'
long, pendant and closely pressed against the secondary branches;
flowers opening in Florida in January and February, the staminate nearly
1/4' long and rather more than twice as long as the pistillate. Fruit
oblong-obovoid, full and rounded at apex, narrowed at base, violet-blue,
about 1/2' long, with a thin outer coat and a light red-brown inner
coat, loose and fibrous on the outer surface, and closely investing the
thin light brown seed.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk rising from an abruptly enlarged
base, gradually tapering from the middle to the ends and often 2 deg. in
diameter, covered with light gray rind tinged with orange color, marked
with dark blotches and irregularly broken into minute plates, the green
upper portion 8 deg.--10 deg. long, and a broad head of gracefully drooping
leaves. Wood of the interior of the stem spongy, pale brown, much
lighter than the hard exterior rim, containing numerous dark conspicuous
fibro-vascular bundles. The outer portion of the stem is made into
canes, and the trunks are sometimes used for wharf-piles and in
construction.

Distribution. Florida, hummocks on Rogue River twenty miles east of
Caximbas Bay, on some of the Everglades Keys, Long's Key, and formerly
on the shores of Bay Biscayne near the mouth of Little River; common in
the West Indies and Central America.

Largely cultivated as an ornamental tree in tropical countries, and
often planted to form avenues, for which its tall pale columnar stems
and noble heads of graceful foliage make it valuable.




                       7. PSEUDOPHOENIX H. Wendl.


A tree, with a slender stem abruptly enlarged at the base or tapering
from the middle to the ends, covered with thin pale blue or nearly white
rind, and conspicuously marked by the dark scars of fallen leaf-stalks.
Leaves erect, abruptly pinnate, with crowded linear-lanceolate acuminate
leaflets increasing in length and width from the ends to the middle of
the leaf, thick and firm in texture, dark yellow-green above, pale and
glaucous below; rachis convex on the lower side, concave on the upper
side near the base of the leaf, with thin margins, becoming toward the
apex of the leaf flat and narrowed below and acute above, marked on the
sides at the base with dark gland-like excrescences; petioles short,
concave above, with thin entire margins separating into slender fibres,
gradually enlarged into broad thick sheaths of short brittle fibres.
Spadix interfoliar, compound, pendulous, stalked, much shorter than the
leaves, with spreading primary branches, stout and much flattened toward
the base, slender and rounded above the middle, furnished at the base
with a thickened ear-like body, slender secondary branches, short thin
rigid densely flowered ultimate divisions, and compressed light green
double spathes erose on their thin dark brown margins. Flowers on
slender pedicels articulate by an expanded base, widely scattered on the
ultimate branches of the spadix, staminate and bisexual in the same
inflorescence; calyx reduced to the saucer-like rim of the thickened
receptacle, undulate on the margin, the rounded angles alternating with
the petals; petals 3, valvate in the bud, oblong, rounded at apex, thick
conspicuously longitudinally veined, persistent; stamens 6, with short
flattened nearly triangular filaments slightly united at the base into a
narrow fleshy disk, and triangular cordate anthers attached at the base
in a cavity on their outer face, 2-celled, the cells opening by lateral
slits; styles of the perfect flower 3-lobed at the apex with obtuse
appressed lobes, that of the sterile flower as long or longer than that
of the perfect flower, more slender and tapering into a narrow 3-pointed
apex. Fruit a stalked globose 2 or 3-lobed orange-scarlet thin-fleshed
drupe marked by the lateral style and surrounded below by the withered
remnants of the flower; pedicel abruptly enlarged at base, articulate
from a persistent cushion-like body furnished in the centre with a
minute point penetrating a cavity in the base of the pedicel. Seed
subglobose, free, erect, with a basal hilum and a thin light red-brown
coat marked by the pale conspicuous ascending 2 or 3-branched raphe;
embryo minute, basal, in uniform horny albumen.

Pseudophoenix with a single species inhabits the keys of southern
Florida, and the Bahamas.

The generic name is in allusion to a fancied resemblance to _Phoenix_, a
genus of Palms.


                    1. Pseudophoenix vinifera Becc.

[Illustration: Fig. 105]

Leaves 5 deg.--6 deg. long, with pinnae often 18' long and 1' wide near the
middle of the leaf, becoming at its extremities not more than half as
long and wide; petioles 6'--8' in length. Flowers: spadix 3 deg. long and
2-1/2 deg. wide. Fruit ripening in May and June, 1/2'--3/4' in diameter on a
peduncle 1/4' long; seed 1/4' in diameter.

Distribution. Florida, east end of Elliot's Key, and east end of Key
Largo near the southern shore, here forming a grove of 200 or 300
plants; more common on the Bahamas.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of southern Florida.




                             IV. LILIACEAE.




                                 YUCCAE.


Leaves, alternate, linear-lanceolate. Flowers in terminal panicles;
sepals and petals nearly similar, subequal, withering-persistent; ovary
with more or less deeply introduced dorsal partitions; ovules numerous,
2-ranked in each cell; embryo subulate, obliquely placed across the
seed; cotyledon arched in germination.

Yuccae as here limited consists of two American genera, Hesperaloe, with
two species, low plants of Texas and Mexico, and Yucca.




                              1. YUCCA L.


Trees with simple or branched stems prolonged by axillary naked buds,
dark thick corky bark, light fibrous wood in concentric layers, and
large stout horizontal roots; or often stemless. Leaves involute in the
bud, at first erect, usually becoming reflexed, abruptly narrowed above
the broad thickened clasping base, usually widest near the middle,
concave on the upper surface, involute toward the horny usually
sharp-pointed apex, convex and often slightly keeled toward the base on
the lower surface, the margins serrulate or filamentose, light or dull
green. Flowers fertilized by insects and opening for a single night, on
slender pedicels in 2 or 3-flowered clusters or singly at the base of
the large compound panicle furnished with conspicuous leathery white or
slightly colored bracts, those at the base of the pedicels thin and
scarious; perianth cup-shaped, with thick ovate-lanceolate creamy white
segments more or less united at base, usually furnished with small tufts
of white hairs at the apex, those of the outer rank narrower, shorter,
and more colored than the more delicate petal-like segments of the inner
rank; stamens 6, in 2 series, free, shorter than the ovary (_as long in_
1), white, with club-shaped fleshy filaments, obtuse and slightly
3-lobed at the apex, and cordate emarginate anthers attached on the
back, the cells opening longitudinally, curling backward and expelling
the large globose powdery pollen-grains; ovary oblong, 6-sided, sessile
or stalked, with nectar-glands within the partitions, dull greenish
white, 3-celled, gradually narrowed into a short or elongated 3-lobed
ivory-white style forming a triangular stigmatic tube. Fruit oblong or
oval, more or less distinctly 6-angled, 6-celled, usually beaked at the
apex, baccate and indehiscent or capsular and 3-valved, the valves
finally separating at the apex; pericarp of 2 coats, the outer at
maturity thick, succulent and juicy, thin, dry and leathery, or thin and
woody. Seeds compressed, triangular, obovoid, or obliquely ovoid or
orbicular, thick, with a narrow 2-edged rim, or thin, with a wide or
narrow brittle margin; seed-coat thin, black, slightly rugose or smooth;
embryo in plain or rarely ruminate hard farinaceous oily albumen;
cotyledon much longer than the short radicle turned toward the small
oblong white hilum.

Yucca is confined to the New World and is distributed from Bermuda and
the eastern Antilles, through the south Atlantic and Gulf states to
Oklahoma and Arkansas, and through New Mexico and northward along the
eastern base of the Rocky Mountains to South Dakota, westward to middle
California, and southward through Arizona, Mexico, and Lower California
to Central America. About thirty species with many varieties and
probable hybrids are recognized. Of the species which inhabit the
territory of the United States nine assume the habit and attain the size
of small trees. The root-stalks of Yucca are used as a substitute for
soap, and ropes, baskets, and mats are made from the tough fibres of the
leaves. Many of the species are cultivated, especially in countries of
scanty rainfall, for their great clusters of beautiful flowers, or in
hedges to protect gardens from cattle.

The generic name is from the Carib name of the root of the Cassava.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flower-clusters usually sessile, or short-stalked.
    Fruit pendulous, with thick succulent flesh; seeds thick; albumen
          ruminate.
      Segments of the perianth slightly united at the base.
        Panicle glabrous or puberulous.
          Ovary stipitate; leaves sharply toothed on their horny
                margins, smooth, dark green, slightly concave.
                                                    1. Y. aloifolia (C).
          Ovary sessile.
            Leaves concave, blue-green, rough on the lower surface.
                                                   2. Y. Treculeana (E).
            Leaves concave above the middle, light yellow-green, smooth.
              Style elongated.
                                                3. Y. macrocarpa (E, H).
              Style short.
                                                4. Y. mohavensis (G, H).
        Panicle coated with hoary tomentum; leaves concave, smooth,
              light yellow-green.
                                                     5. Y. Schottii (H).
      Segments of the perianth united below into a narrow tube; leaves
            flat, smooth, dark green.
                                                    6. Y. Faxoniana (E).
    Fruit erect or spreading, the flesh becoming thin and dry at
          maturity; seeds thin; albumen entire.
      Leaves rigid, concave above the middle, blue-green, sharply
            serrate.
                                                7. Y. brevifolia (F, G).
      Leaves thin, flat or concave toward the apex, nearly entire, rough
            on the lower surface, dull or glaucous green.
                                                     8. Y. gloriosa (C).
  Flower-clusters long-stalked; fruit capsular, erect, finally splitting
        between the carpels and through their backs at the apex; seeds
        thin; albumen entire; leaves thin, flat, filamentose on the
        margins, smooth, pale yellow-green.
                                                     9. Y. elata (E, H).


                 1. Yucca aloifolia L. Spanish Bayonet.

[Illustration: Fig. 106]

Leaves 18'--32' long, 1-1/4'--2-1/2' wide, erect, rigid, conspicuously
narrowed above the light green base, widest above the middle, slightly
concave on the upper surface, smooth, dark rich green, with a stiff dark
red-brown tip, and horny finely and irregularly serrate margins;
long-persistent. Flowers from June until August on stout pedicels, in
nearly sessile glabrous or slightly pubescent panicles 18'--24' long;
perianth 1'--1-1/2' in length and 3' or 4' across when fully expanded,
the segments ovate, thick and tumid toward the base, those of the outer
rank rounded and often marked with purple at apex, the inner acuminate
and short-pointed; stamens as long or sometimes a little longer than the
light green ovary raised on a short stout stipe. Fruit ripening from
August to October, elongated, ellipsoidal, hexagonal, 3'--4' long,
1-1/4'--1-1/2' thick, light green when fully grown, and in ripening
turning dark purple, the outer and inner coats forming a thick succulent
mass of bitter-sweet juicy flesh, finally becoming black and drying on
its stalk; seeds 1/4'--1/3' wide, about 1/16' thick, with a thin narrow
ring-like border to the rim.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, usually much smaller, with an erect or
more or less inclining simple or branched trunk slightly swollen at
base, and rarely more than 6' in diameter; sometimes with numerous
clustered stems. Bark near the base of the trunk thick, rough, dark
brown, marked above by scars left by falling leaves.

Distribution. Sand dunes of the coast from North Carolina to eastern
Louisiana; west of the Apalachicola River attaining its largest size and
sometimes ranging inland through Pine-forests for thirty or forty miles;
and in Yucatan (var. yucatana Trel.).

A common garden plant in all countries with a temperate climate, and
long naturalized in the southern states far beyond the limits of its
natural range, in some of the West Indian islands and on the Gulf coast
of Mexico. Forms with leaves variously striped with white, yellow, and
red or with recurving leaves are frequent in cultivation.


       2. Yucca Treculeana Carr. Spanish Bayonet. Spanish Dagger.

[Illustration: Fig. 107]

Leaves 2-1/2 deg.--4 deg. long, 2'--3-1/4' wide, slightly or not at all
contracted above the dark red lustrous base, concave, stiff, rigid, dark
blue-green, rough on the lower surface, nearly smooth on the upper, with
a short stout dark red-brown tip, and dark brown margins roughened by
minute deciduous teeth and ultimately separating into slender dark
fibres; persistent for many years, the dead leaves hanging closely
appressed against the trunk below the terminal crown of closely
imbricated living leaves. Flowers in March and April on slender
pedicels, in dense many-flowered glabrous or puberulous panicles 2 deg.--4 deg.
long and raised on short stout stalks; perianth 1'--2' long, 2'--4' in
diameter when fully expanded, with narrow elongated ovate-lanceolate to
ovate segments, 1/4' wide, acute, thin and delicate, furnished at apex
with a conspicuous tuft of short pale hairs; filaments slightly
papillose, about as long as the prismatic ovary gradually narrowed above
and crowned by the deeply divided stigmatic lobes. Fruit ripening in the
summer, 3'--4' long, about 1' thick, dark reddish brown or ultimately
black, with thin succulent sweetish flesh; seeds about 1/8' wide, nearly
1/16' thick, with a narrow border to the rim.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 2 deg. in
diameter and numerous stout wide-spreading branches; usually smaller and
often forming broad low thickets 4 deg.--5 deg. tall. Bark on old trunks
1/4'--1/2' thick, dark red-brown and broken into thin oblong plates
covered by small irregular closely appressed scales. Wood light brown,
fibrous, spongy, heavy, difficult to cut and work.

Distribution. Shores of Matagorda Bay, southward through western Texas
into Nuovo Leon, and through the valley of the Rio Grande to the eastern
base of the mountains of western Texas; forming open stunted forests on
the coast dunes at the mouth of the Rio Grande; farther from the coast
often spreading into great impenetrable thickets.

Cultivated as an ornamental plant in the gardens of central and western
Texas and in other southern States, and occasionally in those of
southern Europe.


              3. Yucca macrocarpa Coville. Spanish Dagger.

[Illustration: Fig. 108]

Leaves 1-1/2 deg.--2 deg. long, 1'--2' wide, gradually narrowed from the dark
red lustrous base to above the middle, rigid, concave, yellow-green,
rough on the lower surface and frequently also on the upper surface,
with a stout elongated dark tip, and thickened margins separated into
stout gray filaments. Flowers in March and April in densely flowered
sessile or short-stalked glabrous or occasionally pubescent panicles;
perianth usually about 2' long, with acuminate segments, those of the
outer and inner rows nearly of the same size; stamens shorter than the
elongated style. Fruit 3'--4' long, about 1-1/2' thick, abruptly
contracted at apex into a stout point, nearly black when fully ripe,
with sweet succulent flesh; seeds about 1/3' wide, 1/8' thick, with a
narrow border to the rim.

A tree, rarely exceeding 15 deg. in height, with a usually simple stem
6'--8' in diameter, and often clothed to the ground with living leaves.
Bark dark brown and scaly.

Distribution. Arid plains from western Texas to eastern Arizona and
southward in Chihuahua.


               4. Yucca mohavensis Sarg. Spanish Dagger.

[Illustration: Fig. 109]

Leaves 18'--20' long, about 1-1/2' wide, abruptly contracted above the
dark red lustrous base, gradually narrowed upward to above the middle,
thin and concave except toward the slightly thickened base of the blade,
dark green, smooth on both surfaces, with a stout rigid sharp-pointed
tip, and entire bright red-brown margins soon separating into numerous
pale filaments. Flowers from March to May on slender erect ultimately
drooping pedicels 1'--1-1/2' long, in densely flowered sessile or
short-stemmed panicles 12'--18' in length; perianth 1'--2' long, the
segments united at the base into a short tube, thickened and hood-shaped
at the apex, those of the outer rank often deeply flushed with purple,
but little longer than the less prominently ribbed usually wider and
thinner segments of the inner rank; stamens with more or less pilose
filaments nearly as long as the short style. Fruit ripening in August
and September, 3'--4' long, about 1-1/2' thick, usually much constricted
near the middle, abruptly contracted at apex into a short stout point,
dark dull brown or nearly black, with flesh often nearly 1/2' thick;
seeds 1/3' wide, rather less than 1/8' thick, with a narrow border to
the rim.

A tree, rarely exceeding 15 deg. in height, with a trunk usually simple or
occasionally furnished with short spreading branches, and 6'--8' in
diameter, usually surrounded by a cluster of shorter more or less
spreading stems and often clothed to the ground with living leaves. Bark
dark brown and scaly. Wood soft, spongy, light brown.

Distribution. Southern Nevada and northwestern Arizona across the Mohave
Desert to the California coast, extending northward to the neighborhood
of Monterey, California, and southward into northern Lower California;
common and attaining its largest size on the Mohave Desert, and
sometimes ascending arid mountain slopes to altitudes of 4000 deg. above the
sea.


               5. Yucca Schottii Engelm. Spanish Dagger.

[Illustration: Fig. 110]

Leaves 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. long, about 1-1/2' wide, gradually narrowed upward
from the comparatively thin lustrous red base to above the middle, flat
except toward the apex, smooth, light yellow-green, with a long rigid
sharp light red tip, and thick entire red-brown margins finally
separating into short thin brittle threads. Flowers from July to
September in erect stalked tomentose panicles; perianth 1'--1-3/4' long,
the broad oval or oblong-obovate thin segments pubescent on the outer
surface toward the base and furnished at the apex with conspicuous
clusters of white tomentum; stamens about two thirds as long as the
ovary, with filaments pilose at the base, and only slightly enlarged at
the apex. Fruit ripening in October and November, obscurely angled,
3-1/2'--4' long, about 1-1/4' thick, often narrowed above the middle,
with a stout thick point, and thin succulent flesh; seeds 1/4' wide,
about 1/8' thick, with a thin conspicuous marginal rim.

A tree, in Arizona rarely 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk often crooked or
slightly inclining and simple or furnished with 2 or 3 short erect
branches, covered below with dark brown scaly bark, roughened for many
years by persistent scars of fallen leaves, and clothed above by the
pendant dead leaves of many seasons.

Distribution. Dry slopes of the mountain ranges of Arizona near the
Mexican boundary usually at altitudes between 5000 deg. and 6000 deg., and
southward into Sonora.


                6. Yucca Faxoniana Sarg. Spanish Dagger.

[Illustration: Fig. 111]

Leaves 2-1/2 deg.--4 deg. long, 2-1/2'--3' wide, abruptly contracted above the
conspicuously thickened lustrous base, widest above the middle, flat on
the upper surface, thickened and rounded on the lower surface toward the
base, rigid, smooth and clear dark green, with a short stout dark tip,
and brown entire margins breaking into numerous stout gray or brown
fibres short and spreading near the apex of the leaf, longer, more
remote, and forming a thick cobweb-like mass at their base. Flowers
appearing in April on thin drooping pedicels, in dense many-flowered
glabrous panicles 3 deg.--4 deg. long, with elongated pendulous branches;
perianth 2-1/2' long, the segments thin, concave, widest above the
middle, narrowed at the ends, united at base into a short tube, those of
the outer rank being about half as wide as those of the inner rank and
two thirds as long; stamens much shorter than the ovary, with slender
filaments pilose above the middle and abruptly dilated at apex; ovary
conspicuously ridged, light yellow marked with large pale raised
lenticels, and gradually narrowed into an elongated slender style. Fruit
ripening in early summer, slightly or not at all angled, abruptly
contracted at apex into a long or short hooked beak, 3'--4' long,
1'--1-1/2' thick, light orange-colored and lustrous when first ripe,
becoming nearly black, with thick succulent bitter-sweet flesh; seeds
1/4' long, about 1/8' thick, with a narrow nearly obsolete margin to the
rim.

A tree, often 40 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 2 deg. in diameter above the
broad abruptly enlarged base, unbranched or divided into several short
branches, and covered above by a thick thatch of the pendant dead leaves
of many seasons; frequently smaller and until ten or twelve years old
clothed from the ground with erect living leaves. Bark near the base of
old trees dark reddish brown, 1/3'--1/2' thick, broken on the surface
into small thin loose scales.

Distribution. Common on the high desert plateau of southwestern Texas.


                7. Yucca brevifolia Engelm. Joshua Tree.

                       _Yucca arborescens_ Trel.

[Illustration: Fig. 112]

Leaves 5'--8' or on young plants rarely 10'--12' long, 1/4'--1/2' wide,
rigid, crowded in dense clusters, lanceolate, gradually tapering from
the bright red-brown lustrous base, bluish green and glaucous, smooth or
slightly roughened, concave above the middle, with a sharp dark brown
tip, and thin yellow margins armed with sharp minute teeth; persistent
for many years. Flowers appearing from March until the beginning of May,
the creamy white closely imbricated bracts of the nearly sessile
pubescent panicle forming before its appearance a conspicuous cone-like
bud 8' or 10' long; perianth globose to oblong, 1'--2' long, greenish
white, waxy, dull or lustrous, its segments slightly united at the base,
keeled on the back, thin below the middle, gradually thickened upward
into the concave incurved rounded tip, those of the outer rank rather
broader, thicker, and more prominently keeled than those of the inner
rank, glabrous or pubescent; stamens about half as long as the ovary,
with filaments villose-papillate from the base; ovary conic, 3-lobed
above the middle, bright green, with narrow slightly developed septal
nectar-glands, and a sessile nearly equally 6-lobed stigma. Fruit
ripening in May or June, spreading or more or less pendant at maturity,
oblong-ovoid, acute, slightly 3-angled, 2'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' thick,
light red or yellow-brown, the outer coat becoming dry and spongy at
maturity; seeds nearly 1/2' long, rather less than 1/16' thick, with a
broad well-developed margin to the rim, and a large conspicuous hilum.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, rising abruptly
from a broad thick basal disk, thick tough roots descending deeply into
the soil, and stout branches spreading into a broad, often symmetrical
head formed by the continued forking of the branches at the base of the
terminal flower-clusters; the stem until 8 deg.--10 deg. high simple and clothed
to the ground with leaves erect until after the appearance of the first
flowers, then spreading at right angles and finally becoming reflexed.
Bark 1'--1-1/2' thick, deeply divided into oblong plates frequently 2 deg.
long. Wood light, soft, spongy, difficult to work, light brown or nearly
white; sometimes cut into thin layers and used as wrapping material or
manufactured into boxes and other small articles. The seeds are gathered
and eaten by Indians.

Distribution. Southwestern Utah to the western and northern rim of the
Mohave Desert in California; most abundant and of its largest size on
the foothills on the desert slope of the Tehachapi Mountains,
California.


                  8. Yucca gloriosa L. Spanish Dagger.

[Illustration: Fig. 113]

Leaves 2 deg.--2-1/2 deg. long, gradually narrowed above the broad base and then
gradually broadened to above the middle, thin, flat or slightly concave
toward the apex, frequently longitudinally folded, dull often glaucous
green, roughened on the under surface especially above the middle, with
a stout dark red tip, and pale margins serrulate toward the base of the
leaf, with minute early deciduous teeth, or occasionally separating into
thin fibres. Flowers in October, in pubescent or glabrate panicles,
2 deg.--4 deg. long, on stout stalks sometimes 3 deg.--4 deg. in length, their large
creamy white bracts forming before the panicle emerges a conspicuous
egg-shaped bud 4'--6' long; perianth when fully expanded 3-1/2'--4'
across, its segments thin, ovate, acute, or lance-ovate, often tinged
with green or purple, slightly united at the base, pubescent at apex;
stamens about as long as the ovary, with hispid or slightly papillose
filaments and deeply emarginate anthers; ovary slightly lobed, 6-sided,
light green, gradually narrowed into the elongated spreading stigmatic
lobes. Fruit very rarely produced, prominently 6-ridged, pendulous, 3'
long, 1' in diameter, cuspidate, raised on a short stout stipe, with a
thin leathery almost black outer coat; seeds 1/4' wide and about 1/36'
thick, with a smooth coat and a narrow marginal rim.

A tree, with a trunk occasionally 6 deg.--8 deg. high and 4'--6' in diameter,
simple or rarely furnished with a few short branches and usually clothed
to the base with pendant dead leaves; in cultivation often becoming much
larger, with a stout trunk covered with smooth light gray bark, and
erect or in one form (var. _recurvifolia_ Engelm.) pendulous leaves.

Distribution. Sand dunes and the borders of beaches of the seacoast from
North Carolina to northern Florida.

Often cultivated with many forms in the gardens and pleasure-grounds of
all temperate countries.


                 9. Yucca elata Engelm. Spanish Dagger.

                        1. _Yucca radiosa_ Trel.

[Illustration: Fig. 114]

Leaves 20'--30' long, 1/4'--1/2' wide, rigid, gradually narrowed from
the thin base, tapering toward the apex, or sometimes somewhat broadest
at the middle, thin, flat on the upper surface, slightly thickened and
rounded on the lower surface toward the base, smooth, pale yellow-green,
with a slender stiff red-brown tip, and thickened entire pale margins
soon splitting into long slender filaments. Flowers in May and June on
slender spreading more or less recurved pedicels, in glabrous
much-branched panicles 4 deg.--6 deg. long, raised on stout naked stem 3 deg.--7 deg. in
length; perianth ovoid and acute in the bud, when fully expanded
3-1/2'--4' across, its segments united at the base into a short slender
distinct tube, ovate or slightly obovate, those of the outer rank
usually acute, not more than half as broad as those of the inner rank;
stamens as long or a little longer than the ovary, with slender nearly
terete filaments; ovary sessile, almost terete, pale green, abruptly
contracted into the stout elongated style. Fruit an erect oblong capsule
rounded and obtuse at the ends, tipped by a short stout mucro,
conspicuously 3-ribbed, with rounded ridges on the back of the carpels,
1-1/2'--2' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a thin firm light brown ligneous
outer coat closely adherent to the lustrous light yellow inner coat, in
ripening splitting from the top to the bottom between the carpels, and
through their backs at the apex; seeds 1/3' wide and about 1/32' thick,
with a smooth coat and a thin brittle wide margin to the rim.

A tree, with a rough much-branched underground stem penetrating deep
into the soil and a trunk often 15 deg.--20 deg. high and 7'--8' in diameter,
covered above with a thick thatch of the pendant dead leaves of many
years, simple, or branched at the top with a few short stout branches
densely covered with leaves at first erect, then spreading nearly at
right angles, and finally pendulous. Bark dark brown, irregularly
fissured, broken into thin plates, about 1/4' thick. Wood light, soft,
spongy, pale brown or yellow.

Distribution. High desert plateaus from southwestern Texas to southern
Arizona; southward into northern Mexico; most abundant and of its
largest size on the eastern slope of the continental divide in southern
New Mexico and along the northern rim of the Tucson Desert in Arizona.




                       Division II. Dicotyledons.


Stems formed of bark, wood, or pith, and increasing by the addition of
an annual layer of wood inside the bark. Parts of the flower mostly in
4's and 5's; embryo with a pair of opposite cotyledons. Leaves
netted-veined.

_Subdivision 1._ Apetalae. Flowers without a corolla and sometimes
without a calyx (with a corolla in _Olacaceae_).

Section 1. Flowers in unisexual aments (_female flowers of Juglans and
Quercus solitary or in spikes_); ovary inferior (_superior in
Leitneriaceae_) when calyx is present.




                             V. SALICACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, alternate simple stalked deciduous
leaves with stipules, soft light usually pale wood, astringent bark,
scaly buds, and often stoloniferous roots. Flowers appearing in early
spring usually before the leaves, solitary in the axils of the scales of
unisexual aments from buds in the axils of leaves of the previous year,
the male and female on different plants; perianth 0; stamens 1, 2 or
many, their anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; styles usually short or none; stigmas 2--4, often
2-lobed. Fruit a 1-celled 2--4-valved capsule, with 2--4 placentas
bearing below their middle numerous ascending anatropous seeds without
albumen and surrounded by tufts of long white silky hairs attached to
the short stalks of the seeds and deciduous with them; embryo straight,
filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons flattened, much longer than
the short radicle turned toward the minute hilum.

The two genera of this family are widely scattered but most abundant in
the northern hemisphere, with many species, and are often conspicuous
features of vegetation.


                       CONSPECTUS OF THE GENERA.

  Scales of the aments laciniate; flowers surrounded by a cup-shaped
        often oblique disk; stamens numerous; buds with numerous scales.
                                                             1. Populus.
  Scales of the aments entire; disk a minute gland-like body; stamens 1,
        2 or many; buds with a single scale.
                                                               2. Salix.




                         1. POPULUS L. Poplar.


Large fast-growing trees, with pale furrowed bark, terete or angled
branchlets, resinous winter-buds covered by several thin scales, those
of the first pair small and opposite, the others imbricated, increasing
in size from below upward, accrescent and marking the base of the
branchlet with persistent ring-like scars, and thick roots. Leaves
involute in the bud, usually ovate or ovate-lanceolate, entire, dentate
with usually glandular teeth, or lobed, penniveined, turning yellow in
the autumn; petioles long, often laterally compressed, sometimes
furnished at the apex on the upper side with 2 nectariferous glands,
leaving in falling oblong often obcordate, elliptic, arcuate, or
shield-shaped leaf-scars displaying the ends of 3 nearly equidistant
fibro-vascular bundles; stipules caducous, those of the first leaves
resembling the bud-scales, smaller higher on the branch, and
linear-lanceolate and scarious on the last leaves. Flowers in pendulous
stalked aments, the pistillate lengthening and rarely becoming erect
before maturity; scales obovate, gradually narrowed into slender stipes,
dilated and lobed, palmately cleft or fimbriate at apex, membranaceous,
glabrous or villose, more crowded on the staminate than on the
pistillate ament, usually caducous; disk of the flower broadly
cup-shaped, often oblique, entire, dentate or irregularly lobed, fleshy
or membranaceous, stipitate, usually persistent under the fruit; stamens
4--12 or 12--60 or more, inserted on the disk, their filaments free,
short, light yellow; anthers ovoid or oblong, purple or red; ovary
sessile in the bottom of the disk, oblong-conical subglobose or
ovoid-oblong, cylindric or slightly lobed, with 2 or 3 or rarely 4
placentas; styles usually short; stigmas as many as the placentas,
divided into filiform lobes or broad, dilated, 2-parted or lobed. Fruit
ripening before the full growth of the leaves, greenish, reddish brown,
or buff color, oblong-conic, subglobose or ovoid-oblong, separating at
maturity into 2--4 recurved valves. Seeds broadly obovoid or ovoid,
rounded or acute at the apex, light chestnut-brown; cotyledons elliptic.

Populus in the extreme north often forms great forests, and is common on
the alluvial bottom-lands of streams and on high mountain slopes,
ranging from the Arctic Circle to northern Mexico and Lower California
and from the Atlantic to the Pacific in the New World, and to northern
Africa, the southern slopes of the Himalayas, central China, and Japan
in the Old World. Of the thirty-four species now generally recognized
fifteen are found in North America. The wood of many of the American
species is employed in large quantities for paper-making, and several
species furnish wood used in construction and in the manufacture of
small articles of wooden ware. The bark contains tannic acid and is used
in tanning leather and occasionally as a tonic, and the fragrant balsam
contained in the buds of some species is occasionally used in medicine.
The rapidity of their growth, their hardiness and the ease with which
they can be propagated by cuttings, make many of the species useful as
ornamental trees or in wind-breaks, although planted trees often suffer
severely from the attacks of insects boring into the trunks and
branches. Of the exotic species, the Abele, or White Poplar, _Populus
alba_ L., of Europe and western Asia, and its fastigiate form, and the
so-called Lombardy Poplar, a tree of pyramidal habit and a form of the
European and Asiatic _Populus nigra_ L., and one of its hybrids, have
been largely planted in the United States.

_Populus_, of obscure derivation, is the classical name of the Poplar.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Stigmas 2, 2-lobed, their lobes filiform; leaf stalks elongated,
        laterally compressed; buds slightly resinous.
    Leaves finely serrate; winter-buds glabrous.
                                         1. P. tremuloides (A, B, F, G).
    Leaves coarsely serrate; winter-buds tomentose or pubescent.
                                                    2. P. grandidentata.
  Stigmas 2--4, 2-lobed and dilated, their lobes variously divided; buds
        resinous.
    Leaf-stalks round.
      Leaves tomentose below early in the season, broadly ovate, acute
            or rounded at apex.
                                              3. P. heterophylla (A, C).
      Leaves glabrous or pilose below.
        Leaves dark green above, pale, rarely pilose below.
          Ovary and capsule glabrous.
                                            4. P. tacamahacca (A, B, F).
          Ovary and capsule tomentose or pubescent.
                                               5. P. trichocarpa (B, F).
        Leaves light green on both surfaces, glabrous.
          Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate.
                                                 6. P. angustifolia (F).
          Leaves rhombic-lanceolate to ovate.
                                                    7. P. acuminata (F).
    Leaf-stalks laterally compressed.
      Leaves without glands at apex of the petiole, coarsely serrate,
            thick.
        Pedicels shorter than the fruit.
          Disk cup-shaped.
            Branchlets stout; capsule 1/3'--1/2' long.
                                                 8. P. Fremontii (G, H).
            Branchlets slender; capsule not more than 1/4' long.
                                                 9. P. arizonica (F, H).
          Disk minute.
            Branchlets glabrous; leaves broad-ovate to deltoid,
                  long-pointed and acuminate at apex.
                                                      10. P. texana (C).
            Branchlets pubescent; leaves broad-ovate, abruptly
                  short-pointed or acute at apex.
                                              11. P. McDougallii (G, H).
        Pedicels 2 or 3 times longer than the fruit; leaves broadly
              deltoid, abruptly short-pointed.
                                               12. P. Wislizenii (E, F).
      Leaves furnished with glands at apex of the petiole.
        Branchlets stout; leaves thick.
          Winter-buds puberulous; leaves coarsely serrate; branchlets
                light yellow.
                                                   13. P. Sargentii (F).
          Winter-buds glabrous; leaves less coarsely serrate; branchlets
                gray or reddish brown.
                                              14. P. balsamifera (A, C).
        Branchlets slender; leaves thin, ovate, cuneate or rounded at
              base, finely serrate.
                                                     15. P. Palmeri (E).


           1. Populus tremuloides Michx. Aspen. Quaking Asp.

[Illustration: Fig. 115]

Leaves ovate to broad-ovate or rarely reniform (var. _reniformis_
Tidestrom) abruptly short-pointed or acuminate at apex rounded or rarely
cuneate at the wide base, closely crenately serrate with glandular
teeth, thin, green and lustrous above, dull green or rarely pale below,
up to 4-1/2' long and broad with a prominent midrib, slender primary
veins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles slender, compressed
laterally, 1-1/2'--3' long. Flowers: aments 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, the
pistillate becoming 4' in length at maturity; scales deeply divided into
3--5 linear acute lobes fringed with long soft gray hairs; disk oblique,
the staminate entire, the pistillate slightly crenate; stamens 6--12;
ovary conic, with a short thick style and erect stigmas thickened and
club-shaped below and divided into linear diverging lobes. Fruit
maturing in May and June, oblong-conic, light green, thin-walled, nearly
1/4' long; seeds obovoid, light brown, about 1/32' in length.

A tree, 20 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 18'--20' in diameter, slender remote
and often contorted branches somewhat pendulous toward the ends, forming
a narrow symmetrical round-topped head, and slender branchlets covered
with scattered oblong orange-colored lenticels, bright red-brown and
very lustrous during their first season, gradually turning light gray
tinged with red, ultimately dark gray, and much roughened for two or
three years by the elevated leaf-scars. Winter-buds slightly resinous,
conic, acute, often incurved, about 1/4' long, narrower than the more
obtuse flower-buds, with 6 or 7 lustrous glabrous red-brown scales
scarious on the margins. Bark thin, pale yellow-brown or orange-green,
often roughened by horizontal bands of circular wart-like excrescences,
frequently marked below the branches by large rows of lunate dark scars.
Wood light brown, with nearly white sapwood of 25--30 layers of annual
growth.

Distribution. Southern Labrador to the southern shores of Hudson's Bay
and northwesterly to the mouth of the Mackenzie River, through the
northern states to the mountains of Pennsylvania, northern Ohio, Indiana
and Illinois, eastern and central Iowa and northeastern Missouri; common
and generally distributed usually on moist sandy soil and gravelly
hillsides; most valuable in the power of its seeds to germinate quickly
in soil made infertile by fire and of its seedlings to grow rapidly in
exposed situations; westward passing into the var. _aurea_ Daniels, with
thicker rhombic to semiorbicular or broad-ovate generally smaller
leaves, usually pale on the lower surface, rounded or acute and minutely
short-pointed at apex, rounded or cuneate at base, often entire with
slightly thickened margins, or occasionally coarsely crenately serrate,
with inconspicuous reticulate veinlets, turning bright golden yellow in
the autumn before falling.

A tree occasionally 100 deg. high with a trunk up to 3 deg. in diameter, with
pale often white bark, becoming near the base of old stems 2' thick,
nearly black, and deeply divided into broad flat ridges broken on the
surface into small appressed plate-like scales.

Distribution. Valley of the Yukon River to Saskatchewan, and southward
through the mountain ranges of the Rocky Mountain region to southern New
Mexico, the San Francisco Mountains of Arizona, and westward to the
valley of the Skeena River, British Columbia, western Washington and
Oregon, the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada and the high mountains
of southern California, and eastward to North and South Dakota and
western Nebraska; on the mountains of Chihuahua, and on the Sierra de
Laguna, Lower California.


              Populus tremuloides var. vancouveriana Sarg.

                     _Populus vancouveriana Trel._

[Illustration: Fig. 116]

Leaves broadly ovate to semiorbicular, abruptly short-pointed or rounded
at apex, rounded or slightly cordate at the broad base, coarsely
crenately serrate and sometimes obscurely crispate on the margins, when
they unfold covered below and on the petioles with a thick coat of long
matted pale hairs, and slightly villose, glabrous or nearly glabrous
above, soon glabrous, and at maturity thick dark green, lustrous and
scabrate on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, 3'--4-1/2'
long and broad, with a prominent midrib and primary veins; petioles
slender, compressed, becoming glabrous, 2'--3' in length. Flowers:
staminate aments slightly villose; pedicels pubescent; disk of the
flower puberulous toward the base; flowers as in the species; pistillate
aments 2'--2-1/4' long, becoming 3'--3-1/2' in length at maturity; the
rachis, pedicels and slightly lobed disk of the flower densely
villose-pubescent; ovary conic, pubescent, with a short style and stigma
divided into narrow divergent lobes. Fruit on pedicel not more than
1/24' in length, oblong-conic, pubescent or glabrous, 1/4' long.

A tree 30 deg.--36 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--16' in diameter, stout spreading
branches forming a round-topped head, stout, reddish brown pubescent or
puberulous branchlets often becoming glabrous during their first summer.
Winter-buds acute, tomentose, pubescent or glabrous.

Coast of Vancouver Island, British Columbia and shores of Puget Sound;
Tualitin, Washington County, and valley of the Willamette River at
Corvallis, Benton County, Oregon.


                2. Populus grandidentata Michex. Poplar.

[Illustration: Fig. 117]

Leaves semiorbicular to broad-ovate, short-pointed at apex, rounded,
abruptly cuneate or rarely truncate at the broad entire base, coarsely
repand-dentate above with few stout incurved teeth, covered like the
petioles early in the season with white tomentum, soon glabrous, thin
and firm in texture, dark green above, paler on the lower surface,
2'--3' long, 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a prominent yellow midrib,
conspicuously forked veins, and reticulate veinlets; petioles slender,
laterally compressed, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long. Flowers: aments pubescent,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, the pistillate becoming 4'--5' long at maturity;
scales pale and scarious below, divided above into 5 or 6 small
irregular acute lobes covered with soft pale hairs; disk shallow,
oblique, the staminate entire, the pistillate slightly crenate; stamens
6--12, with short slender filaments and light red anthers; ovary
oblong-conic, bright green, puberulous, with a short style, and
spreading stigmas divided nearly to the base into elongated filiform
lobes. Fruit ripening before the leaves are fully grown, often more or
less curved above the middle, light green and puberulous, thin-walled,
2-valved, about 1/8' long; pedicel slender, pubescent, about 1/12' in
length; seeds minute dark brown.

A tree, often 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 2 deg. in diameter,
slender rather rigid branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and
stout branchlets marked by scattered oblong orange-colored lenticels,
coated when they first appear with thick hoary deciduous tomentum,
becoming during their first year dark red-brown or dark orange-colored,
glabrous, lustrous, or covered with a delicate gray pubescence, and in
their second year dark gray sometimes slightly tinged with green and
much roughened by the elevated 3-lobed leaf-scars; generally smaller,
and usually not more than 30 deg.--40 deg. tall. Winter-buds terete, broadly
ovoid, acute, with light bright chestnut-brown scales, pubescent during
the winter especially on their thin scarious margins, about 1/8' long
and not more than half the size of the flower-buds. Bark thin, smooth,
light gray tinged with green, becoming near the base of old trunks
3/4'--1' thick, dark brown tinged with red, irregularly fissured and
divided into broad flat ridges roughened on the surface by small thick
closely appressed scales. Wood light brown, with thin nearly white
sapwood of 20--30 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Rich moist sandy soil near the borders of swamps and
streams; Nova Scotia, through New Brunswick, southern Quebec and Ontario
to northern Minnesota, southward through the northern states to
Pennsylvania, northern Ohio, and eastern (Muscatine County) and central
Iowa, and westward to central Kentucky and Tennessee; passing into the
var. _meridionalis_ Tidestrom with broad-ovate acuminate leaves with
more numerous teeth, often 4'--5' long and 3' wide; the common form in
Maryland, northern Delaware, the piedmont region of Virginia and North
Carolina, southern Ohio, and southern Indiana and Illinois; rare
northward to northern New England.


     3. Populus heterophylla L. Swamp Cottonwood. Black Cottonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 118]

Leaves broadly ovate, gradually narrowed and acute, short-pointed or
rounded at apex, slightly cordate or truncate or rounded at the wide
base, usually furnished with a narrow deep sinus, finely or coarsely
crenately serrate with incurved glandular teeth, covered as they unfold
with thick hoary deciduous tomentum, becoming thin and firm in texture,
dark deep green above, pale and glabrous below, with a stout yellow
midrib, forked veins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets, 4'--7' long,
3'--6' wide; petioles slender terete tomentose or nearly glabrous
2-1/2'--3-1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate aments broad, densely
flowered, 1' long, erect when the flowers first open, becoming pendulous
and 2'--2-1/2' long; scales narrowly oblong-obovate, brown, scarious and
glabrous below, divided into numerous elongated filiform light red-brown
lobes; disk oblique, slightly concave; stamens 12--20, with slender
filaments about as long as the large dark red anthers; pistillate aments
slender, pendulous, few-flowered, 1'--2' long, becoming erect and 4'--6'
long before maturing, their scales concave and infolding the flowers,
linear-obovate, brown and scarious, laterally lobed, fimbriate above the
middle, caducous; disk thin, irregularly divided in numerous triangular
acute teeth, long-stalked; ovary ovoid, terete or obtusely 3-angled,
with a short stout elongated style and 2 or 3 much-thickened dilated 2
or 3-lobed stigmas. Fruit on elongated pedicels, ripening when the
leaves are about one third grown, ovoid, acute, dark red-brown, rather
thick-walled, 2 or 3-valved, about 1/2' long; seeds obovoid, minute,
dark red-brown.

A tree, 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a tall trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, short
rather slender branches forming a comparatively narrow round-topped
head, and stout branchlets, marked by small elongated pale lenticels,
coated at first with hoary caducous tomentum, becoming dark brown and
rather lustrous or ashy gray, or rarely pale orange color and glabrous
or slightly puberulous, or covered with a glaucous bloom in their first
winter, growing darker in their second year and much roughened by the
large thickened leaf-scars; usually much smaller and at the north rarely
more than 40 deg. tall. Winter-buds slightly resinous, broadly ovoid, acute,
with bright red-brown scales, about 1/4' long and about one half the
size of the flower-buds. Bark on young trunks divided by shallow
fissures into broad flat ridges separating on the surface into thick
plate-like scales, becoming on old trunks 3/4'--1' thick, light brown
tinged with red, and broken into long narrow plates attached only at the
middle and sometimes persistent for many years. Wood dull brown, with
thin lighter brown sapwood of 12--15 layers of annual growth; now often
manufactured into lumber in the valley of the Mississippi River and in
the Gulf states, and as black poplar used in the interior finish of
buildings.

Distribution. Southington, Connecticut, and Northport, Long Island,
southward near the coast to southern Georgia, and the valley of the
lower Apalachicola River, Florida, through the Gulf states to western
Louisiana, and through Arkansas to southeastern Missouri, western
Kentucky and Tennessee, southern Illinois and Indiana, and in central
and northern Ohio (Williams, Ottawa and Lake Counties); in the north
Atlantic states in low wet swamps, rare and local; more common south and
west on the borders of river swamps; very abundant and of its largest
size in the valley of the lower Ohio and in southeastern Missouri,
eastern Arkansas, and western Mississippi.


            4. Populus tacamahacca Mill. Balsam. Tacamahac.

                  _Populus balsamifera_ Du Roi, not L.

[Illustration: Fig. 119]

Leaves ovate-lanceolate, gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex,
cordate or rounded at base, or narrow-elliptic and acute or acuminate at
the ends, finely crenately serrate, with slightly thickened revolute
margins, coated when they unfold with the gummy secretions of the bud,
glabrous, or puberulous on the under side of the midrib, becoming thin
and firm in texture, deep dark green and lustrous above, pale green or
glaucous and more or less rusty and conspicuously reticulate-venulose
below, 3'--5' long, 1-1/2'--3' wide, with thin veins running obliquely
almost to the margins; petioles slender, terete, 1-1/2' long, glabrous
or rarely puberulous. Flowers: aments long-stalked, the pistillate
becoming 4'--5' long before the fruit ripens, glabrous or pubescent;
scales broadly obovate, light brown and scarious, often irregularly
3-parted at apex, cut into short thread-like brown lobes; disk of the
staminate flower oblique, short-stalked; stamens 20--30, with short
filaments and large light red anthers; disk of the pistillate flower
cup-shaped; ovary ovoid, slightly 2-lobed, with two nearly sessile large
oblique dilated crenulate stigmas. Fruit ovoid-oblong, acute and often
curved at apex, 2-valved, light brown, about 1/4'--1/3' long, nearly
sessile or short-stalked, 1/2'--1/8' in length; seeds oblong-obovoid,
pointed at apex, narrowed and truncate at base, light brown, about 1/12'
long.

A tree, often 100 deg. high, with a tall trunk 6 deg.--7 deg. in diameter, stout
erect branches usually more or less contorted near the end, forming a
comparatively narrow open head, and glabrous or occasionally pubescent
branchlets marked by oblong bright orange-colored lenticels, much
roughened by the thickened leaf-scars, at first red-brown and glabrous
or pubescent, becoming bright and lustrous in their first winter, dark
orange-colored in their second year, and finally gray tinged with
yellow-green; usually much smaller toward the southern limits of its
range. Winter-buds saturated with a yellow balsamic sticky exudation,
ovoid, terete, long-pointed; terminal 1' long, 1/3' broad; axillary
about 3/4' long, 1/16' broad, with 5 oblong pointed concave closely
imbricated thick chestnut-brown lustrous scales. Bark light brown tinged
with red, smooth or roughened by dark excrescences, becoming on old
trunks 3/4'--1' thick, gray tinged with red, and divided into broad
rounded ridges covered by small closely appressed scales. Wood light
brown, with thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Low often inundated river-bottom lands and swamp borders;
Labrador to latitude 65 deg. north in the valley of the Mackenzie River, and
to the Alaskan coast, south to northern New England and New York,
central Michigan, Minnesota (except in southern and southwestern
counties), Turtle Mountains, Rolette County, North Dakota, the Black
Hills of South Dakota, northwestern Nebraska (basin of Hat Creek), and
in Colorado; the characteristic tree on the streams of the prairie
region of British America, attaining its greatest size on the islands
and banks of the Peace, Athabasca, and other tributaries of the
Mackenzie; common in all the region near the northern boundary of the
United States from Maine to the western limits of the Atlantic forests;
the largest of the sub-Arctic American trees, and in the far north the
most conspicuous feature of vegetation; passing into the variety
_Michauxii_ Farwell, with more cordate leaves, slightly pilose on the
under side of the midrib and veins; common from Aroostook County, Maine,
to the Province of Quebec, Newfoundland, and the shores of Hudson Bay.

Often planted at the north for shelter or ornament.

_Populus candicans_ Ait., the Balm of Gilead of which only the
pistillate tree is known, has often been considered a variety of the
North American Balsam Poplar. This tree has been long cultivated in the
northeastern part of the country and has sometimes escaped from
cultivation and formed groves of considerable extent, as on the banks of
Cullasagee Creek on the western slope of the Blue Ridge in Macon County,
North Carolina. The fact that only one sex is known suggests hybrid
origin but of obscure and possibly partly of foreign origin.


   5. Populus trichocarpa Hook. Black Cottonwood. Balsam Cottonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 120]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded or abruptly
cuneate at base, finely crenately serrate, glabrous, dark green above,
pale and rusty or silvery white and conspicuously reticulate-venulose
below, 3'--4' long, 2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender, pubescent,
puberulous, pilose or rarely glabrous, 1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers:
aments stalked, villose-pubescent, the staminate densely flowered,
1-1/2'--2' long, 1/3' thick, the pistillate loosely flowered, 2-1/2'--3'
long, becoming 4'--5' long before the fruit ripens; scales dilated at
the apex, irregularly cut into numerous filiform lobes, glabrous or
slightly puberulous on the outer surface; disk of the staminate flower
broad, slightly oblique; stamens 40--60, with slender elongated
filaments longer than the large light purple anthers; disk of the
pistillate flower deep cup-shaped, with irregularly crenate or nearly
entire revolute margins; ovary subglobose, coated with thick hoary
tomentum, with 3 nearly sessile broadly dilated deeply lobed stigmas.
Fruit subglobose, nearly sessile, pubescent, thick-walled, 3-valved;
seeds obovoid, apiculate at the gradually narrowed apex, light brown,
puberulous toward the ends, 1/12' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, erect branches
forming an open head, and slender branchlets terete or slightly angled
while young, marked by many orange-colored lenticels, glabrous or when
they first appear coated with deciduous rufous or pale pubescence,
reddish brown during their first year, gradually becoming dark gray, and
roughened by the greatly enlarged and thickened elevated leaf-scars.
Winter-buds resinous, fragrant, ovoid, long-pointed, frequently curved
above the middle, 3/4' long and 1/4' thick, with 6 or 7 light
orange-brown slightly puberulous scales scarious on the margins. Bark
1/2'--2-1/2' thick, ashy gray, deeply divided into broad rounded ridges
broken on the surface into thick closely appressed scales. Wood light,
dull brown, with thin nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. In California in small groves with widely scattered
individuals on the coast ranges, the western slope of the Sierra Nevada
up to elevations of 6000 deg.--8000 deg., and on the southern mountains to Mt.
Palomar in San Diego County; on the California islands, and on the
western slopes of the San Pedro Martir Mountains, Lower California.

On the high Sierra Nevada and in northern California passing into the
var. _hastata_ A. Henry, differing in its thicker leaves, usually longer
in proportion to their width, often long-acuminate, rounded or cordate
at base, frequently 5' or 6' long and 3' or 4' wide, with glabrous
petioles and larger sometimes nearly glabrous capsules on glabrous or
pubescent aments, sometimes 10'--12' in length, and in its glabrous
young branchlets.

A tree sometimes 200 deg. high, with a trunk 7 deg.--8 deg. in diameter, and the
largest deciduous-leaved tree of northwestern North America. The wood is
largely used in Oregon and Washington for the staves of sugar barrels
and in the manufacture of wooden ware.

Distribution. In open groves on rich bottom lands of streams from
Siskiyou County, California, to southern Alaska; eastward in the United
States through Oregon and Washington to western and southern Idaho; and
to the mountains of western Nevada; in British Columbia to the valley of
the Columbia River; on the banks of the east fork of the Kaweah River,
Tulare County, California, at 10,000 deg. above the sea.


        6. Populus angustifolia James. Narrow-leaved Cottonwood.

                 _Populus fortissima_ A. Nels & Macbr.

[Illustration: Fig. 121]

Leaves lanceolate, ovate-lanceolate, elliptic or rarely obovate,
narrowed to the tapering acute or rounded apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate or rounded at base, finely or on vigorous shoots coarsely
serrate, thin and firm, bright yellow-green above, glabrous or rarely
puberulous and paler below, 2'--3' long, 1/2'--1' wide, or on vigorous
shoots occasionally 6'--7' long, and 1-1/2' wide, with a stout yellow
midrib and numerous slender-oblique primary veins arcuate and often
united near the slightly thickened revolute margins; petioles slender,
somewhat flattened on the upper side, and in falling leaving small
nearly oval obcordate scars. Flowers: aments densely flowered, glabrous,
short-stalked, 1/2'--2-1/2' long, the pistillate becoming 2-1/2'--4'
long before the fruit ripens; scales broadly obovate, glabrous, thin,
scarious, light brown, deeply and irregularly cut into numerous dark
red-brown filiform lobes; disk of the staminate flower cup-shaped,
slightly oblique, short-stalked; stamens 12--20, with short filaments
and large light red anthers; disk of the pistillate flower shallow,
cup-shaped, slightly and irregularly lobed, short-stalked; ovary ovoid,
more or less 2-lobed, with a short or elongated style and 2 oblique
dilated irregularly lobed stigmas. Fruit broadly ovoid, often rather
abruptly contracted above the middle, short-pointed, thin-walled,
2-valved; pedicels often 1/3' long; seeds ovoid or obovoid, rather
obtuse, light brown, nearly 1/8' long.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk rarely more than 18' in diameter,
slender erect branches forming a narrow and usually pyramidal head, and
slender glabrous or rarely puberulous branchlets marked by pale
lenticels, at first light yellow-green, becoming bright or dark orange
color in their first season, pale yellow in their second winter, and
ultimately ashy gray. Winter-buds very resinous, ovoid, long-pointed,
covered by usually 5 thin concave chestnut-brown scales; terminal
1/4'--1/2' long and nearly twice as large as the axillary buds. Bark
3/4'--1' thick, light yellow-green, divided near the base of old trees
by shallow fissures into broad flat ridges, smooth and much thinner
above. Wood light brown, with thin nearly white sapwood of 10--30 layers
of annual growth.

Distribution. Banks of streams usually at altitudes of 5000 deg.--10,000 deg.
above the sea; southern Alberta to the Black Hills of South Dakota and
northwestern Nebraska (basin of Hat Creek) westward through Wyoming,
Montana and Idaho to Yakima County, Washington, and southward to central
Nevada, southwestern New Mexico (Silver City, Grant County) and northern
Arizona; the common Cottonwood of northern Colorado, Utah, Wyoming,
southern Montana, and eastern Idaho; on the mountains of Chihuahua.


                 7. Populus acuminata Rydb. Cottonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 122]

Leaves rhombic-lanceolate to ovate, abruptly acuminate, gradually or
abruptly narrowed and cuneate or concave-cuneate, or rarely broad and
rounded at the mostly entire base, coarsely crenately serrate except
near the apex, dark green and lustrous above, dull green below, 2'--4'
long, 3/4'--2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, thin remote primary
veins and obscure reticulate veinlets; petioles slender, nearly terete,
1'--3' long. Flowers: aments slender, short-stalked, 2'--3' long, the
pistillate becoming 4' or 5' long before the fruit ripens; scales
scarious, light brown, glabrous, dilated and irregularly divided into
filiform lobes; disk of the staminate flower wide, oblique, and
membranaceous; stamens numerous, with short filaments and dark red
anthers; disk of the pistillate flower deep cup-shaped; ovary
broad-ovoid, gradually narrowed above, with large laciniately lobed
nearly sessile stigmas. Fruit pedicellate, oblong-ovoid, acute,
thin-walled, slightly pitted, about 1/3' long, 3 or rarely 2-valved;
seeds oblong-obovoid, rounded at the apex, light brown, about 1/12' in
length.

A tree, usually about 40 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, stout
spreading and ascending branches forming a compact round-topped head,
and slender terete or slightly 4-angled pale yellow-brown branchlets
roughened for two or three years by the elevated oval horizontal
leaf-scars. Winter-buds acuminate, resinous, about 1/3' long, with 6 or
7 light chestnut-brown lustrous scales. Bark on young stems and large
branches smooth, nearly white, becoming on old trunks pale gray-brown,
about 1/2' thick, deeply divided into broad flat ridges.

Distribution. Banks of streams in the arid eastern foothill region of
the Rocky Mountains; Assiniboia to the Black Hills of South Dakota,
northwestern Nebraska, eastern Wyoming, southern Colorado, and
southwestern New Mexico (Fort Bayard, Grant County); in Colorado
crossing the Continental Divide to southeastern Utah; passing into the
var. _Rehderi_ Sarg. differing in the larger leaves on longer petioles,
and in the pubescent branchlets and winter-buds. Borders of streams
southeastern New Mexico.

Sometimes planted as a shade-tree in the streets of cities in the Rocky
Mountain region.

x _Populus Andrewsii_ Sarg. intermediate in its character between _P.
acuminata_ and _P. Sargentii_ and believed to be a natural hybrid of
these species has been found growing naturally near Boulder and
Walsenburg, Colorado, and as a street tree in Montrose, Colorado.


               8. Populus Fremontii S. Wats. Cottonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 123]

Leaves deltoid or reniform, generally contracted into broad short entire
points, or rarely rounded or emarginate at apex, truncate, slightly
cordate or abruptly cuneate at the entire base, coarsely and irregularly
serrate, with few or many incurved gland-tipped teeth, coated like the
petioles when they unfold with short spreading caducous pubescence, at
maturity thick and firm, glabrous bright green and lustrous, 2'--2-1/2'
long, 2-1/2'--3' wide, with a thin yellow midrib and 4 or 5 pairs of
slender veins; petioles flattened, yellow, 1-1/2'--3' long. Flowers:
staminate aments densely flowered, 1-1/2'--2' long, nearly 1/2' thick,
with slender glabrous stems, the pistillate sparsely flowered, with
stout glabrous or puberulous stems, becoming before the fruit ripens 4'
or 5' long; scales light brown, thin and scarious, dilated and
irregularly cut at apex into filiform lobes; disk of the staminate
flower broad, oblique, slightly thickened on the entire revolute margin;
stamens 60 or more, with large dark red anthers; disk of the pistillate
flower cup-shaped; ovary ovoid or ovoid-oblong, with 3 or rarely 4 broad
irregularly crenately lobed stigmas. Fruit ovoid, acute or obtuse,
slightly pitted, thick-walled, 3 or rarely 4-valved, 1/3'--1/2' long;
pedicel stout, from 1/20'--1/6' long; seeds ovoid, acute, light brown,
nearly 1/8' in length.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. high, with a short trunk 5 deg.--6 deg. in diameter,
stout spreading branches pendulous at the ends and forming a broad
rather open graceful head, and slender terete branchlets light green and
glabrous, becoming light yellow before winter, dark or light gray more
or less tinged with yellow in their second year, and only slightly
roughened by the small 3-lobed leaf-scars. Winter-buds ovoid, acute,
with light green lustrous scales, the terminal usually about 1/3' long
and usually two or three times as large as the lateral buds. Bark on
young stems light gray-brown, thin, smooth or slightly fissured,
becoming on old trees 1-1/2'--2' thick, dark brown slightly tinged with
red, and deeply and irregularly divided into broad connected rounded
ridges covered with small closely appressed scales. Wood light brown,
with thin nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams; valley of the upper Sacramento River
southward through western California to the San Pedro Martir Mountains,
Lower California; most abundant in the San Joaquin Valley, and ascending
the western slopes of the southern Sierra Nevada to altitudes of 3000 deg.

Often planted in southern California as a shade-tree, and for the fuel
produced quickly and abundantly from pollarded trees.

[Illustration: Fig. 124]

In San Bernardino and San Diego Counties, California, generally replaced
by the var. _pubescens_ Sarg., differing in its pubescent branchlets and
ranging eastward to southwestern Nevada and southern Utah. In southern
Arizona and near Silver City, Grant County, New Mexico, represented by
the var. _Thornberii_ Sarg., differing from the typical _P. Fremontii_
in the more numerous serratures of the leaves, in the ellipsoidal not
ovoid capsules with smaller disk and shorter pedicels, and by the var.
_Toumeyi_ Sarg., differing from the type in the shallow cordate base of
the leaves, gradually narrowed and cuneate to the insertion of the
petiole, and in the larger disk of the fruit (Fig. 124). The var.
_macrodisca_ Sarg. with a broad disc nearly inclosing the ellipsoidal
fruit is known only in the neighborhood of Silver City.

x _Populus Parryi_ Sarg., a probable hybrid of _P. Fremontii_ and _P.
trichocarpa_, with characters intermediate between those of its supposed
parents, grows naturally along Cottonwood Creek on the west side of
Owens Lake, Inyo County, and in the neighborhood of Fort Tejon, Kern
County, and as a street tree is not rare in San Bernardino, California.


                 9. Populus arizonica Sarg. Cottonwood.

                  _Populus mexicana_ Sarg., not Wesm.

[Illustration: Fig. 125]

Leaves deltoid or reniform, gradually or abruptly long-pointed at the
acuminate entire apex, truncate or broad-cuneate at the wide base,
finely serrate with numerous teeth, as they unfold dark red covered
below with pale pubescence, pubescent above, ciliate on the margins,
thin, glandular with bright red caducous glands, soon becoming glabrous,
at maturity subcoriaceous, bright yellow-green, very lustrous,
1-1/2'--2' long and broad, with a slender yellow midrib and obscure
primary veins; petioles laterally compressed, sparingly villose when
they first appear, soon glabrous, 1-1/2'--2' long; leaves on vigorous
leading shoots often rounded at apex, cuneate at base, and often 2' long
and 3' wide, with petioles often 3' in length. Flowers: staminate aments
dense, cylindric, 1--1-1/2' long, the pistillate slender, many-flowered,
1-1/2'--2' long, becoming 3'--4' long before the fruit ripens; disk of
the staminate flower broad-oblong; stamens numerous; disk of the
pistillate flower deep cup-shaped, nearly entire; ovary ovoid, rounded
at apex, slightly 3 or 4-angled, short-stalked, nearly inclosed in the
cup-shaped membranaceous disk. Fruit on short stout pedicels,
round-ovoid, buff color, slightly 3 or 4-lobed, deeply pitted,
thin-walled, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 50 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 3 deg. in diameter,
gracefully spreading and ascending branches forming a broad open head of
wide-spreading branches, and slender often pendulous branchlets, pale
green and glabrous or puberulous when they first appear, soon becoming
glabrous, and light yellow during their first season. Winter-buds
narrow, acute, light orange-brown, puberulous toward the base of the
outer scales, the terminal about 1/4' long, and two or three times as
large as the much-compressed oblong lateral buds. Bark pale gray or
rarely white, and deeply divided into broad flat ridges.

Distribution. Banks of mountain streams; southwestern California (Mill
Creek, above Forest Home, San Bernardino Mountains) and southern and
central Arizona; widely distributed through northern Mexico (_var.
Jonesii_ Sarg.); well distinguished from the other Cottonwoods of the
United States by its small fruit.

Often planted as a street tree in the towns of southern Arizona.


                        10. Populus texana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 126]

Leaves thin, glabrous, broadly ovate, gradually narrowed, long-pointed
and acuminate at apex, truncate at base, coarsely crenately serrate
below the middle, entire above, 3'--3-1/4' long and 2-1/4'--2-1/2' wide;
petioles slender, compressed, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers not
seen. Fruit: aments slender, glabrous, 2-1/2'--3' long; fruit
oblong-ovoid, acute, deeply pitted, glabrous, thin-walled, 3-valved,
1/3' in length; disk slightly lobed; pedicel slender, 1/16'--1/8' in
length; seeds ovoid, acuminate, 1/16' long.

A tree up to 60 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 3 deg. in diameter, stout more
or less pendulous branches and stout glabrous pale yellow-brown
branchlets. Winter-buds acuminate, glabrous.

In canyons and along the streams of northwestern Texas, where it appears
to be the only Cottonwood.


                     11. Populus McDougallii Rose.

[Illustration: Fig. 127]

Leaves broadly ovate, abruptly short-pointed or acute at apex, broadly
or acutely cuneate or truncate, or on vigorous shoots rarely slightly
cordate at base, finely or often coarsely crenately serrate, bluish
green, thin, pubescent on the under sides of the midrib and primary
veins early in the season, otherwise glabrous, 1-1/2'--3' long and
broad, with slender midribs and veins; petioles slender, slightly
compressed, pubescent early in the season, becoming glabrous, 1-1/2'--2'
in length. Flowers not seen. Fruit: aments glabrous, short-stalked,
2'--2-1/2' long; fruit ovoid and acute at apex to ellipsoidal and acute
or acuminate at ends, glabrous, slightly pitted, thin-walled, 3-valved,
5/12'--1/2' long; disk not more than 1/8' in diameter; pedicels
glabrous, 1/8'--1/5' in length; seeds oblong-ovoid, acuminate, 1/8'
long.

A tree rarely 90 deg.--110 deg. high, usually much smaller, with erect branches
and slender branchlets pubescent or puberulous when they first appear,
sometimes becoming glabrous during their first season, and sometimes
pubescent during two years.

Distribution. Banks of streams and springs, San Bernardino County,
California (Cottonwood Springs, Meca, etc.), and eastward to the bottoms
of the Colorado River from Clark County, Nevada, to Yuma, Arizona, and
probably the only Cottonwood in this arid region.

Often planted as a street tree in the towns of southwestern California
and of adjacent Nevada and Arizona.


                12. Populus Wislizenii Sarg. Cottonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 128]

Leaves broadly deltoid, abruptly short- or long-pointed at apex,
truncate or sometimes cordate at the broad entire base, coarsely and
irregularly crenately serrate except toward the entire apex, coriaceous,
glabrous, yellow-green and lustrous, 2'--2-1/2' long, usually about 3'
wide, with a slender yellow midrib, thin remote primary veins and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles slender, glabrous, 1-1/2'--2'
long; on vigorous shoots often 3-1/2'--4' long and wide with petioles
3-1/2'--4' in length. Flowers: aments 2'--4' long, the pistillate
becoming 4'--5' long before the fruit ripens; scales scarious, light
red, divided at the apex into elongated filiform lobes; disk of the
staminate flower broad and oblique; stamens numerous, with large oblong
anthers and short filaments; disk of the pistillate flower cup-shaped,
irregularly dentate, inclosing to the middle the long stalked ovary full
and rounded at apex, with 3 broad crenulate lobed stigmas raised on the
short branches of the style. Fruit oblong-ovoid, thick-walled, acute, 3
or 4-valved, slightly ridged, buff color, 1/4' long; pedicels slender,
1/2'--3/4' in length and placed rather remotely on the slender glabrous
rachis of the ament.

A large tree, with wide-spreading branches, and stout light
orange-colored glabrous branchlets. Winter-buds acute lustrous,
puberulous. Bark pale gray-brown, deeply divided into broad flat ridges.
Wood used as fuel, for fence-posts and the rafters of Mexican houses.

Distribution. Western Texas through New Mexico to the valley of Grand
River, western Colorado (Grand Junction, Mesa County); common in the
valley of the Rio Grande in western Texas and New Mexico, and the
adjacent parts of Mexico.

Often planted as a shade tree in New Mexico.


                      13. Populus Sargentii Dode.

             _Populus deltoides_ var. _occidentalis_ Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 129]

Leaves ovate, usually longer than broad, abruptly narrowed into a long
slender entire acuminate point or rarely rounded at apex, truncate or
slightly cordate at base, and coarsely crenately serrate, as they unfold
slightly villose above and tomentose on the margins, soon glabrous,
light green and very lustrous, 3'--3-1/2' long, 3-1/2'--4' wide, with a
thin midrib, slender primary veins and reticulate veinlets occasionally
furnished on the upper side at the insertion of the petiole with one or
two small glands; petioles slender, compressed laterally, 2-1/2'--3-1/2'
long. Flowers: aments short-stalked, glabrous, the staminate 2'--2-1/2'
in length, the pistillate becoming 4'--8' long before the fruit ripens;
scales fimbriately divided at apex, scarious, light brown; disk of the
staminate flower broad, oblique, slightly thickened on the margins;
stamens 20 or more, with short filaments and yellow anthers; disk of the
pistillate flower cup-shaped, slightly lobed on the margin; ovary
subglobose, with 3 or 4 sessile dilated or laciniately lobed stigmas.
Fruit oblong-ovoid, gradually or abruptly narrowed to the blunt apex,
thin-walled, about 2/5' long and three or four times longer than the
pedicel; seeds oblong-obovoid, rounded at apex, about 1/16' in length.

A tree 60 deg.--90 deg. tall with a trunk often 6 deg. or 7 deg. in diameter, erect and
spreading branches forming a broad open head, and stout glabrous light
yellow often angular branchlets conspicuously roughened by the elevated
scars of fallen leaf-stalks. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, with light
orange-brown puberulous scales. Bark pale, thick, divided by deep
fissures into broad rounded ridges broken into closely appressed scales.

Distribution. The common Cottonwood along the streams in the eastern
foothill region of the Rocky Mountains from Saskatchewan to New Mexico,
and ranging east to the Dakotas, western Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma and
Texas.

Often planted as a shade and street tree in the Rocky Mountain states;
hardy in Massachusetts.


                 14. Populus balsamifera L. Cottonwood.

                      _Populus angulata_ Michx. f.

[Illustration: Fig. 130]

Leaves ovate, longer than broad, abruptly acuminate and often
long-pointed at apex, subcordate or rarely truncate at the wide base,
finely crenately serrate with glandular teeth, furnished on the upper
surface at the insertion of the petiole with two glands, thick,
glabrous, green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler below, 5'--7'
long and 4'--5' wide, with stout midribs and conspicuous primary veins
sometimes sparingly pilose below early in the season; petioles much
compressed laterally, often more or less tinged with red, 3'--4' in
length. Flowers: aments glabrous, short-stalked, the staminate densely
flowered, 1-1/2'--2' long, 1/2'--3/4' in diameter, the pistillate
slender, sparsely flowered, 3'--3-1/2' in length; scales scarious, light
brown, glabrous, dilated and irregularly divided at apex into filiform
lobes; disk of the staminate flower broad, oblique, slightly thickened
and revolute on the margins; stamens 60 or more, with short filaments
and large dark red anthers; disk of the pistillate flower broad,
slightly crenate, inclosing about 1/3' of the ovoid obtusely pointed
ovary, with 3 or 4 sessile dilated laciniately lobed stigmas. Fruit on
aments 8'--12' in length, ellipsoidal, pointed, thin-walled, 3 or
4-valved, 1/3' long, the disk little enlarged; pedicels 1/6'--1/4' in
length; seeds oblong-obovoid, rounded at apex, light brown, about 1/12'
long.

A large tree with massive spreading branches and stout yellow-brown
often angular branchlets. Winter-buds resinous, acute, 1/2' long with
light chestnut brown lustrous scales.

Distribution. Shores of Lake Champlain (Shelburne Point, Chittenden
County), Vermont; western New York; Island of the Delaware River above
Easton, Northampton County, Pennsylvania; Baltimore County, and Bare
Hills, Maryland; northern banks of the Potomac River opposite Plummer's
Island near Washington, D.C.; Artisia, Lowndes County, and Starkville,
Oktibbeha County, Mississippi; rare and local.


         Populus balsamifera var. virginiana Sarg. Cottonwood.

              _Populus deltoidea_ Marsh. at least in part.
              _Populus nigra {b} virginiana_ Castiglioni.

[Illustration: Fig. 131]

Leaves deltoid to ovate-deltoid, acuminate with entire points, truncate,
slightly cordate or occasionally abruptly cuneate at the entire base,
crenately serrate above, with incurved glandular teeth, fragrant with a
balsamic odor, glabrous, thick and firm, light bright green and
lustrous, paler on the lower than on the upper surface, 3'--5' long and
broad, with a stout yellow midrib often tinged with red toward the base,
raised and rounded on the upper side, and conspicuous primary veins;
petioles slender, pilose at first, soon glabrous, compressed laterally,
yellow often more or less tinged with red, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long. Flowers
and Fruit: as on the type.

A tree, sometimes 100 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 7 deg.--8 deg. in
diameter, divided often 20 deg.--30 deg. above the ground into several massive
limbs spreading gradually and becoming pendulous toward the ends, and
forming a graceful rather open head frequently 100 deg. across, or on young
trees nearly erect above and spreading below almost at right angles with
the stem, and forming a symmetrical pyramidal head, and stout branchlets
marked with long pale lenticels, terete, or, especially on vigorous
trees, becoming angled in their second year, with thin more or less
prominent wings extending downward from the two sides and from the base
of the large 3-lobed leaf-scars. Winter-buds very resinous, ovoid,
acute, the lateral much flattened, 1/2' long, with 6 or 7 light
chestnut-brown lustrous scales. Bark thin, smooth, light yellow tinged
with green on young stems and branches, becoming on old trunks
1-1/2'--2' thick, ashy gray, and deeply divided into broad rounded
ridges broken into closely appressed scales. Wood dark brown, with thick
nearly white sapwood, warping badly in drying and difficult to season.

Distribution. Banks of streams, often forming extensive open groves, and
toward the western limits of its range occasionally in upland ravines
and on bluffs; Province of Quebec and the shores of Lake Champlain,
through western New England, western New York, Pennsylvania west of the
Allegheny Mountains, and westward to southern Minnesota, North and South
Dakota, eastern Nebraska, eastern Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas, and
southward through the Atlantic states from Delaware to western Florida,
and through the Gulf states to western Texas (Brown County). In the
south Atlantic states and the valley of the Lower Ohio River and
southward sometimes replaced by a variety with leaves covered above when
they unfold with soft white hairs and below with close pubescence more
or less persistent during the season especially on the midribs and veins
(var. _pilosa_ Sarg.).

Often planted for shelter and ornament on the treeless plains and
prairies between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains, and as
an ornamental tree in the eastern United States and largely in western
and northern Europe.

x _Populus canadensis_ Moench, believed to be a hybrid between the
northern glabrous form of _P. balsamifera_ and the European _P. nigra_
L., with several varieties, is cultivated in Europe and occasionally in
the United States. The best known of these varieties, x _P. canadensis_
var. _Eugenie_ Schelle, the Carolina Poplar of American nurseries,
believed to be a hybrid of the northern Cottonwood with the Lombardy
Poplar, has been planted in the United States in immense numbers.

x _Populus Jackii_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of the northern
Cottonwood with _P. tacamahacca_, with characters intermediate between
those of its supposed parents, grows spontaneously near the mouth of the
Chateaugay River and at Beauharnois, Province of Quebec, and at South
Haven, Michigan, and is now occasionally cultivated.


                       15. Populus Palmeri Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 132]

Leaves thin, ovate, gradually or abruptly contracted at apex into a
narrow acuminate entire point, cuneate or rounded at the broad base,
finely serrate with incurved teeth, ciliate on the margins when they
unfold, otherwise glabrous, 2-1/2'--5' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/4' wide;
petioles slender, glabrous, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers not seen.
Fruit: aments glabrous, 12--15 cm. long; fruit ovoid, obtuse, slightly
pitted, puberulous, thin-walled, 4-valved, 1/4'--1/3' long, the disk
deeply lobed; pedicel slender, 1/4'--1/3' in length.

A tree 60 deg. tall, with a straight trunk 3 deg. in diameter, erect smooth pale
branches forming an open pyramidal head, the lower branches smaller,
horizontal or pendulous, and slender glabrous branchlets light reddish
brown early in the season, becoming pale grayish brown in their second
year. Bark pale, 3'--4' thick, deeply divided by wide fissures into
narrow ridges.

Distribution. In moist fertile soil near springs, at the base of high
chalky bluffs of Nueces Canyon of the upper Nueces River, Uvalde County,
growing with _Salix nigra_ var. _Lindheimeri_, _Carya pecan_, _Morus
rubra_ and _Ulmus crassifolia_, and at Strawn, Palo Pinto County, Texas.




                          2. SALIX L. Willow.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, scaly bark, soft wood, slender
terete tough branchlets often easily separated at the joints, and
winter-buds covered by a single scale of 2 coats, the inner
membranaceous, stipular, rarely separable from the outer, inclosing at
its base 2 minute opposite lateral buds alternate with 2 small
scale-like caducous leaves coated with long pale or rufous hairs. Leaves
variously folded in the bud, alternate, simple, lanceolate, obovate,
rotund or linear, penniveined; petioles sometimes glandular at the apex,
and more or less covering the bud, in falling leaving U-shaped or
arcuate elevated leaf-scars displaying the ends of 3 small equidistant
fibro-vascular bundles; stipules oblique, serrate, small and deciduous,
or foliaceous and often persistent, generally large and conspicuous on
vigorous young branches, leaving in falling minute persistent scars.
Flowers in sessile or stalked aments, terminal and axillary on leafy
branchlets; scales of the ament lanceolate, concave, rotund or obovate,
entire or glandular-dentate, of uniform color or dark-colored toward the
apex, more or less hairy, deciduous or persistent; disk of the flower
nectariferous, composed of an anterior and posterior or of a single
posterior gland-like body; stamens 3--12 or 1 or 2, inserted on the base
of the scale, with slender filaments free or rarely united and usually
light yellow, glabrous, or hairy toward the base, and small ovoid or
oblong anthers generally rose-colored before anthesis, becoming orange
or purple; ovary sessile or stipitate, conic, obtuse to
subulate-rostrate, glandular at the base, glabrous, tomentose or
villose, with an abbreviated style divided into 2 short recurved retuse
or 2-parted stigmas; ovules 4--8 on each of the 2 placentas. Fruit an
acuminate 1-celled capsule separating at maturity into 2 recurved
valves. Seeds minute, narrowed at the ends, dark chestnut-brown or
nearly black; cotyledons oblong.

Salix inhabits the banks of streams and low moist ground, the alpine
summits of mountains, and the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions of the
northern hemisphere, ranging south in the New World, with a few species,
through the West Indies and Central America to Brazil, and the Andes of
Chile, and in the Old World to Madagascar, southern Africa, the
Himalayas, Burmah, the Malay peninsula, Java, and Sumatra. Of the 160 or
170 species which are now recognized about seventy are found in North
America. Of these twenty-four attain the size and habit of trees, the
others being small and sometimes prostrate shrubs. Of exotic species,
_Salix alba_ L., and _Salix fragilis_ L., important European
timber-trees, are now generally naturalized in the northeastern states.
The flexible tough branches of several species are used in making
baskets; the bark is rich in tannic acid and is used in tanning leather
and yields salicin, a bitter principle valuable as a tonic. Many of the
species are cultivated as ornamental trees.

_Salix_ is the classical name of the Willow-tree.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES

  Scales of the flowers deciduous, pale straw color.
    Stamens 3 or more.
      Leaves green on both surfaces; petioles without glands at the base
            of the leaves; branchlets easily separable.
        Branchlets reddish or grayish purple; leaves mostly
              narrow-lanceolate; capsule glabrous.
                                                  1. S. nigra (A, C, E).
        Branchlets yellowish-gray; leaves lanceolate to
              elliptic-lanceolate; capsule often more or less pubescent.
                                             2. S. Gooddingii (F, G, H).
      Leaves (at least when fully grown) pale or glaucous below.
        Petioles without glands.
          Branchlets easily separable.
            Leaves narrow-lanceolate to lanceolate; petioles less than
                  1/2' long.
                                                   3. S. Harbisonii (C).
            Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, caudate; petioles
                  1/2'--3/4' long.
                                              4. S. amygdaloides (A, B).
          Branchlets not easily separable.
            Capsules short-stalked (pedicels hardly more than 1/24'
                  long), ovoid-conic, up to 1/5' in length; leaves more
                  or less narrow-lanceolate, petioles glabrous or nearly
                  so.
                                                 5. S. Bonplandiana (H).
            Capsules long-stalked (pedicels 1/12'--1/6' long), more or
                  less acuminate.
              Petioles puberulous; leaves lanceolate to
                    ovate-lanceolate; stipules without glands on their
                    inner surface; capsules hardly more than 1/4' long.
                                                  6. S. laevigata (G, F).
              Petioles hairy-tomentose; leaves lanceolate; stipules
                    glandular on their inner surface; capsules
                    1/4'--3/4' long.
                                                  7. S. longipes (C, D).
        Petioles glandular; leaves lanceolate to broadly ovate, caudate;
              branchlets easily separable.
          Leaves distinctly pale or glaucous below, lanceolate to
                ovate-lanceolate.
                                                 8. S. lasiandra (B, G).
          Leaves pale green below, ovate to elliptic-lanceolate,
                abruptly caudate-acuminate.
                                                       9. S. lucida (A).
    Stamens 2.
      Stigmas linear, 4 or 5 times longer than broad.
        Leaves linear, hardly more than 1/3' long; anthers very small,
              globose; aments small, in fruit hardly up to 4/5' in
              length.
                                                   10. S. taxifolia (H).
        Leaves linear-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate; up to 2' in
              length; anthers ellipsoid; aments longer.
                                             11. S. sessilifolia (B, G).
      Stigmas short, hardly 2 or 3 times longer than broad.
        Mature leaves covered below with appressed white silky hairs,
              those of flowering branchlets entire or barely
              denticulate.
                                                12. S. exigua (B, F, G).
        Mature leaves glabrous below, those of flowering branchlets more
              or less distinctly denticulate.
                                               13. S. longifolia (A, F).
  Scales of the flowers persistent, dark brown or fuscous, at least
        toward the apex (in _S. Bebbiana_ more or less straw-colored or
        tawny).
    Stamens 2.
      Ovaries glabrous.
        Leaves more or less denticulate or serrate; styles short.
          Base of leaf cuneate or rounded.
            Leaves acute, oblanceolate to narrowly lanceolate; filaments
                  mostly united below.
                                                  14. S. lasiolepis (G).
            Leaves mostly acuminate; filaments free.
              Branchlets glabrous, lustrous; leaves oblanceolate to
                    narrowly obovate, up to 2' in length; pedicels
                    1/8'--1/6' long; stipules small.
                                             15. S. Mackenzieana (A, G).
              Branchlets pubescent; leaves narrowly lanceolate to
                    ovate-lanceolate, 4'--6' long; pedicels 1.5--2.5 mm.
                    long.
                                               16. S. missouriensis (A).
          Base of leaf mostly more or less cordate; leaves glabrous;
                filaments free; pedicels long.
                                                   17. S. pyrifolia (A).
        Leaves entire, oval to broad-obovate; branchlets
              villose-pubescent during their first season.
                                                      18. S. amplifolia.
      Ovaries pubescent (glabrous often in No. 23).
        Leaves covered with a soft dense felt-like tomentum,
              oblong-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate.
                                                   19. S. alaxensis (B).
        Leaves glabrous or more or less villose-pubescent below.
          Bracts of the flowers pale or tawny, often reddish at the tip;
                pedicels up to 1/5' in length; leaves
                elliptic-lanceolate to obovate, reticulate beneath in
                age, pubescent or glabrate.
                                                        20. S. Bebbiana.
          Bracts of the flowers brown or fuscous.
            Stipules more or less distinctly developed; pedicels several
                  times longer than the short styles.
              Leaves elliptic-lanceolate to oblong-elliptic; mostly
                    glabrous in age.
                                              21. S. discolor (A, B, F).
              Leaves oblanceolate to cuneate-obovate, covered beneath
                    with short hairs or at maturity with a gray
                    villose-pubescence.
                                              22. S. Scouleriana (A, B).
            Stipules usually wanting; pedicels hardly longer than the
                  distinct styles; leaves broad-elliptic to
                  obovate-oblong, more or less grayish villose beneath.
                                               23. S. Hookeriana (B, G).
    Stamens usually 1; leaves obovate-oblong, densely covered below with
          lustrous silvery white silky tomentum.
                                               24. S. sitchensis (B, G).


                  1. Salix nigra Marsh. Black Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 133]

Leaves lanceolate, long-acuminate, often falcate, gradually cuneate or
rounded at base, finely serrate, thin bright light green, rather
lustrous, with obscure reticulate veins, glabrous or often pubescent on
the under side of the midribs and veins and on the short slender
petioles, 3'--6' long, 1/8'--3/4' wide; at the north turning light
yellow before falling in the autumn; stipules semicordate, acuminate,
foliaceous, persistent, or ovoid, minute, and deciduous. Flowers: aments
terminal on leafy pubescent branches, narrowly cylindric, 1'--3' long;
scales yellow, elliptic to obovate, rounded at apex and coated on the
inner surface with pale hairs; stamens 3--5, with filaments hairy toward
the base; ovary ovoid, short-stalked, glabrous, gradually narrowed above
the middle to the apex, with nearly sessile slightly divided stigmatic
lobes. Fruit ovoid-conic, short-stalked, glabrous, about 1/8' long,
light reddish brown.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with usually several clustered stout
stems, thick spreading upright branches forming a broad somewhat
irregular open head, and reddish brown or gray-brown branchlets
pubescent when they first appear, soon glabrous, and easily separated at
the joints. Winter-buds acute, about 1/8' long. Bark 1'--1-1/4' thick,
dark brown or nearly black and deeply divided into broad flat connected
ridges separating freely into thick plate-like scales and becoming
shaggy on old trunks. Wood light, soft, weak, light reddish brown, with
thin nearly white sapwood; now sawed into lumber in the valley of the
lower Mississippi River and largely used for packing cases, cellar and
barn floors, in furniture, and in the manufacture of toys and other
purposes where strength is not important as it does not warp, check or
splinter.

Distribution. Low moist alluvial banks of streams and lakes; southern
New Brunswick through southern Quebec and Ontario to the region north of
Lake Superior, southward to northern and western North Carolina, through
the Piedmont region of South Carolina and Georgia to eastern and central
Alabama, and westward to southeastern North Dakota, eastern South
Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, the valley of Wichita River, Oklahoma, and
central and western Texas to Valverde County.

In southern Arkansas, in Louisiana and in eastern Texas _Salix nigra_ is
often replaced by var. _altissima_ Sarg., differing from the type in the
more pubescent young branchlets, leaves and petioles, in the more acute
base of the leaves and longer petioles, and in its later flowering. A
tree sometimes 120 feet high and the tallest of American Willows.


                   Salix nigra var. Lindheimeri Schn.

                  _Salix Wrightii_ Sarg., not Anders.

[Illustration: Fig. 134]

Leaves lanceolate, often slightly falcate, long-pointed and acuminate at
apex, cuneate at base, finely glandular-serrate, glabrous, light green
on the upper surface, paler below, 4'--5' long, 1/3'--1/2' wide;
petioles pubescent early in the season, becoming glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in
length. Flowers: aments slender, densely villose, 2'--3' long; scales
ovate, acute or rarely rounded at apex, covered with matted white hairs,
more abundant on the inner surface; stamens 4 or 5; filaments villose
below the middle; ovary ovoid, gradually narrowed to the apex, the
2-lobed stigmas nearly sessile. Fruit ovoid-conic; pedicels about 1/4'
long.

A tree, 50 deg.--70 deg. high with a trunk often 3 deg. in diameter, large erect
spreading branches forming an open irregular head, and slender
branchlets light green and slightly pubescent when they first appear,
becoming light orange or yellow-brown and lustrous. Bark thick, pale
yellow-brown, deeply furrowed, the surface sometimes separating into
long plate-like scales.

Distribution. River banks, central and western Texas from Grayson and
Dallas Counties and the lower valley of the Brazos River to the valleys
of the San Antonio and upper Guadalupe Rivers; in Coahuila, Nuevo Leon
and Tamaulipas.


                       2. Salix Gooddingii Ball.

                        _Salix vallicola_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 135]

Leaves lanceolate to narrow elliptic-lanceolate, acute or acuminate,
acutely cuneate at base, finely glandular-serrate, often slightly
falcate, silky pubescent when they unfold especially below, glabrous and
dull green at maturity, 1-1/2'--3' long, 1/4'--1/2' wide, or on vigorous
shoots 5' or 6' long and 3/4' wide; petioles pubescent, usually becoming
glabrous, 1/6'--1/4' in length; stipules orbicular-cordate, coarsely
glandular-serrate, pubescent. Flowers: aments pubescent terminal on
leafy pubescent branchlets, narrow-cylindric, 1'--2' long; scales
linear-oblanceolate, acute, yellow, hoary tomentose; stamens 3--5;
filaments villose toward the base; ovary ovoid-conic, gradually narrowed
to the acuminate apex, pubescent or glabrous; style distinct, 2-lobed.
Fruit ovoid, acute, light reddish brown, glabrous or pubescent, 1/4'
long; pedicels glabrous or rarely pubescent, 1/16'--1/8' in length.

A tree, 25 deg.--50 deg. high, with slender light orange-colored or grayish
glabrous or pubescent easily separable branchlets. Bark rough, thick,
deeply furrowed, sometimes nearly black.

Distribution. River banks; Reed Creek, Shasta County, and Red Bluff,
Tehama County, California, southward in the interior valleys and on the
western foothills of the Sierra Nevada to the mountain valleys in the
southern part of the state, and to northern Lower California; eastward
through central and southern Arizona; in southeastern Nevada; through
southern New Mexico to western Texas (El Paso, El Paso County, and Fort
Davis, Jeff Davis County); and southward into northern Mexico.


                       3. Salix Harbisonii Schn.

[Illustration: Fig. 136]

Leaves linear-lanceolate, narrow-elliptic or rarely obovate-lanceolate,
acute or short-acuminate, obtusely or acutely cuneate at the base, and
finely glandular dentate; when the flowers open more or less pubescent
especially below or glabrous, and at maturity green on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, glabrous, 4' or 5' long, 3/4' broad;
petioles villose early in the season, becoming glabrous, 1/4' in length,
minutely glandular at apex; stipules wanting or minute, semicordate,
acute, pubescent on vigorous leading branches and sometimes 1/4' long.
Flowers: aments terminal on leafy branchlets, 2-1/2'--3' in length,
their rachis villose-pubescent; scales ovate or ovate-oblong, obtuse or
acute; stamens usually 5--7, rarely 3--9; filaments densely villose;
ovary ovoid, long-acuminate, glabrous, long-stalked; style short,
distinct, 2-lobed. Fruit acuminate and long-pointed, acute at base, 1/4'
long and about as long as its pedicel.

A tree, 30 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 10' or 12' in diameter, with often
pendulous branches, and slender branchlets more or less densely
pubescent or tomentose or nearly glabrous when they first appear,
becoming glabrous and dark reddish purple in their second season, and
easily separable at the joints; often only a large shrub. Bark thick,
deeply furrowed, dark red-brown, separating on the surface into small
appressed scales.

Distribution. River banks and the borders of swamps; Dismal Swamp,
Norfolk County, Virginia; near Goldsboro, Wayne County, North Carolina;
common in the coast region of South Carolina and Georgia, extending up
the Savannah River at least as far as Augusta, Richmond County, and
through southern Georgia to the valley of the Flint River; swamps near
Jacksonville, Duval County, and in the neighborhood of Apalachicola,
Florida.


       4. Salix amygdaloides Anders. Peach Willow. Almond Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 137]

Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, frequently falcate, gradually or
abruptly narrowed into a long slender point, cuneate or gradually
rounded and often unequal at base, finely serrate, slightly puberulous
when they unfold, becoming at maturity thin and firm in texture, light
green and lustrous above, pale and glaucous below, 2-1/2'--4' long,
3/4'--1-1/4' wide, with a stout yellow or orange-colored midrib,
prominent veins and reticulate veinlets; petioles slender, nearly terete
1/2'--3/4' in length; stipules reniform, serrate, often 1/2' broad on
vigorous shoots, usually caducous. Flowers: aments on leafy branchlets,
elongated, cylindric, slender, arcuate, stalked, pubescent or tomentose,
2'--3' long; scales yellow, sparingly villose on the outer, densely
villose on the inner face, the staminate broadly ovate, rounded at the
apex, the pistillate oblong-obovate, narrower, caducous; stamens 5--9,
with free filaments slightly hairy at the base; ovary oblong-conic,
long-stalked, glabrous, with a short style and emarginate stigmas. Fruit
globose-conic, light reddish yellow, about 1/4' in length.

A tree, sometimes 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a single straight or slightly
inclining trunk rarely more than 2 deg. in diameter, straight ascending
branches, and slender glabrous or rarely pilose (f. _pilosiuscula_
Schn.) branchlets marked with scattered pale lenticels, dark orange
color or red-brown and lustrous, becoming in their first winter light
orange-brown. Winter-buds broadly ovoid, gibbous, dark chestnut-brown,
very lustrous above the middle, light orange-brown below, 1/8' long.
Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, brown somewhat tinged with red, and divided by
irregular fissures into flat connected ridges separating on the surface
into thick plate-like scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light
brown, with thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams; Province of Quebec from the neighborhood
of Montreal to Winnipeg, and along the fiftieth degree of north latitude
to southeastern British Columbia, and to central New York, along the
southern shores of Lake Erie, and through northern Ohio to northern
Indiana, southwestern Illinois, northern and central Missouri, and to
Kansas, northwestern Oklahoma and northwestern Texas; in Colorado, Utah
and Nevada to central Oregon and southeastern Washington.


                 Salix amygdaloides var. Wrightii Schn.

                        _Salix Wrightii_ Anders.

[Illustration: Fig. 138]

Leaves lanceolate, gradually acuminate and long-pointed at apex, cuneate
at base, finely serrate, occasionally slightly falcate, glabrous,
yellow-green on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2'
long, 1/4'--1/3' wide, and on vigorous summer shoots sometimes 4' or 5'
long and 1/2' wide; petioles slender, glabrous, 1/4'--1/3' in length.
Flowers and Fruit as in the species.

A small or large tree best distinguished from _S. amygdaloides_ by the
distinctly yellow or yellowish brown glabrous branchlets.

Distribution. Barstow, Ward County, common along the Rio Grande near El
Paso and at Belon, El Paso County, and on Amarillo Creek, Potter County,
western Texas; through southern New Mexico to the Sacramento Mountains,
Otero County.


                5. Salix Bonplandiana var. Toumeyi Schn.

                        _Salix Toumeyi._ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 139]

Leaves 4'--6' long, 1/2'--3/4' wide, linear-lanceolate to
oblong-lanceolate, acuminate with a long slender point at apex,
gradually narrowed and often unequal at the cuneate base, obscurely
serrate with glandular teeth, or entire with revolute margins, thick and
firm, reticulate-venulose, yellow-green and lustrous above, silvery
white below, with a broad yellow midrib; falling irregularly during the
winter; petioles stout, grooved, reddish; stipules ovate, rounded,
slightly undulate, thin and scarious, 1/8'--1/4' broad, often persistent
during the summer. Flowers: aments on leafy branchlets, cylindric,
erect, slender, short-stalked, the staminate 1'--1-1/2' long and
somewhat longer than the pistillate; scales broadly obovate, rounded at
the apex, light yellow, villose on the outer surface and glabrous or
slightly hairy above the middle on the inner surface; stamens usually 3,
with free filaments slightly hairy at the base; ovary slender,
oblong-conic, short-stalked, glabrous, with nearly sessile
much-thickened club-shaped stigmas, sometimes nearly encircled below by
the large broad ventral gland. Fruit ovoid-conic, rounded at base, light
reddish yellow.

A tree, rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--15' in diameter,
slender erect and spreading branches often pendulous at the ends,
forming a broad round-topped head, and slender glabrous branchlets
marked with occasional pale lenticels, light yellow, becoming light or
dark red-brown and lustrous, and paler orange-brown in their second
year. Winter-buds narrowly ovoid, long-pointed, more or less falcate,
bright red-brown, lustrous, 1/4' long. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, dark brown
or nearly black, and deeply divided by narrow fissures into broad flat
ridges separating on the surface into closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Banks of streams in the canyons of the mountains of central
and southern Arizona (Sicamore Canyon near Flagstaff and Sabino Canyon,
Santa Catalina Mountains); and southwestern New Mexico (canyon, Saint
Louis Mountains, Grant County); in Chihuahua, Sonora and Lower
California.

The typical _S. Bonplandiana_ H. B. K. with broader and more coarsely
serrate leaves, and flower-aments appearing from July to January from
the axils of mature leaves is widely distributed in Mexico and ranges to
Guatemala.


                  6. Salix laevigata Bebb. Red Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 140]

Leaves obovate, narrowed and rounded or acute and mucronate at apex,
cuneate at base, with slightly revolute obscurely serrate margins, on
sterile branches lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, acute or acuminate,
when they unfold light blue-green and coated on the lower surface with
long pale or tawny deciduous hairs, at maturity glabrous, dark
blue-green and lustrous above, paler and glaucous below, 3'--7' long,
3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad flat yellow midrib; petioles broad,
grooved, puberulous, rarely 1/2' long; stipules ovate, acute, finely
serrate, usually small and caducous. Flowers: aments cylindric, slender,
lax, elongated, 2'--4' long, on leafy branchlets; scales peltate,
dentate at apex, covered with long pale hairs, the staminate obovate,
rounded, the pistillate narrower and more or less truncate; stamens
usually 5 or 6, with free filaments hairy at the base; ovary conic,
acute, rounded below, short-stalked, glabrous, with broad spreading
emarginate stigmatic lobes. Fruit elongated, conic, long-stalked, nearly
1/4' in length.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a straight trunk 2 deg. in diameter, slender
spreading branches, and slender light or dark orange-colored or bright
red-brown glabrous, or in one form tomentose or villose (f. _araquipa_
Jeps.) branchlets; often much smaller, with an average height of
20 deg.--30 deg. Winter-buds ovoid, somewhat obtuse, pale chestnut-brown,
1/8'--1/4' long. Bark 3/4'--1' thick, dark brown slightly tinged with
red and deeply divided into irregular connected flat ridges broken on
the surface into thick closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft, light
brown tinged with red, with thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams; western California from the Oregon
boundary to the southern borders of the state, ascending to altitudes of
4500 deg. on the western slopes of the southern Sierra Nevada, and eastward
to Mohave and Yavapai Counties, Arizona, southeastern Nevada and
southwestern Utah.


                       7. Salix longipes Shuttl.

                        _Salix amphibia_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 141]

Leaves lanceolate, acuminate or on fertile branches occasionally rounded
at the apex, rounded or cuneate at the base, finely serrate,
hoary-tomentose early in the season, becoming glabrous above, and pale
and glabrous or pubescent below, 2'--4' long, 1/2'--3/4' wide; petioles
hoary-tomentose, 1/4'--1/2' long; stipules minute, ovate, acute,
hoary-tomentose, caducous, on vigorous shoots foliaceous, reniform,
serrate above the middle, often 3/4' in diameter. Flowers: aments
terminal on leafy tomentose or glabrous branchlets, narrow-cylindric, 3'
or 4' long; scales ovate, rounded at the apex, yellow, densely
villose-pubescent; stamens 3--7, usually 5 or 6, the filaments hairy
toward the base; ovary ovoid-conic, acute, cuneate at the base with a
short 2-lobed style, and pedicels up to 1/4' in length. Fruit ovoid,
often rather abruptly contracted above the middle, 1/4' in length.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg., high with a trunk occasionally 12'--18' in diameter,
spreading branches, and glabrous or pubescent red-brown or gray-brown
branchlets; or more often a shrub. Bark dark, sometimes nearly black,
deeply divided into broad ridges covered by small closely appressed
scales.

Distribution. Borders of swamps and streams; coast of North Carolina
southward to the Everglade Keys of Florida, ranging westward in Florida
to the valley of the Saint Marks River, Wakulla County; in Cuba.

A variety with narrower summer leaves and longer petioles is var.
_venulosa_ Schn.

Distribution. Newbern, Craven County, North Carolina, southward near the
coast to northern and western Florida, ranging inland in Georgia to the
banks of the Savannah River near Augusta, Richmond County, and to
Traders Hill, Charlton County; in the neighborhood of New Orleans,
Louisiana (_Drummond_); in southwestern Oklahoma and in western Texas
(Blanco, Kendall, Kerr, Bandera and Uvalde Counties).

A variety with obtuse stipules, usually glabrous branchlets and
lanceolate or narrow elliptic-lanceolate leaves is distinguished as var.
_Wardii_ Schn.

A shrub or small tree.

Distribution. Banks of the Potomac River, District of Columbia, and
Alleghany County, Maryland to Natural, Rockbridge, Fairfax and Elizabeth
Counties, Virginia; northern Kentucky; northern Tennessee; northeastern
Mississippi (near Iuka, Tishamingo County); St. Clair and Madison
Counties, Illinois; more abundant in Missouri from Pike County southward
to southwestern Kansas, western Arkansas and eastern Oklahoma.


                8. Salix lasiandra Benth. Yellow Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 142]

Leaves lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate and long-pointed at
apex, cuneate or rounded at base, often slightly falcate, finely
serrate, glabrous, dark green and lustrous above, pale or glaucous
below, 1-1/2'--3' long, about 1/2' wide, on vigorous summer shoots often
6' or 7' long and 1-1/2' wide; petioles slender, glabrous, glandular at
apex, 1/4' in length, or on summer shoots stout and 1'--1-1/2' long;
stipules reniform, caducous. Flowers: aments terminal on leafy
puberulous branchlets, narrow-cylindric, 2-1/2'--3' in length; scales
pale pubescent, those of the staminate ament lanceolate-acuminate to
obovate and rounded at apex and entire, those of the pistillate ament
obovate and usually dentate near the apex; stamens 5--9; filaments hairy
below the middle; ovary rather abruptly narrowed above the middle and
acuminate, long-stalked; style short with slightly emarginate lobes.
Fruit light red-brown, 1/4' long; pedicels about 1/16' in length.

Distribution. Valley of the Yukon River near Dawson, Yukon, Vancouver
Island, and southward near the coast of Washington and Oregon, and on
the western slope of the Sierra Nevada and on the coast ranges to
southern California, ranging from the sea-level to altitudes of 8500 deg. on
the southern Sierra Nevada; in New Mexico (Glenwood, Soccoro County, and
Santa Fe, Santa Fe County); in Colorado (Buena Vista, Chaffee County,
_Alice Eastwood_). Passing into var. _caudata_ Sudw., distinguished by
its caudate-acuminate leaves green on both surfaces, and by its bright
yellow or orange-yellow branchlets, and ranging from northeastern Oregon
and eastern Washington through Idaho, and from northern Wyoming to
southern Colorado, Utah and Nevada.

A variety (var. _lancifolia_ Bebb), differing from the typical _S.
lasiandra_ in the gray or rusty villose pubescence covering the
branchlets during their first and sometimes their second season and the
lower surface of the young leaves, is distributed from Dawson in the
valley of the Yukon River southward to the valley of the upper Nesqually
River, Washington, to the valley of the Willamette River (Salem,
Oregon), to Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz County, and to the San Bernardino
Mountains, California.


                 9. Salix lucida Muehl. Shining Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 143]

Leaves ovate-lanceolate, or narrow lanceolate (f. _angustifolia_
Anders.), acuminate and long-pointed at apex, cuneate or rounded at
base, finely serrate, 3'--5' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, covered when they
unfold with scattered pale caducous hairs, at maturity coriaceous,
smooth and lustrous, dark green above, paler below, with a broad yellow
midrib, and slender primary veins arcuate and united near the margins;
petioles stout, yellow, puberulous, glandular at the apex, with several
dark or yellow conspicuous glands, 1/4'--1/2' long; stipules nearly
semicircular, glandular-serrate, membranaceous, 1/8'--1/4' wide, often
persistent during the summer. Flowers: aments erect, tomentose, on stout
puberulous peduncles terminal on short leafy branchlets, the staminate
oblong-cylindric, densely flowered, about 1-1/2' in length, the
pistillate slender, elongated, 1-1/2'--2' long, often persistent until
late in the season; scales oblong or obovate, rounded, entire, erose or
dentate at apex, light yellow, nearly glabrous or coated on the outer
surface with pale hairs, often ciliate on the margins; stamens usually
5, with elongated free filaments slightly hairy at base; ovary narrowly
cylindric, long-stalked, elongated, glabrous, with nearly sessile
emarginate stigmas. Fruit: cylindric, lustrous, about 1/3' long.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
erect branches forming a broad round-topped symmetrical head, and stout
glabrous branchlets dark orange color and lustrous in their first
season, becoming darker and more or less tinged with red the following
year; usually smaller and shrubby in habit. Winter-buds narrowly ovoid,
acute, light orange-brown, lustrous, about 1/4' long. Bark thin, smooth,
dark brown slightly tinged with red.

Distribution. Banks of streams and swamps; Newfoundland to the shores of
Hudson's Bay and northwestward to the valley of the Mackenzie River and
the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains, southward to southern
Pennsylvania, northeastern Iowa, the Turtle Mountains, North Dakota, and
eastern Nebraska; very abundant at the north, rare southward; a variety
from extreme northeastern New England and adjacent New Brunswick and
Quebec (var. _intonsa_ Fernald) is distinguished by its often linear
leaves rufous pubescent during the season on the under side of the veins
and by its pubescent branchlets; a shrub or tree up to 25 deg.


                      10. Salix taxifolia H. B. K.

[Illustration: Fig. 144]

Leaves linear-lanceolate, narrowed at the ends, acute, slightly falcate,
mucronate at the apex, entire or rarely obscurely dentate above the
middle, coated as they unfold with long soft white hairs, at maturity
pale gray-green, slightly puberulous, 1/3'--1-1/3' long, 1/12'--1/8'
wide, with a slender midrib, thin arcuate veins, and thickened slightly
revolute margins; petioles stout, puberulous, rarely 1/12' long;
stipules ovate, acute, scarious, minute, caducous. Flowers: aments
densely flowered, oblong-cylindric or subglobose, 1/4'--1/2' long,
terminal, or terminal and axillary on the staminate plant, on short
leafy branchlets; scales oblong or obovate, rounded or acute and
sometimes apiculate at apex, coated on the outer surface with hoary
tomentum and pubescent or glabrous on the inner; stamens 2, with free
filaments hairy below the middle; ovary ovoid-conic, short-stalked or
subsessile, villose, with nearly sessile deeply emarginate stigmas.
Fruit cylindric, long-pointed, bright red-brown, more or less villose,
short-stalked, about 1/4' long.

A tree, often 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 18' in diameter, erect and
drooping branches forming a broad open head, and slender branchlets
covered during their first season with hoary tomentum, becoming light
reddish or purplish brown and much roughened by the elevated persistent
leaf-scars. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, dark chestnut-brown, puberulous,
about 1/16' long and nearly as broad as long. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1'
thick, light gray-brown, and divided by deep fissures into broad flat
ridges covered by minute closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Near El Paso, Texas; southwestern New Mexico, and along
mountain streams in southern Arizona; southward through Mexico to
Guatemala, and on the Sierra de la Victoria, Lower California.


                      11. Salix sessilifolia Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 145]

Leaves linear-lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate, acute or acuminate at
apex, cuneate at base, entire or furnished above the middle with a few
remote apiculate glandular teeth, bluish green and thickly covered with
silky white hairs most abundant on the lower side of the midrib, 1'--2'
long, 1/2'--3/4' wide, or on vigorous summer shoots often 4' long and
1-1/4' wide; petioles densely villose-pubescent, 1/16'--1/8' in length;
stipules ovate to lanceolate, acute, entire or denticulate. Flowers:
aments appearing after the leaves, terminal on leafy branchlets, densely
hoary-tomentose, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long; scales broadly elliptic, acute or
rounded at apex, cuneate at base, densely villose-tomentose; stamens 2;
filaments villose below the middle; ovary sessile, villose, the stigmas
sessile, deeply 2-lobed. Fruit ovoid-acuminate, densely villose,
pubescent.

A shrub or small tree occasionally 20 deg. high, with short hairy tomentose
branchlets.

Distribution. River banks, southwestern British Columbia; Whitcomb
County, Washington, and on the Umpqua and Willamette Rivers, western
Oregon. Southward passing into

Var. _Hindsiana_ Anders., a large shrub with numerous stems often 20 deg.
high, differing in its more linear or narrow lanceolate usually entire
leaves on longer petioles, smaller aments and pubescent, not tomentose,
branchlets; and distributed from the valleys of central California to
southwestern Oregon. A shrubby form of _S. sessilifolia_ (var.
_leucodendroides_ Schn.) with longer and broader leaves is common on the
banks of streams in southern California.


                         12. Salix exigua Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 146]

Leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, acuminate at the ends, often slightly
falcate, minutely glandular-serrate above the middle, bluish green and
glabrous above, covered below with appressed silky white hairs,
1-1/2'--3' long, 1/8'--1/4' wide, or on summer shoots sometimes 4-1/2'
long and 1-1/2' wide; petioles glabrous, 1/16' long or less; stipules
minute or wanting. Flowers: aments terminal and solitary or terminal and
axillary, on leafy glabrous branchlets, 1'--2' in length; scales hoary
pubescent, lanceolate and acute on staminate aments, often wider,
obovate and rounded at the apex on pistillate aments; stamens, 2,
filaments hairy below the middle; ovary sessile, villose, the stigmatic
lobes sessile. Fruit ovoid, acuminate, glabrous.

A shrub with stems 10 deg. or 12 deg. tall, or rarely a tree 25 deg. high, with a
trunk 5' or 6' in diameter, thin spreading branches forming a
round-topped head, and slender glabrous red-brown branchlets. Bark of
the trunk thin, longitudinally fissured, grayish brown.

Distribution. Southern Alberta and valley of the Fraser River (Clinton),
British Columbia, southward through western Washington and Oregon to San
Diego County, California, and southeastern Nevada, and eastward to
southern Idaho, central Nevada and western Wyoming (Yellowstone National
Park).

Apparently only truly a tree on the banks of the Palouse and other
streams of eastern Washington.

Several shrubby forms of _S. exigua_ found in Nevada, Arizona, Colorado,
western Nebraska and in Lower California are distinguished.


              13. Salix longifolia Muehl. Sand Bar Willow.

                  _Salix fluviatalis_ Sarg., not Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 147]

Leaves linear-lanceolate, often somewhat falcate, gradually narrowed at
the ends, long-pointed, dentate with small remote spreading callous
glandular teeth, 2'--6' long, 1/8'--1/3' wide, when they unfold coated
below with soft lustrous silky hairs, at maturity thin, glabrous, light
yellow-green, darker on the upper than on the lower surface, with a
yellow midrib, slender arcuate primary veins, and slender reticulate
veinlets; petioles grooved, 1/8'--1/4' long; stipules ovate-lanceolate,
foliaceous, about 1/4' long, deciduous. Flowers: aments cylindric on
leafy branchlets, pubescent, the staminate about 1' long, 1/3' broad,
terminal and axillary, the pistillate elongated, 2' or 3' long, about
1/4' broad; scales obovate-oblong, entire, erose or dentate above the
middle, light yellow-green, densely villose on the outer surface,
slightly hairy on the inner; stamens 2, with free filaments slightly
hairy at the base; ovary oblong-cylindric, acute, short-stalked,
glabrous or pubescent, with large sessile deeply lobed stigmas. Fruit
light brown, glabrous or villose, about 1/4' long.

A tree, usually about 20 deg. high, with a trunk only a few inches in
diameter, spreading by stoloniferous roots into broad thickets, short
slender erect branches, and slender glabrous light or dark
orange-colored or purplish red branchlets, growing darker after their
first season; occasionally 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg. in diameter;
often a shrub not more than 5 deg.--6 deg. tall. Winter-buds narrowly ovoid,
acute, chestnut-brown, about 1/8' long. Bark 1/8'--1/4' thick, smooth,
dark brown slightly tinged with red and covered with small closely
appressed irregularly shaped scales. Wood light, soft, light brown
tinged with red, with thin light brown sapwood.

Distribution. River banks, sand bars and alluvial flats; shores of Lake
St. John, Quebec to Manitoba, and southward through western New England
to northeastern Virginia, southern Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, western
Kentucky, south Tennessee, to the mouth of the Mississippi River, and
westward to southwestern South Dakota, southwestern Wyoming,
northeastern Colorado, western Kansas and Oklahoma, and northern Texas.

From central and northwestern Texas to northeastern Mexico and southern
New Mexico represented by var. _angustissima_ Anders., differing in the
absence of a dorsal gland in the male flowers and in the silky
pubescence of the young ovary.

In the northern Rocky Mountains region replaced by var. _pedunculata_
Anders., differing from the type in its narrower linear leaves, glabrous
ovaries and longer pedicels of the fruit, and ranging from western South
Dakota and northwestern Wyoming, through eastern Montana, Saskatchewan,
and Alberta, to the valley of the Yukon River in the neighborhood of
Dawson.

A shrubby form with leaves densely covered with silky pubescence (var.
_Wheeleri_ Schn.) is distributed from New Brunswick to North Dakota,
Nebraska and Beckham County, Oklahoma.


               14. Salix lasiolepis Benth. Arroyo Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 148]

Leaves oblanceolate to lanceolate-oblong, often inequilateral and
occasionally falcate, acute or acuminate or rarely rounded at apex,
gradually or abruptly cuneate or rounded at base, entire or remotely
serrate, pilose above and coated below with thick hoary tomentum when
they unfold, at maturity thick and subcoriaceous, conspicuously
reticulate-venulose, dark green and glabrous above, pale or glaucous and
pubescent or puberulous below, 3'--6' long, 1/2'--1' wide, with a broad
yellow midrib and slender arcuate veins forked and united within the
slightly thickened and revolute margins; petioles slender, 1/8'--1/2'
long; stipules ovate, acute, coated with hoary tomentum, minute and
caducous, or sometimes foliaceous, semilunar, acute or acuminate, entire
or denticulate, dark green above, pale below, persistent. Flowers:
aments erect, cylindric, slightly flexuose, densely flowered, nearly
sessile on short tomentose branchlets, 1-1/2' long, the staminate 1/2'
thick, and nearly twice as thick as the pistillate; scales
oblong-obovate, rounded or acute at the apex, dark-colored, clothed with
long crisp white hairs, persistent under the fruit; stamens 2, with
elongated glabrous filaments more or less united below the middle; ovary
narrow, cylindric acute and long-pointed, dark green, glabrous, with a
short style and broad nearly sessile stigmas. Fruit oblong-cylindric,
light reddish brown, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--35 deg. high, with a trunk 3'--7' in diameter, slender erect
branches forming a loose open head, and stout branchlets coated at first
with hoary tomentum, bright yellow or dark reddish brown and puberulous
or pubescent during their first year, becoming darker and glabrous in
their second season; or often at the north and at high altitudes a low
shrub. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, compressed, contracted laterally into
thin wing-like margins, light brownish yellow, glabrous or puberulous.
Bark on young stems and on the branches thin, smooth, light gray-brown,
becoming on old trunks dark, about 1/3' thick, roughened by small
lenticels and broken into broad flat irregularly connected ridges. Wood
light, soft, close-grained, light brown, with thick nearly white
sapwood; in southern California often used as fuel.

Distribution. Banks of streams in low moist ground; valley of the
Klamath River, California, southward along the foothills of the Sierra
Nevada, the central valley, and on the Coast Ranges to southern
California; on Santa Catalina Island and on the mountains of southern
Arizona; on the Sierra de Laguna, Lower California; occasionally
ascending to altitudes of 4000 deg. above the sea.


                      15. Salix Mackenzieana Barr.

[Illustration: Fig. 149]

Leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, or elliptic, long-pointed at apex,
cuneate or rounded at base, finely crenately serrate, reddish and pilose
with caducous pale hairs when they unfold, at maturity thin and firm in
texture, light green above, pale below, 1-1/2'--2' long, about
1/2'--3/4' wide, on summer shoots, often 4' long and 1-1/2' wide, with a
slender yellow midrib, arcuate veins, and obscure reticulate veinlets;
petioles thin, yellow, about 1/3' long; stipules reniform, conspicuously
veined, about 1/16' broad. Flowers: aments densely flowered, glabrous,
erect, often more or less curved, about 1-1/2' long, terminal on short
leafy branchlets; scales oblanceolate, acute, dark-colored; stamens 2,
with elongated free glabrous filaments; ovary cylindric, long-stalked,
elongated, gradually narrowed into a short style, with spreading
emarginate stigmas. Fruit ovoid, acuminate, light brown, about 1/8'
long; pedicels about 1/6' in length.

A small tree, with a slender trunk, upright branches forming a narrow
shapely head, and slender branchlets marked with scattered lenticels,
glabrous or slightly puberulous and often tinged with red when they
first appear, soon becoming yellow and lustrous, growing lighter colored
in their second year. Winter-buds ovoid, rounded on the back, compressed
and acute at the apex, bright orange color, about 1/8' long.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps; shores of Great Slave Lake
southward through the region at the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains
to Saskatchewan, northern Idaho, and northwestern Wyoming, and to
western Nevada (Lake County; _M. S. Bebb_), and on the high Sierra
Nevada in Calaveras and Mariposa Counties, California (_W. L. Jepson_).


                     16. Salix missouriensis Bebb.

[Illustration: Fig. 150]

Leaves lanceolate or oblanceolate, acuminate and long-pointed at apex,
gradually narrowed from above the middle to the cuneate or rounded base,
finely glandular-serrate, coated with pale hairs on the lower surface
and pilose on the upper surface when they unfold, soon becoming nearly
glabrous, at maturity thin and firm, dark green above, pale and often
silvery white below, 4'--6' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with slender veins
often united near the margins and connected by coarse reticulate
veinlets; petioles stout, pubescent or tomentose, 1/2'--3/4' long;
stipules foliaceous, semicordate, pointed or rarely reniform and obtuse,
serrate with incurved teeth, dark green and glabrous on the upper side,
coated on the lower with hoary tomentum, reticulate-venulose, often 1/2'
long, deciduous or persistent during the season. Flowers: aments
oblong-cylindric, densely flowered, appearing early in February on short
leafy branchlets, the staminate 1-1/2' long and nearly 1/2' wide and
rather longer than the more slender pistillate aments becoming at
maturity lax and 3'--4' long; scales oblong-obovate, light green, and
covered on the outer surface with long straight white hairs; stamens 2,
with elongated free glabrous filaments; ovary cylindric, short-stalked,
beaked, glabrous, with a short style and spreading entire or slightly
emarginate stigmas. Fruit narrow, long-pointed, light reddish brown,
1/3' in length; pedicels about half the length of the scales.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 10'--12' or rarely 18'
in diameter, rather slender upright slightly spreading branches forming
a narrow open symmetrical head, and slender branchlets marked by small
scattered orange-colored lenticels, light green and coated during their
first year with thick pale pubescence, becoming reddish brown and
glabrous or puberulous in their second winter. Winter-buds ovoid, round,
or flattened, acute at the apex, reddish brown, hoary-tomentose, nearly
1' long. Bark thin, smooth, light gray, slightly tinged with red, and
covered with minute closely appressed plate-like scales. Wood dark
red-brown, with thin pale sapwood; durable, used for fence-posts.

Distribution. Deep sandy alluvial bottom-lands of the Missouri River in
southwestern Nebraska to western Missouri; through northeastern Kansas
and eastern Oklahoma to Cache Creek, Comanche County (_G. W. Stevens_);
and from the neighborhood of St. Louis to southeastern and western Iowa.


                      17. Salix pyrifolia Anders.

                       _Salix balsamifera_ Barr.

[Illustration: Fig. 151]

Leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate, acute at apex, broad and rounded and
usually subcordate at base, finely glandular serrulate, balsamic
particularly while young, when they unfold thin, pellucid, red and
coated below with long slender caducous hairs, at maturity thin and
firm, dark green above, pale and glaucous below, 2'--4' long, 1'--1-1/2'
wide, with a yellow midrib and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles
reddish or yellow, 1/3'--1/2' long; stipules often wanting or on
vigorous shoots foliaceous, broadly ovate and acute. Flowers: aments
cylindric, 1'--1-1/2' long, on short leafy branchlets, the staminate
1'--1-1/4' long and 3/4' in diameter and shorter and broader than the
pistillate ament; scales obovate, rose-colored, coated with long white
hairs; stamens 2, with free filaments and reddish ultimately yellow
anthers; ovary narrow-ovoid, long-stalked, gradually contracted above
the middle, with a short style and emarginate stigmas. Fruit
ovoid-conic, 1/4' long, dark orange color; pedicels 1/6' in length.

Usually a shrub, often making clumps of crowded slender erect stems
generally destitute of branches except near the top, rarely arborescent,
with a height of 25 deg., a trunk 12'--14' in diameter, erect branches, and
comparatively stout reddish brown branchlets becoming olive-green in
their second year and marked with narrow slightly raised leaf-scars.
Winter-buds acute, much-compressed, bright scarlet, very lustrous, about
1/4' long. Bark thin, smooth, dull gray.

Distribution. Cold wet bogs; Newfoundland and the coast of Labrador to
the valley of the Saskatchewan and the Mackenzie, and British Columbia,
and to northern Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, New York, Michigan, and
northeastern South Dakota; reported to become arborescent only near Fort
Kent on the St. John River, Aroostook, Maine.


                       18. Salix amplifolia Cov.

[Illustration: Fig. 152]

Leaves oval to broadly obovate, rounded or broadly pointed at apex,
gradually or abruptly narrowed at the cuneate base, dentate-serrulate or
entire, densely villose when they unfold, with long matted white hairs,
at maturity nearly glabrous, pale yellow-green above, slightly glaucous
below, 2'--2-1/2' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a midrib broad and
hoary-tomentose toward the base of the leaf and thin and glabrous above
the middle; petioles slender, tomentose. Flowers: aments appearing about
the middle of June, stout, pedunculate, tomentose, on leafy branchlets,
the staminate 1-1/2'--2' long and shorter than the pistillate; scales
oblanceolate or lanceolate, dark brown or nearly black, covered with
long pale hairs; stamens 2, with slender elongated glabrous filaments;
ovary ovoid-lanceolate, short-stalked, glabrous or slightly pubescent,
gradually narrowed into the elongated slender style crowned with a
2-lobed slender stigma. Fruit ovoid-lanceolate, glabrous, short-stalked,
1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter, and
stout branchlets conspicuously roughened by the large elevated U-shaped
leaf-scars, and marked by occasional pale lenticels, coated at first
with thick villose pubescence, becoming during their second and third
years dark dull reddish purple.

Distribution. Sand dunes on the shores of Yakutat Bay and Disenchantment
Bay, Alaska.


               19. Salix alaxensis Cov. Feltleaf Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 153]

Leaves elliptic-lanceolate to obovate, acute, acuminate or occasionally
rounded at apex, gradually narrowed into a short thick petiole, coated
above as they unfold with thin pale deciduous tomentum and covered below
with a thick mass of snowy white lustrous hairs persistent on the mature
leaves, entire, often somewhat wrinkled, dull yellow-green above, 2'--4'
long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad yellow midrib; stipules
linear-lanceolate to filiform, entire, 1/2'--3/4' long, usually
persistent until midsummer. Flowers: aments appearing in June when the
leaves are nearly fully grown, stout, erect, tomentose, stalked, on
leafy branchlets, the staminate 1'--1-1/2' long, much shorter than the
pistillate; scales oblong-ovate, rounded at apex, dark-colored, and
coated with long silvery white soft hairs; stamens 2, with slender
elongated filaments; ovary acuminate, short-stalked, covered with soft
pale hairs, gradually narrowed into the elongated slender style, with
2-lobed stigmas. Fruit nearly sessile, ovoid, acuminate covered with
close dense pale tomentum, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--6' in diameter, and stout
branchlets thickly coated at first with matted white hairs, becoming in
their second year glabrous, dark purple, lustrous, marked by large
elevated pale scattered lenticels and much roughened by large U-shaped
leaf-scars; often shrubby, and in the most exposed situations frequently
only a foot or two high, with semiprostrate stems.

Distribution. Coast of Alaska from the Alexander Archipelago to Cape
Lisbourne, and eastward to the valley of the Mackenzie River and to the
shores of Coronation Gulf; the only arborescent Willow in the coast
region west and north of Kadiak Island; attaining its largest size from
the Shumagin Islands eastward.


                        20. Salix Bebbiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 154]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oblong-elliptic or lanceolate, acuminate and
short-pointed or acute at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate or
rounded at base, remotely and irregularly serrate usually only above the
middle, or rarely entire, when they unfold pale gray-green, glabrous or
villose, and often tinged with red on the upper surface and coated on
the lower with pale tomentum or pubescence, at maturity thick and firm,
dull green and glabrous or puberulous above, blue or silvery white and
covered with pale rufous pubescence below, especially along the midrib,
veins, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets, 1'--3' long, 1/2'--1' wide;
petioles slender, often pubescent, reddish, 1/4'--1/2' long; stipules
foliaceous, semicordate, glandular-dentate, sometimes nearly 1/2' long
on vigorous shoots, deciduous. Flowers: aments terminal on short leafy
branchlets; scales ovate or oblong, rounded at apex, broader on the
staminate than on the pistillate plant, yellow below, rose color at
apex, villose with long pale silky hairs, persistent under the fruit;
staminate aments cylindric, obovoid, narrowed at base, densely flowered,
3/4'--1' long, 1/2'--1' thick; pistillate aments oblong-cylindric,
loosely flowered, 1'--1-1/4' long, 1/2' thick; stamens 2, with free
glabrous filaments; ovary cylindric, villose; with long silky white
hairs, gradually narrowed at apex, with broad sessile entire or
emarginate spreading yellow stigmas; pedicel villose, about 1/4' in
length, and about as long as the scale. Fruit elongated-cylindric,
gradually narrowed into a long thin beak, and raised on a slender stalk
sometimes 1/2' long.

A bushy tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, stout ascending branches forming a broad round head, and
slender branchlets coated at first with hoary deciduous tomentum,
varying during their first winter from reddish purple to dark
orange-brown, marked by scattered raised lenticels and roughened by
conspicuous elevated leaf-scars, growing lighter-colored and reddish
brown in their second year; usually much smaller and often shrubby in
habit. Bark thin, reddish or olive-green or gray tinged with red, and
slightly divided by shallow fissures into appressed plate-like scales.
Winter-buds oblong, gradually narrowed and rounded at apex, full and
rounded on the back, bright light chestnut-brown, nearly 1/4' long.

Distribution. Borders of streams, swamps, and lakes, hillsides, open
woods and forest margins, usually in moist rich soil; valley of the St.
Lawrence River to the shores of Hudson's Bay, the valley of the
Mackenzie River within the Arctic Circle, Cook Inlet, Alaska, and the
coast ranges of British Columbia, forming in the region west of Hudson's
Bay almost impenetrable thickets, with twisted and often inclining
stems; common in all the northern states, ranging southward to
Pennsylvania and westward to Minnesota and through the Rocky Mountain
region from western Idaho and northern Montana to northern North Dakota,
eastern South Dakota, northeastern and central Iowa, and western
Nebraska, and southward through Colorado to northern Arizona; ascending
as a low shrub in Colorado to an altitude of 10,000 deg.


               21. Salix discolor Muehl. Glaucous Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 155]

Leaves lanceolate to elliptic, gradually narrowed at the ends, remotely
crenulate-serrate, as they unfold thin, light green often tinged with
red, pubescent above and coated with a pale tomentum below, at maturity
thick and firm, glabrous, conspicuously reticulate-venulose, bright
green above, glaucous or silvery white below, 3'--5' long, 3/4'--1-1/2'
wide, with a broad yellow midrib and slender arcuate primary veins;
petioles slender, 1/2'--1' long; stipules foliaceous, semilunar, acute,
glandular-dentate, about 1/4' long, deciduous. Flowers: aments appearing
late in winter or in very early spring, erect, terminal on short
scale-bearing branchlets coated with thick white tomentum,
oblong-cylindric, about 1' long and 2/3' thick, the staminate soft and
silky before the flowers open and densely flowered; scales
oblong-obovate, dark reddish brown toward the apex, covered on the back
with long silky silvery white hairs; stamens 2, with elongated glabrous
filaments; ovary oblong-cylindric, narrowed above the middle, villose,
with a short distinct style and broad spreading entire stigmas; pedicel
glabrous, about twice the length of the scale. Fruit cylindric, more or
less contracted above the middle, long-pointed, light brown, coated with
pale pubescence.

A tree, rarely more than 25 deg. high, with a trunk about 1 deg. in diameter,
stout ascending branches forming an open round-topped head, and stout
branchlets marked by occasional orange-colored lenticels, dark reddish
purple and coated at first with pale deciduous pubescence; more often
shrubby, with numerous tall straggling stems. Winter-buds semiterete,
flattened and acute at the apex, about 3/8' long, dark reddish purple
and lustrous. Bark 1/4' thick, light brown tinged with red, and divided
by shallow fissures into thin plate-like oblong scales. Wood light,
soft, close-grained, brown streaked with red, with lighter brown
sapwood.

Distribution. Moist meadows and the banks of streams and lakes; Nova
Scotia to Manitoba, and southward to Delaware, southern Indiana and
Illinois, eastern and southwestern Iowa, the Black Hills of South
Dakota, and northeastern Missouri; common.

A form of _Salix discolor_ with more densely flowered and more silvery
pubescent aments is described as var. _eriocephala_ Schn. and a form
with loosely flowered aments with less tomentose fruits with longer
styles and with narrower leaves as var. _prinoides_ Schn.


               22. Salix Scouleriana Barr. Black Willow.

                        _Salix Nuttallii_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 156]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic, acute or abruptly acuminate with a
short or long-pointed apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at the often
unsymmetrical base, entire or remotely and irregularly crenately
serrate, thin and firm, dark yellow-green and lustrous above, pale or
glaucous and glabrous or pilose below, 1-1/4'--4' long, 1/2'--1-1/2'
wide, with a broad yellow pubescent midrib and slender veins forked and
arcuate within the slightly thickened and revolute margins and connected
by conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles slender, puberulous,
1/4'--1/2' in length; stipules foliaceous, semilunar, glandular-serrate,
1/8'--1/4' long, caducous. Flowers: aments appearing before the leaves,
oblong-cylindric, erect, nearly sessile on short tomentose scale-bearing
branchlets, the staminate about 1' long and rather more than 1/2' thick,
the pistillate 1-1/2' long, about 5/12' thick; scales oblong, narrowed
at the ends, dark-colored, covered with long white hairs, persistent
under the fruit; stamens 2, with free glabrous filaments; ovary
cylindric, short-stalked, with a distinct style and broad emarginate
stigmas; pedicels less than half the length of the scale, villose. Fruit
oblong-ovoid, acuminate, light reddish brown, pale pubescent, about 1/3'
long.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely exceeding 1 deg. in
diameter, slender pendulous branches forming a rather compact
round-topped shapely head, and stout branchlets marked by scattered
yellow lenticels, coated when they first appear with pale early
deciduous pubescence, becoming bright yellow or dark orange color, and
in their second year dark red-brown and much roughened by the
conspicuous leaf-scars; or more often a shrub. Winter-buds ovoid, acute,
nearly terete or slightly flattened, with narrow lateral wing-like
margins, light or dark orange color, glabrous or pilose at the base,
about 1/4' long. Bark thin, dark brown slightly tinged with red, and
divided into broad flat ridges. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light
brown tinged with red, with thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Cook's Inlet, coast of Alaska, and valley of the Yukon
River near Dawson southward through western British Columbia to northern
California, ranging eastward through Washington and northwestern Oregon
to northern Idaho and Montana.

From central California to San Bernardino County represented by the
variety _crassijulis_ Andr. (S. _brachystachys_ Benth.) with shorter and
broader obovate leaves rounded at apex, pubescent and tomentose
branchlets and larger pubescent winter-buds. A tree sometimes 70 deg. high
with a trunk often 2-1/2 deg. in diameter.

On the high Sierra Nevada eastward to the eastern ranges of the Rocky
Mountains of Colorado and to northern New Mexico, northern Wyoming and
the Black Hills of South Dakota represented by the var. _flavescens_
Schn. A shrub or rarely a small tree with obovate rounded yellowish
leaves and branchlets.


                       23. Salix Hookeriana Barr.

[Illustration: Fig. 157]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, acute or abruptly acuminate, or rarely
rounded and frequently apiculate at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate
or rounded at base, coarsely crenately serrate, especially those on
vigorous shoots, or entire, when they unfold villose with pale hairs, or
tomentose above and clothed below with silvery white tomentum, at
maturity thin and firm, bright yellow-green and lustrous, nearly
glabrous or tomentose on the upper surface, pale and glaucous and
tomentose or pubescent on the lower surface, especially along the midrib
and slender arcuate primary veins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets,
2'--6' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles stout, tomentose, 1/4'--1/3'
long. Flowers: aments oblong-cylindric, erect, rather lax, often more or
less curved, about 1-1/2' long, on short tomentose scale-bearing
branchlets, the staminate 2/3' thick and rather thicker than the
pistillate; scales oblong-obovate, yellow, coated with long pale hairs,
the staminate rounded above and rather shorter than the more acute
scales of the pistillate ament persistent under the fruit; stamens 2,
with free elongated glabrous filaments; ovary conic, glabrous, stalked,
with a slender stalk about one third as long as the scale, gradually
narrowed above, with a slender elongated bright red style and broad
spreading entire stigmas. Fruit oblong-cylindric, narrowed above, about
1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a trunk about 1 deg. in diameter, and
stout branchlets marked by large scattered orange-colored lenticels,
covered during their first season with hoary tomentum and rather bright
or dark red-brown and pubescent in their second summer; more often
shrubby, with numerous stems 4'--8' thick and 15 deg.--20 deg. high; frequently
a low bush, with straggling almost prostrate stems. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, nearly terete, dark red, coated with pale pubescence, about 1/4'
long. Bark nearly 1/8' thick, light red-brown, slightly fissured and
divided into closely appressed plate-like scales. Wood light, soft,
close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thin nearly white
sapwood.

Distribution. Borders of salt marshes and ponds and sandy coast dunes;
Vancouver Island southward along the shores of Puget Sound and the
Pacific Ocean to southern Oregon.


                      24. Salix sitchensis Sanson.

[Illustration: Fig. 158]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oblanceolate, entire or minutely glandular
dentate, acute or acuminate, or rounded and short-pointed, or rounded at
apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, when they unfold pubescent
or tomentose on the upper surface, and coated on the lower with lustrous
white silky pubescence or tomentum persistent during the season or
sometimes deciduous from the leaves of vigorous young shoots, at
maturity thin and firm, dark green, lustrous and glabrous above, with
the exception of the pubescent midrib, 2'--5' long, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide,
with conspicuous slender veins arcuate and united within the margins and
prominent reticulate veinlets; petioles stout, pubescent, rarely 1/2'
long; stipules rarely produced, foliaceous, semilunar, acute or rounded
at apex, glandular-dentate, coated below with hoary tomentum, often 1/2'
long, caducous. Flowers: aments cylindric, densely flowered, erect on
short tomentose leafy branchlets, the staminate 1-1/2'--2' long and 1/2'
thick, the pistillate 2-1/2'--3' long, and 1/4' thick; scales yellow or
tawny, the staminate oblong-obovate, rounded at the apex, covered with
long white hairs, much longer than the more acute pubescent scales of
the pistillate ament; stamen 1, with an elongated glabrous filament, or
very rarely 2, with filaments united below the middle or nearly to the
apex; ovary short-stalked, ovoid, conic, acute, pubescent and gradually
narrowed into the elongated style, with entire or slightly emarginate
short stigmas. Fruit ovoid, narrowed above, light red-brown, pubescent
about 1/4' long.

A much-branched tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short contorted
often inclining trunk sometimes 1 deg. in diameter, and slender brittle
branchlets coated at first with hoary tomentum, pubescent and tomentose
and dark red-brown or orange color during their first winter, becoming
darker, pubescent or glabrous, and sometimes covered with a glaucous
bloom in their second season; more often shrubby and 6 deg.--15 deg. tall.
Winter-buds acute, nearly terete, light red-brown, pubescent or
puberulous, about 1/4' long. Bark about 1/8' thick and broken into
irregular closely appressed dark brown scales tinged with red. Wood
light, soft, close-grained, pale red, with thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams and in low moist ground; Cook Inlet and
Kadiak Island, Alaska, southward in the neighborhood of the coast to
Santa Barbara, California; on the Marble Creek of the Kaweah River at
6900 deg. altitude (f. _Ralphiana_ Jeps.)




                             VI. MYRICACEAE.


Aromatic resinous trees and shrubs, with watery juice, terete branches,
and small scaly buds. Leaves alternate, revolute in the bud, serrate,
resinous-punctate, persistent in our species, in falling leaving
elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars showing the ends of three nearly
equidistant fibro-vascular bundles. Flowers unisexual, dioecious or
monoecious, usually subtended by minute bractlets, in the axils of the
deciduous scales of unisexual or androgynous simple oblong aments from
buds in the axils of the leaves of the year, opening in early spring,
the staminate below the pistillate in androgynous aments; staminate,
perianth 0; stamens 4 or many, inserted on the thickened base of the
scales of the ament; filaments slender, united at the base into a short
stipe; anthers ovoid, erect, 2-celled, introrse, opening longitudinally;
ovary rudimentary or 0; pistillate flowers single or in pairs; ovary
sessile, 1-celled; styles short, divided into 2 elongated filiform
stigmas stigmatic on the inner face; ovule solitary, erect from the base
of the cell, orthotropous, the micropyle superior. Fruit a globose or
ovoid dry drupe usually covered with waxy exudations; nut hard,
thick-walled. Seed erect, with a thin coat, without albumen; embryo
straight; cotyledons plano-convex, fleshy; radicle short, superior,
turned away from the minute basal hilum.

The family consists of the genus _Myrica_ L., of about thirty or forty
species of small trees and shrubs, widely distributed through the
temperate and warmer parts of both hemispheres. Of the seven North
American species three are trees. Wax is obtained from the exudations of
the fruit of several species. The bark is astringent, and sometimes used
in medicine, in tanning, and as an aniline dye. _Myrica_ rubra Sieb and
Zacc., of southern Japan and China, is cultivated for its succulent
aromatic red fruit.

The generic name is probably from the ancient name of some shrub,
possibly the Tamarisk.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers dioecious.
    Leaves oblanceolate, usually acute or rarely rounded at apex, mostly
          coarsely serrate above the middle, yellow-green, coated below
          with conspicuous orange-colored glands.
                                                  1. M. cerifera (A, C).
    Leaves usually broadly oblong-obovate, rounded or rarely acute at
          apex, entire, dark green and lustrous.
                                                      2. M. inodora (C).
  Flowers monoecious; leaves oblanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, sharply
        serrate, dark green and lustrous.
                                                  3. M. californica (G).


                   1. Myrica cerifera L. Wax Myrtle.

[Illustration: Fig. 159]

Leaves oblanceolate or rarely oblong-lanceolate, acute or rarely
gradually narrowed and rounded at apex, cuneate at base, decurrent on
short stout petioles, coarsely serrate above the middle or entire,
yellow-green, covered above by minute dark glands and below by bright
orange-colored glands, 1-1/2'--4' long and 1/4'--1/2' wide, with a
slender pale midrib often puberulous below, and few obscure arcuate
veins, fragrant with a balsamic resinous odor; gradually deciduous at
the end of their first year. Flowers in small oblong aments, with ovate
acute ciliate scales, those of the staminate plant 1/2'--3/4' long,
about twice as long as those of the pistillate plant; stamens few, with
oblong slightly obcordate anthers at first tinged with red, becoming
yellow; ovary gradually narrowed into 2 slender spreading stigmas longer
than its scale. Fruit in short spikes, ripening in September and October
and persistent on the branches during the winter, irregularly deciduous
in the spring and early summer, globose, about 1/8' in diameter,
slightly papillose, light green, coated with thick pale blue wax; seed
pale, minute.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
slender upright or slightly spreading branches forming a narrow
round-topped head, and slender branchlets marked by small pale
lenticels, coated at first with loose rufous tomentum and caducous
orange-colored glands, bright red-brown or dark brown tinged with gray,
usually lustrous and nearly glabrous during their first winter, finally
becoming dark brown; generally smaller, frequently shrubby. Winter-buds
oblong, acute, 1/16'--1/8' long, with numerous ovate acute imbricated
scales, the inner scales becoming nearly 1/2' long, and often persistent
until the young branch has completed its growth. Bark of the trunk 1/4'
thick, compact, smooth, light gray. Wood light, soft and brittle, dark
brown, with thin lighter-colored sapwood.

Distribution. In the neighborhood of the coast; Cape May, New Jersey,
southern Delaware and Maryland to the keys of southern Florida, and
through the Gulf states to the shores of Aranzas Pass, San Patricio
County, Texas, ranging inland to the neighborhood of Natchez, Jackson
County, Mississippi, the valley of the Red River (Natchitoches,
Louisiana and Fulton, Arkansas), and to Cherokee County, Texas, and
northward to the valley of the Washita River, Arkansas; on the Bermuda
and Bahama Islands and on several of the Antilles; most abundant and of
its largest size on the south Atlantic and Gulf coasts in sandy swamps
and pond holes; the most common woody plant and forming great thickets
on the Everglades east of Lake Okeechobee, Florida; in the sandy soil of
Pine-barrens and on dry arid hills of the interior, often only a few
inches in height, var. _pumila_ Michx.


                2. Myrica inodora W. Bartr. Wax Myrtle.

[Illustration: Fig. 160]

Leaves broadly oblong-obovate or rarely ovate, rounded or sometimes
pointed and occasionally apiculate at apex, narrowed at base, decurrent
on short stout petioles, entire or rarely obscurely toothed toward the
apex, thick and coriaceous, glandular-punctate, dark green and very
lustrous above, bright green below, 2'--4' long, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with
a broad conspicuously glandular midrib slightly pubescent on the lower
side, and few remote slender obscure primary veins forked and arcuate
near the much-thickened and revolute margins; gradually deciduous from
May until midsummer. Flowers in aments 3/4'--1' long, with ovate acute
glandular scales; stamens numerous, with oblong slightly emarginate
yellow anthers; pistillate flowers usually in pairs, with an ovate
glabrous ovary and slender bright red styles. Fruit produced sparingly
in elongated spikes, oblong, 1/3'--1/2' long, papillose, black, and
covered with a thin coat of white wax; seed oblong-oval, acute at apex,
rounded at base, 1/8' long, bright orange-brown, with a pale yellow
hilum.

Usually a shrub, with numerous slender stems, occasionally arborescent
and 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a straight trunk 6 deg.--8 deg. tall and 2'--3' in
diameter, and stout branchlets roughened by small scattered lenticels,
coated at first with dense pale tomentum, soon becoming bright
red-brown, scurfy, and glabrous or pubescent. Winter-buds ovoid, acute,
nearly 1/8' long, with numerous loosely imbricated lanceolate acute
red-brown scurfy-pubescent scales. Bark thin, smooth, nearly white.

Distribution. Deep swamps, Round Lake, Jackson County, and
Appalachicola, and Saint Andrews Bay, Florida; near Mobile and Stockton,
Alabama; near Poplarville, Pearl County, Mississippi, and Bogalusa,
Washington Parish, Louisiana.


                3. Myrica californica Cham. Wax Myrtle.

[Illustration: Fig. 161]

Leaves oblanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute at apex, remotely
serrate except at the gradually narrowed base with small incurved teeth,
decurrent on a short stout petiole, thin and firm, dark green and
lustrous above, yellow-green, glabrous or puberulous and marked by
minute black glandular dots below, 2'--4' long, 1/2'--3/4' wide, with a
narrow yellow midrib and numerous obscure primary veins arcuate near the
thickened and revolute margins, slightly fragrant, gradually deciduous
after the end of their first year. Flowers subtended by conspicuous
bractlets, those of the two sexes on the same plant; staminate in oblong
simple aments often 1' long, pistillate in shorter aments in the axils
of upper leaves, androgynous aments occurring between the two with
staminate flowers at their base and pistillate flowers above, or with
staminate flowers also mixed with the pistillate at their apex; scales
of the aments ovate, acute, coated with pale tomentum; stamens numerous,
with oblong slightly emarginate dark red-purple anthers soon becoming
yellow; ovary ovoid, with bright red exserted styles. Fruit in short
crowded spikes ripening in the early autumn and usually falling during
the winter, globose, papillose, dark purple, covered with a thin coat of
grayish white wax; seed pale reddish brown, minute.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg. high, with a trunk 14'--15' in diameter, short
slender branches forming a narrow compact round-topped head, and stout
branchlets coated at first with loose tomentum, dark green or light or
dark red-brown, glabrous or pubescent during their first season,
becoming in their second year much roughened by the elevated leaf-scars,
darker and ultimately ashy gray; usually smaller at the north and toward
the northern and southern limits of its range reduced to a low shrub
often only 3 deg.--4 deg. tall. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, about 1/3' thick, with
loosely imbricated ovate acute dark red-brown tomentose scales nearly
1/2' long when fully grown and long-persistent on the branch. Bark
smooth, compact, 1/16'--1/8' thick, dark gray or light brown on the
surface and dark red-brown internally. Wood heavy, very hard and strong,
brittle, close-grained, light rose color, with thick lighter colored
sapwood.

Distribution. Ocean sand-dunes and moist hillsides in the vicinity of
the coast from the shores of Puget Sound to the neighborhood of Santa
Monica, Los Angeles County, California; of its largest size on the
shores of the Bay of San Francisco.

Occasionally used in California as a garden plant.




                           VII. LEITNERIACEAE.


A tree or shrub, with pale slightly fissured bark, scaly buds, stout
terete pithy branchlets marked by pale conspicuous nearly circular
lenticels and by elevated crescent-shaped angled or obscurely 3-lobed
leaf-scars, very light soft wood, and thick fleshy stoloniferous yellow
roots. Leaves involute in the bud, lanceolate to elliptic-lanceolate,
acuminate or acute and short-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed at
base, entire, with slightly revolute undulate margins, penniveined with
remote primary veins arcuate and united near the margins, and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets, petiolate, at first coated on the lower
surface and on the petioles with thick pale tomentum and puberulous on
the upper surface, thick and firm at maturity, bright green and lustrous
above, pale and villose-pubescent below, deciduous. Flowers in unisexual
aments, with ovate acute concave tomentose scales, the male and female
on different plants, opening in early spring from buds formed the
previous autumn and covered with acute chestnut-brown hairy scales; the
staminate clustered near the end of the branches, their scales bearing
on the thickened stipe a ring of 3--12 stamens, with slender incurved
filaments and oblong light yellow introrse 2-celled anthers opening
longitudinally; perianth 0; pistillate aments scattered, shorter and
more slender than the staminate, their scales bearing in their axils a
short-stalked pistil surrounded by a rudimentary perianth of small
gland-fringed scales, the 2 larger lateral, the others next the axis of
the inflorescence; ovary superior, pubescent, 1-celled, with an
elongated flattened style inserted obliquely, curving inward above the
middle in anthesis, grooved and stigmatic on the inner face; ovule
solitary, attached laterally, ascending, semianatropous; micropyle
directed upward. Fruit an oblong compressed dry drupe thick and rounded
on the ventral, narrowed on the dorsal edge, rounded at base, thin and
pointed at apex, chestnut-brown, rugose, with a thick dry exocarp
closely investing the thin-walled light brown crustaceous rugose nutlet.
Seed flattened, rounded at the ends, light brown, marked on the thick
edge with the oblong nearly black hilum; embryo erect, surrounded by
thin fleshy albumen; cotyledons oblong, flattened; radicle superior,
conical, short, and fleshy.

The family consists of a single genus, _Leitneria_ Chapm., with one
species of the southern United States, named for a German naturalist
killed in Florida during the Seminole War.


                1. Leitneria floridana Chapm. Cork Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 162]

Leaves 4'--6' long, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with petioles 1'--2' in length.
Flowers opening at the end of February or early in March; staminate
aments 1'--1-1/4' long, 1/4' thick, and twice as long as the pistillate.
Fruit solitary or in clusters of 2--4, ripening when the leaves are
about half grown, 3/4' long, 1/4' wide.

A shrub or small tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a slender straight
trunk 4'--5' in diameter above the swollen gradually tapering base,
spreading branches forming a loose open head, and branchlets at first
light reddish brown and thickly coated with gradually deciduous hairs,
becoming in their first winter glabrous or puberulous, especially toward
the ends, and dark red-brown. Winter-buds: terminal broad, conic, 1/8'
long, covered by 10 or 12 oblong nearly triangular closely imbricated
scales coated with pale tomentum and long-persistent at the base of the
branch; lateral scattered, ovoid, flattened. Bark about 1/16' thick,
dark gray faintly tinged with brown, divided by shallow fissures into
narrow rounded ridges. Wood soft, exceedingly light, close-grained, the
layers of annual growth hardly distinguishable, pale yellow, without
trace of heartwood; occasionally used for the floats of fishing-nets.

Distribution. Borders of swamps of the lower Altamaha River, Georgia
(_C. L. Boynton_); muddy saline shores on the coast of the Gulf of
Mexico near Apalachicola, Florida; swampy prairies, Velasco (_E. J.
Palmer_), and swamps of the Brazos River near Columbia, Brazoria County,
Texas; Varner, Lincoln County (_B. F. Bush_), and Moark, Clay County
(_E. J. Palmer_) Arkansas; and in Butler and Dunklin Counties,
southeastern Missouri, here sometimes occupying muddy sloughs of
considerable extent to the exclusion of other woody plants.




                           VIII. JUGLANDACEAE.


Aromatic trees, with watery juice, terete branchlets, scaly buds, the
lateral buds often superposed, 2--4 together, and alternate unequally
pinnate deciduous leaves with elongated grooved petioles and without
stipules, the leaflets increasing in size from the lowest upward,
penniveined, sessile, short-stalked or the terminal usually
long-stalked. Flowers monoecious, opening after the unfolding of the
leaves, the staminate in lateral aments and composed of a 3--6-lobed
calyx in the axil of and adnate to an ovate acute bract, and numerous
stamens inserted on the inner and lower face of the calyx in 2 or
several rows, with short distinct filaments and oblong anthers opening
longitudinally; the pistillate in a spike terminal on a branch of the
year and composed of a 1--3-celled ovary subtended by an involucre free
toward the apex and formed by the union of an anterior bract and 2
lateral bractlets, a 1 or 4-lobed calyx inserted on the ovary, a short
style with 2 plumose stigmas stigmatic on the inner face, and a solitary
erect orthotropous ovule. Fruit drupaceous, the exocarp (husk)
indehiscent or 4-valved, inclosing a thick- or thin-shelled nut divided
by partitions extending inward from the shell, and like the shell more
or less penetrated by internal longitudinal cavities often filled with
dry powder. Seed solitary, 2-lobed from the apex nearly to the middle,
light brown, its coat thin, of 2 layers, without albumen; cotyledons
fleshy and oily, sinuose or corrugated, 2-lobed; radicle short,
superior, filling the apex of the nut. Of the six genera of the Walnut
family two occur in North America.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN GENERA.

  Aments of staminate flowers simple; husk of the fruit indehiscent; nut
        sculptured; pith in plates.
                                                             1. Juglans.
  Aments of staminate flowers branched; husk of the fruit 4-valved; nut
        not sculptured; pith solid.
                                                               2. Carya.




                         1. JUGLANS L. Walnut.


Trees, with furrowed scaly bark, durable dark-colored wood, stout
branchlets, laminate pith, terminal buds with 2 pairs of opposite more
or less open scales often obscurely pinnate at apex, those of the inner
pair more or less leaf-like, and obtuse slightly flattened axillary buds
formed before midsummer and covered with 4 ovate rounded scales, closed
or open during winter. Leaves with numerous leaflets, and terete
petioles leaving in falling large conspicuous elevated obcordate 3-lobed
leaf-scars displaying 3 equidistant U-shaped clusters of dark
fibro-vascular bundle-scars; leaflets conduplicate in the bud, ovate,
acute or acuminate, mostly unequal at base, with veins arcuate and
united near the margins. Aments of the staminate flowers many-flowered,
elongated, solitary or in pairs from lower axillary buds of upper nodes,
appearing from between persistent bud-scales in the autumn and remaining
during the winter as short cones covered by the closely imbricated
bracts of the flowers; calyx 3--6-lobed, its bract free only at the
apex; stamens 8--40, in 2 or several ranks, their anthers surmounted by
a conspicuous dilated truncate or lobed connective; pistillate flowers
in few-flowered spikes, their involucre villose, free only at the apex
and variously cut into a laciniate border (_corolla?_) shorter than the
erect calyx-lobes; ovary rarely of 3 carpels; stigmas club-shaped,
elongated, fimbriately plumose. Fruit ovoid, globose or pyriform, round
or obscurely 4-angled, with a fleshy indehiscent glabrate or hirsute
husk; nut ovoid or globose, more or less flattened, hard, thick-walled,
longitudinally and irregularly rugose, the valves alternate with the
cotyledons, and more or less ribbed along the dorsal sutures and in some
species also on the marginal sutures. Seed more or less compressed,
gradually narrowed or broad and deeply lobed at base, with conspicuous
dark veins radiating from the apex and from the minute basal hilum.

Juglans is confined to temperate North America, the West Indies, South
America from Venezuela to Peru, western and northern China, Korea,
Manchuria, Japan, and Formosa. Eleven species are known. Of exotic
species _Juglans regia_ L., an inhabitant probably originally of China,
is cultivated in the middle Atlantic and southern states and largely in
California for its edible nuts, which are an important article of
commerce. The wood of several species is valued for the interior finish
of houses and for furniture.

_Juglans_, from Jupiter and glands, is the classical name of the
Walnut-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Fruit racemose; nut 4-ribbed at the sutures with smaller intermediate
        ribs, 2-celled at the base; heartwood light brown; leaflets
        11--17, oblong-lanceolate.
                                                   1. J. cinerea (A, C).
  Fruit usually solitary or in pairs; nut without sutural ribs, 4-celled
        at the base; heartwood dark brown.
    Nuts prominently and irregularly ridged with often interrupted
          ridges; leaflets 15--23, ovate-lanceolate.
                                                     2. J. nigra (A, C).
    Nuts more or less deeply longitudinally grooved.
      Nuts up to 1-1/2' in diameter; leaflets 9--13, rarely 19,
            oblong-lanceolate to ovate, acuminate, coarsely serrate.
                                                     3. J. major (F, H).
      Nuts not more than 3/4' in diameter.
        Leaflets 17--23, narrow-lanceolate, long-pointed.
                                                    4. J. rupestris (C).
        Leaflets 11--15 or rarely 19, oblong-lanceolate, acute or
              acuminate, the lower often rounded at the apex.
                                                  5. J. californica (G).
    Nuts obscurely or not at all grooved, up to 2' in diameter; leaflets
          15--19, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, long-pointed.
                                                      6. J. Hindsii (G).


                    1. Juglans cinerea L. Butternut.

[Illustration: Fig. 163]

Leaves 15'--30' long, with stout pubescent petioles, and 11--17
oblong-lanceolate acute or acuminate leaflets 2'--3' long, 1-1/2'--2'
wide, finely serrate except at the unequal rounded base, glandular and
sticky as they unfold, at maturity thin, yellow-green and rugose above,
pale and soft-pubescent below; turning yellow or brown and falling early
in the autumn. Flowers: staminate in thick aments 3'--5' long; calyx
usually 6-lobed, light yellow-green, puberulous on the outer surface,
1/4' long, its bract rusty-pubescent, acute at apex; stamens 8--12, with
nearly sessile dark brown anthers and slightly lobed connectives;
pistillate in 6--8-flowered spikes, constricted above the middle, about
1/3' long, its bract and bractlets coated with sticky white or pink
glandular hairs and rather shorter than the linear-lanceolate
calyx-lobes; stigmas bright red, 1/2' long. Fruit in 3--5 fruited
drooping clusters, obscurely 2 or rarely 4-ridged, ovoid-oblong, coated
with rusty clammy matted hairs, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long with a thick husk;
nut ovoid, abruptly contracted and acuminate at apex, with 4 prominent
and 4 narrow less conspicuous ribs, light brown, deeply sculptured
between the ribs into thin broad irregular longitudinal plates, 2-celled
at the base and 1-celled above the middle; seed sweet, very oily, soon
becoming rancid.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, and sometimes free of branches for half its height; more
frequently divided 20 deg. or 30 deg. above the ground into many stout limbs
spreading horizontally and forming a broad low symmetrical round-topped
head, and dark orange-brown or bright green rather lustrous branchlets
coated at first with rufous pubescence, covered more or less thickly
with pale lenticels, gradually becoming puberulous, brown tinged with
red or orange in their second year and marked by light gray leaf-scars
with large black fibro-vascular bundle-scars and elevated bands of pale
tomentum separating them from the lowest axillary bud. Winter-buds:
terminal 1/2'--2/3' long, 1/4' wide, flattened and obliquely truncate at
apex, their outer scales coated with short pale pubescence; axillary
buds ovoid, flattened, rounded at apex, 1/8' long, covered with rusty
brown or pale pubescence. Bark of young stems and of the branches smooth
and light gray, becoming on old trees 3/4'--1' thick, light brown,
deeply divided into broad ridges separating on the surface into small
appressed plate-like scales. Wood light, soft, not strong,
coarse-grained, light brown, turning darker with exposure, with thin
light-colored sapwood composed of 5 or 6 layers of annual growth;
largely employed in the interior finish of houses, and for furniture.
The inner bark possesses mild cathartic properties. Sugar is made from
the sap, and the green husks of the fruit are used to dye cloth yellow
or orange color.

Distribution. Rich moist soil near the banks of streams and on low rocky
hills, southern New Brunswick to the valley of the St. Lawrence River in
Ontario, the northern peninsular of Michigan, southern Minnesota,
eastern South Dakota, eastern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska, and southward
to central Kansas, northern Arkansas, Delaware, eastern Virginia, and on
the Appalachian Mountains and their foothills to northern Georgia; in
northern Alabama, southern Illinois and western Tennessee; most abundant
northward.

Occasionally cultivated.

x _Juglans quadrangulata_ A. Rehd., a natural hybrid of _J. cinerea_ and
the so-called English Walnut (_J. regia_) is not uncommon in eastern
Massachusetts, and a hybrid of _J. cinerea_ with the Japanese _J.
Sieboldiana_ Maxm. has appeared in the United States.


                   2. Juglans nigra L. Black Walnut.

[Illustration: Fig. 164]

Leaves 1 deg.--2 deg. long, with pubescent petioles, and 15--23 ovate-lanceolate
leaflets 3'--3-1/2' long, 1'--1-1/4' wide, long-pointed, sharply serrate
except at the more or less rounded often unequal base, thin, bright
yellow-green, lustrous and glabrous above, soft-pubescent below,
especially along the slender midrib and primary veins; turning bright
clear yellow in the autumn before falling. Flowers: staminate in stout
puberulous aments 3'--5' long, calyx rotund, 6-lobed, with nearly
orbicular lobes concave and pubescent on the outer surface, its bract
1/4' long, nearly triangular, coated with rusty brown or pale tomentum;
stamens 20--30, arranged in many series, with nearly sessile purple and
truncate connectives; pistillate in 2--5 flowered spikes, ovoid,
gradually narrowed at the apex, 1/4' long, their bract and bractlets
coated below with pale glandular hairs and green and puberulous above,
sometimes irregularly cut into a laciniate border, or reduced to an
obscure ring just below the apex of the ovary; calyx-lobes ovate, acute,
light green, puberulous on the outer, glabrous or pilose on the inner
surface; stigmas yellow-green tinged on the margins with red, 1/2'--3/4'
long. Fruit solitary or in pairs, globose, oblong and pointed at apex,
or slightly pyriform, light yellow-green, roughened by clusters of short
pale articulate hairs, 1-1/2'--2' in diameter, with a thick husk; nut
oval or oblong, slightly flattened, 1-1/8'--1-1/2' in diameter, dark
brown tinged with red, deeply divided on the outer surface into thin or
thick often interrupted irregular ridges, 4-celled at base and slightly
2-celled at the apex; seed sweet, soon becoming rancid.

A tree, frequently 100 deg. and occasionally 150 deg. high, with a straight
trunk often clear of branches for 50 deg.--60 deg. and 4 deg.--6 deg. in diameter, thick
limbs spreading gradually and forming a comparatively narrow shapely
round-topped head of mostly upright rigid branches, and stout branchlets
covered at first with pale or rusty matted hairs, dull orange-brown and
pilose or puberulous during their first winter, marked by raised
conspicuous orange-colored lenticels and elevated pale leaf-scars,
gradually growing darker and ultimately light brown. Winter-buds:
terminal ovoid, slightly flattened, obliquely rounded at apex, coated
with pale silky tomentum, 1/3' long, with usually 4 obscurely pinnate
scales; axillary 1/8' long, tomentose, their outer scales opening at the
apex during the winter. Bark of young stems and branches light brown and
covered with thin scales, becoming on old trees 2'--3' thick, dark brown
slightly tinged with red, and deeply divided into broad rounded ridges
broken on the surface into thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, rather coarse-grained, very durable, rich dark brown, with thin
lighter colored sapwood of 10--20 layers of annual growth; largely used
in cabinet-making, the interior finish of houses, gun-stocks,
air-planes, and in boat and shipbuilding.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands and fertile hillsides, western
Massachusetts to southern Ontario, southern Michigan, southeastern
Minnesota, central and northern Nebraska, central Kansas, eastern
Oklahoma, and southward to western Florida, central Alabama and
Mississippi, and the valley of the San Antonio River, Texas; most
abundant in the region west of the Alleghany Mountains, and of its
largest size on the western slopes of the high mountains of North
Carolina and Tennessee, and on the fertile river bottom-lands of
southern Illinois and Indiana, southwestern Arkansas, and Oklahoma;
largely destroyed for its valuable timber, and now rare.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern United
States, and in western and central Europe. x _Juglans intermedia_ Carr.,
a natural hybrid, of _J. nigra_ with the so-called English Walnut (_J.
regia_) has appeared in the United States and Europe, and on the banks
of the James River in Virginia has grown to a larger size than any other
recorded Walnut-tree. In California a hybrid, known as "Royal," between
_J. nigra_ and _J. Hindsii_ has been artificially produced.


                     3. Juglans major Hell. Nogal.

                 _Juglans rupestris_ var. _major_ Torr.
            _Juglans rupestris_ Sarg., in part, not Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 165]

Leaves 8'--12' long, with slender pubescent petioles and rachis, and
9--13 rarely 19 oblong-lanceolate to ovate acuminate often slightly
falcate coarsely serrate leaflets cuneate or rounded at base, coated
when they first appear with scurfy pubescence, soon becoming glabrous,
or at maturity slightly pubescent on the midrib below, 3'--4', or those
of the lower pairs 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, thin,
yellow-green, with a thin conspicuous yellow midrib and primary veins.
Flowers: staminate in slender puberulous or pubescent aments 8'--10'
long; calyx nearly orbicular, long-stalked, pale yellow-green, 5 or
6-lobed, the lobes ovate, acute, hoary pubescent on the outer surface,
their bract acute, coated with thick pale tomentum; stamens 30--40, with
nearly sessile yellow anthers, and slightly divided connectives;
pistillate not seen. Fruit subglobose to slightly ovoid or oblong,
abruptly contracted at apex into a short point (_J. elaeopyren_ Dode),
densely tomentose when half grown, 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, with a thin
husk covered with close rufous pubescence; nut dark brown or black,
slightly compressed, usually rather broader than high, or ovoid, rounded
or bluntly acute at apex, rounded and sometimes depressed at base,
longitudinally grooved with broad deep grooves, thick shelled; seed
small and sweet.

A tree sometimes 50 deg. high, with a straight trunk occasionally 3 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, or divided at the ground into several large stems, stout
branches forming a narrow head, and slender branchlets thickly coated
when they first appear with rufous pubescence, becoming red-brown,
pubescent or puberulous and marked by many small pale lenticels at the
end of their first season and ashy gray the following year.

Distribution. Banks of streams in the canyons of central and southern New
Mexico and Arizona, and on Oak Creek near Flagstaff, Arizona on the
Colorado plateau (_P. Lowell_).


                  4. Juglans rupestris Engelm. Walnut.

[Illustration: Fig. 166]

Leaves 9'--12' long, with slender pubescent or puberulous petioles and
rachis, and 13--23 narrow lanceolate long-pointed usually falcate finely
serrate leaflets entire or nearly entire on their incurved margins,
cuneate or rounded at base, thin, light green, glabrous or pubescent on
the midrib below, 2'--3' long and 1/3'--2/3' wide. Flowers: staminate in
slender aments, 3'--4' long, pubescent when they first appear, becoming
glabrous; calyx short-stalked, nearly orbicular, light yellow-green,
puberulous on the outer surface, 3--5-lobed with rounded lobes, their
bracts ovate-lanceolate, coated with hoary tomentum; stamens about 20,
with nearly sessile yellow anthers and slightly lobed connectives;
pistillate flowers oblong, narrowed at the ends, thickly coated with
rufous pubescence; bract and bractlets irregularly divided into a
laciniate border rather shorter than the ovate acute calyx-lobes;
stigmas green tinged with red, 1/3' long. Fruit globose or subglobose,
tipped with the persistent remnants of the calyx, pubescent or
puberulous with rusty hairs, 1/2'--3/4' in diameter, with a thin husk;
nut subglobose to slightly ovoid, sometimes obscurely 4-ridged from the
apex nearly to the middle (_J. subrupestris_ Dode), deeply grooved with
longitudinal simple or forked grooves, 4-celled at base, 2-celled at
apex, thick shelled; seed small and sweet.

A shrubby round-headed tree occasionally 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short
generally leaning trunk 18'--30' in diameter, usually branching from
near the ground, and slender branchlets coated with pale scurfy
pubescence often persistent for two or three years, orange-red and
marked by pale lenticels in their first winter and ultimately ashy gray;
often a shrub with clustered stems only a few feet high. Winter-buds:
terminal, 1/4'--1/2' long, compressed, narrowed and often oblique at
apex, covered with pale tomentum; axillary 1/8' long, compressed, coated
with pale pubescence. Wood heavy, hard, not strong, rich dark brown with
thick white sapwood. The beauty of the veneers obtained from the stumps
of the large trees is fast causing their destruction.

Distribution. Limestone banks of the streams of southern, central and
western Texas from the Rio Grande to the mountains in the western part
of the state; western Oklahoma (Kiowa, Greer, Beckham, Rogel, Mills and
Ellis Counties); southeastern New Mexico.

Occasionally cultivated in the eastern United States and in Europe, and
hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts; interesting as producing
the smallest nuts of any of the known Walnut-trees.


                    5. Juglans californica S. Wats.

[Illustration: Fig. 167]

Leaves 6'--9' long, with glandular pubescent petioles and rachis, and
11--15, rarely 19, oblong-lanceolate acute or acuminate glabrous finely
serrate leaflets cuneate or rounded at base, 1'--2-1/2' long and
1/3'--3/4' wide, the lower often rounded at apex. Flowers: staminate in
slender glabrous or puberulous aments 2'--3' long; calyx puberulous on
the outer surface with acute or rarely rounded lobes, its bract,
puberulous; stamens 30--40, with yellow anthers and short connectives
bifid at apex; the pistillate subglobose, puberulous; stigmas yellow,
1/2' long. Fruit globose, 1/3'--3/4' in diameter, with a thin
dark-colored puberulous husk; nut nearly globose, deeply grooved with
longitudinal grooves, thick shelled, 4-celled at base, imperfectly
2-celled at apex; seed small and sweet.

A shrubby round-headed tree or shrub generally 12 deg.--20 deg., rarely 40 deg.--50 deg.
high, usually branching from the ground or with a short trunk 1 deg. or
rarely 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, and slender branchlets coated with scurfy
rufous pubescence when they first appear, glabrous, reddish brown and
marked by pale lenticels at the end of their first season and gray the
following year. Winter-buds coated with rufous tomentum.

Distribution. Banks of streams and bottom-lands in the southern
California coast region from Santa Barbara and the Ojai valley to San
Fernando and the Sierra Santa Monica, and along the foothills of the
Sierra Madre to the San Bernardino Mountains and southward to the Sierra
Santa Anna.

A curious seminal variety (var. _quercina_ Babcock) with compound leaves
composed of 3 oval leaflets, the terminal long-stalked and 2 or 3 times
larger than the lateral leaflets, is occasionally cultivated in
California.


                        6. Juglans Hindsii Rehd.

                _Juglans californica_ S. Wats., in part.
               _Juglans californica_ var. _Hindsii_ Jep.

[Illustration: Fig. 168]

Leaves 9'--12' long, with slender villose pubescent petioles and rachis,
and 15--19, usually 19, ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate long-pointed
often slightly falcate leaflets, serrate with remote teeth except toward
the usually rounded cuneate or rarely cordate base, thin, puberulous
above while young, becoming bright green, lustrous and glabrous on the
upper surface, below furnished with conspicuous tufts of pale hairs, and
villose-pubescent along the midrib and primary veins, 2-1/2'--4' long
and 3/4'--1' wide. Flowers: staminate in slender glabrous or sparingly
villose aments 3'--5' long; calyx elongated, coated like its bract with
scurfy pubescence, divided into 5 or 6 acute lobes; stamens 30--40, with
short connectives bifid at apex; ovary of the pistillate flower
oblong-ovoid, thickly covered with villose pubescence, 1/8' long, the
border of the thin bract and bractlets much shorter than the
calyx-lobes; stigma yellow. Fruit globose, 1-1/4'--2' in diameter, with
a thin dark-colored husk covered with short soft pubescence; nut nearly
globose, somewhat flattened at the ends, faintly grooved with remote
longitudinal depressions, thick shelled; seed small and sweet.

A tree usually 30 deg.--40 deg., occasionally 75 deg. high, with a tall trunk 1 deg.--2 deg.
in diameter, stout pendulous branches forming a narrow round-topped
head, and comparatively slender branchlets thickly coated when they
first appear with villose pubescence, reddish brown and puberulous, and
marked by pale lenticels and small elevated obscurely 3-lobed leaf scars
during their first winter, becoming darker and nearly glabrous in their
second year. Winter-buds coated with hoary tomentum; terminal acute,
compressed, more or less enlarged at apex, 1/4'--1/3' long; axillary
usually solitary, nearly globose, about 1/16' in diameter. Bark
gray-brown, smoothish, longitudinally fissured into narrow plates. Wood
heavy, hard, rather coarse-grained, dark brown often mottled, with thick
pale sapwood of from 8 to 10 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Coast region of central California; banks of the lower
Sacramento River; along streams near the western base of Mt. Diablo, and
on eastern slope of the Napa Range near Atlas Peak east of Napa Valley;
near Loyalton in the Sierra Valley.

Often cultivated in California as a shade tree and as stock on which to
graft varieties of _Juglans regia_ L., and rarely in the eastern states
and in Europe. In California, a hybrid known as "Paradox" between _J.
Hindsii_ and _J. regia_ has been artificially produced.




                        2. CARYA NUTT. Hickory.


                            _Hicoria_ Rafn.

Trees, with smooth gray bark becoming on old trunks rough or scaly,
strong hard tough brown heartwood, pale sapwood and tough terete
flexible branchlets, solid pith, buds covered with few valvate or with
numerous imbricated scales, the axillary buds much smaller than the
terminal. Leaves often glandular-dotted, their petioles sometimes
persistent on the branches during the winter, and in falling leaving
large elevated oblong or semiorbicular more or less 3-lobed emarginate
leaf-scars displaying small marginal clusters and central radiating
lines of dark fibro-vascular bundle-scars; leaflets involute in the bud,
ovate or obovate, usually acuminate, thick and firm, serrate, mostly
unequal at base, with veins forked and running to the margins; turning
clear bright yellow in the autumn. Aments of the staminate flowers
ternate, slender, solitary or fascicled in the axils of leaves of the
previous or rarely of the current year, or at the base of branches of
the year from the inner scales of the terminal bud, the lateral branches
in the axils of lanceolate acute persistent bracts; calyx usually 2
rarely 3-lobed, its bract free nearly to the base and usually much
longer than the ovate rounded or acuminate calyx-lobes; stamens 3--10,
in 2 or 3 series, their anthers ovate-oblong, emarginate or divided at
apex, yellow or red, pilose or hirsute, as long or longer than their
slender connectives; pistillate flowers sessile, in 2--10-flowered
spikes, with a perianth-like involucre, slightly 4-ridged, unequally
4-lobed at apex, villose and covered on the outer surface with yellow
scales more or less persistent on the fruit, the bract much longer than
the bractlets and the single calyx-lobe; stigmas short,
papillose-stigmatic. Fruit ovoid, globose or pyriform, with a thin or
thick husk becoming hard and woody at maturity, 4-valved, the sutures
alternate with those of the nut, sometimes more or less broadly winged,
splitting to the base or to the middle; nut oblong, obovoid or
subglobose, acute, acuminate, or rounded at apex, tipped by the hardened
remnants of the style, narrowed and usually rounded at base, cylindric,
or compressed contrary to the valves, the shell thin and brittle or
thick, hard, and bony, smooth or variously rugose or ridged on the outer
surface, 4-celled at base, 2-celled at apex. Seed compressed, variously
grooved on the back of the flat or concave lobes, sweet or bitter.

_Carya_ is confined to the temperate region of eastern North America
from the valley of the St. Lawrence River to the highlands of Mexico,
and to southern China where one species occurs. Of the seventeen
species, fifteen inhabit the territory of the United States.

The generic name is from {Karya}, an ancient name of the Walnut.


            CONSPECTUS OF THE SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Bud-scales valvate, the inner strap-shaped and only occasionally
        slightly accrescent; fruit more or less broadly winged at the
        sutures; the thin partitions of the nut containing cavities
        filled with dark astringent powder (absent in 3 and 5).
    Shell of the nut thin and brittle; leaflets more or less falcate.
      Aments of staminate flowers nearly sessile, usually on branches of
            the previous year; lobes of the seed entire or slightly
            notched at apex.
        Leaflets 9--17; nut ovoid-oblong, cylindric; seed sweet.
                                                     1. C. pecan (A, C).
        Leaflets 7--13; nut oblong, compressed; seed bitter.
                                                       2. C. texana (C).
      Aments of staminate flowers pedunculate, on branches of the year
            or of the previous year; lobes of the bitter seed deeply
            2-lobed.
        Leaflets 7--9; nut cylindric or slightly compressed.
                                               3. C. cordiformis (A, C).
        Leaflets 7--13; nut compressed, usually conspicuously wrinkled.
                                                     4. C. aquatica (C).
    Shell of the ellipsoidal cylindric nut thick and hard; lobes of the
          sweet seed deeply 2-lobed; leaflets 7--9, occasionally 5,
          rarely slightly falcate; aments of staminate flowers
          long-pedunculate at the base of branches of the year.
                                              5. C. myristicaeformis (C).
  Bud-scales imbricated, the inner becoming much enlarged and often
        highly colored; aments of staminate flowers on peduncles from
        the base of branches of the year, rarely from the axils of
        leaves; fruit usually without wings; partitions of the nut thick
        without cavities filled with astringent powder; seed sweet, its
        lobes deeply 2-lobed.
    Branchlets usually stout (slender in 7); involucre 1/4'--1/2' in
          thickness, opening freely to the base.
      Bark on old trunks separating into long, broad, loosely attached
            plates; nuts pale.
        Branchlets light red-brown; shell of the nut thin.
          Leaflets 5 or rarely 7, obovate to ovate, acute or acuminate;
                nut much compressed, often long-pointed at apex;
                branchlets glabrous or pubescent.
                                                     6. C. ovata (A, C).
          Leaflets 5, lanceolate, acuminate; nut little compressed,
                acute at apex; branchlets slender, glabrous.
                                     7. C. carolinae-septentrionalis (C).
        Branchlets pale orange color, pubescent; leaflets usually 7--9;
              shell of the nut thick.
                                                 8. C. laciniosa (A, C).
      Bark not scaly, on old trunks dark, deeply ridged; leaflets 7--9,
            often subcoriaceous, pubescent below; nut reddish brown,
            often long-pointed, thick shelled; branchlets pubescent.
                                                      9. C. alba (A, C).
    Branchlets slender; leaves 5--7-foliolate; involucre of the fruit
          tardily dehiscent to the middle, indehiscent or opening freely
          to the base; shell of the nut thick, bark close, (sometimes
          scaly in 13).
      Branchlets and leaves not covered when they first appear with
            rusty brown pubescence.
        Involucre of the fruit 3--5.5 mm. in thickness, opening freely
              to the base, leaves usually 7-foliolate; winter-buds
              pubescent.
          Leaflets hoary tomentose below in early spring, slightly
                pubescent at maturity; petioles and rachis glabrous;
                fruit broad-obovoid; branchlets glabrous.
                                                  10. C. leiodermis (C).
          Leaflets covered in early spring with silvery scales, pale and
                pubescent below during the season; petioles and rachis
                more or less thickly covered with fascicled hairs; fruit
                ellipsoidal to obovoid or globose; branchlets glabrous
                or slightly pubescent.
                                                  11. C. pallida (A, C).
        Involucre of the fruit 1--3 mm. in thickness; winter-buds
              glabrous or puberulous.
          Leaves 5, rarely 7-foliolate, glabrous or rarely slightly
                pubescent; fruit obovoid, often narrowed below into a
                stipitate base, the involucre indehiscent or tardily
                dehiscent.
                                                   12. C. glabra (A, C).
          Leaves generally 7-foliolate, glabrous or rarely pubescent;
                fruit ellipsoidal, subglobose or obovoid, the involucre
                opening freely to the base; bark often more or less
                scaly.
                                                   13. C. ovalis (A, C).
      Branchlets and leaves densely covered when they first appear with
            rusty brown pubescence; leaflets usually 5--7; winter-buds
            rusty pubescent.
        Fruit obovoid; the involucre 2--3 mm. in thickness; peduncles of
              the aments of staminate flowers often from the axils of
              leaves; branchlets soon becoming glabrous.
                                                   14. C. floridana (C).
        Fruit subglobose to broadly obovoid, ellipsoidal or pyriform,
              the involucre on the different varieties 2--13 mm. in
              thickness; branchlets pubescent through their first
              season.
                                                 15. C. Buckleyi (A, C).


                   1. Carya pecan Asch. & Gr. Pecan.

[Illustration: Fig. 169]

Leaves 12'--20' long, with slender glabrous or pubescent petioles, and
9--17 lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate more or less falcate long-pointed
coarsely often doubly serrate leaflets rounded or cuneate at the unequal
base; sessile, except the terminal leaflet, or short-stalked, dark
yellow-green and glabrous or pilose above, and pale and glabrous or
pubescent below, 4'--8' long, 1'--3' wide, with a narrow yellow midrib
and conspicuous veins. Flowers: staminate in slender puberulous
clustered aments 3'--5' long, from buds formed in the axils of leaves of
the previous year or occasionally on shoots of the year, sessile or
short-stalked, light yellow-green and hirsute on the outer surface, with
broadly ovate acute lobes rather shorter than the oblong or obovate
bract; stamens 5' or 6'; anthers yellow, slightly villose; pistillate in
few or many flowered spikes, oblong, narrowed at the ends, slightly
4-angled and coated with yellow scurfy pubescence. Fruit in clusters of
3--11, pointed at apex, rounded at the narrowed base, 4-winged and
angled, 1'--2-1/2' long, 1/2'--1' broad, dark brown and more or less
thickly covered with yellow scales, with a thin, brittle husk splitting
at maturity nearly to the base and often persistent on the branch during
the winter after the discharge of the nut; nut ovoid to ellipsoidal,
nearly cylindric or slightly 4-angled toward the pointed apex, rounded
and usually apiculate at base, bright reddish brown, with irregular
black markings with a thin shell and papery partitions; seed sweet,
red-brown, its nearly flat lobes grooved from near the base to the apex
by 2 deep longitudinal grooves.

A tree, 100 deg.--180 deg. high, with a tall massive trunk occasionally 6 deg. or 7 deg.
in diameter above its enlarged and buttressed base, stout slightly
spreading branches forming in the forest a narrow symmetrical and
inversely pyramidal head, or with abundant room a broad round-topped
crown, and branchlets at first slightly tinged with red and coated with
loose pale tomentum, becoming glabrous or puberulous in their first
winter, and marked by numerous oblong orange-colored lenticels and by
large oblong concave leaf-scars with a broad thin membranaceous border
surrounding the lower axillary bud. Winter-buds acute, compressed,
covered with clusters of bright yellow articulate hairs and pale
tomentum; terminal 1/2' long; axillary ovoid, often stalked, especially
the large upper bud. Bark 1'--1-1/2' thick, light brown tinged with red,
and deeply and irregularly divided into narrow forked ridges broken on
the surface into thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, not strong,
brittle, coarse-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thin light
brown sapwood; less valuable than that of most Hickories, and used
chiefly for fuel, and occasionally in the manufacture of wagons and
agricultural implements. The nuts, which vary in size and shape and in
the thickness of their shells and in the quality of the kernels, are an
important article of commerce.

Distribution. Low rich ground in the neighborhood of streams; in the
valley of the Mississippi River, Iowa (Clinton and Muscatine Counties),
southern Illinois, southwestern Indiana (Sullivan and Spencer Counties),
western Kentucky and Tennessee, western Mississippi and Louisiana,
extreme western and southwestern Missouri (Jackson County southward,
common only on the Marias de Cygne River), eastern Kansas to Kickapoo
Island in the Missouri River near Fort Leavenworth, Oklahoma to the
valley of the Salt Fork of the Arkansas River (near Alva, Woods County)
and to creek valleys near Cache, Comanche County (_G. W. Stevens_),
through Arkansas; and in Texas to the valley of the Devil's River and to
that of Warder's Creek, Hardiman County; reappearing on the mountains of
Mexico; most abundant and of its largest size in southern Arkansas and
eastern Texas.

Largely cultivated in the Southern States, in many selected varieties,
for its valuable nuts.


                  2. Carya texana Schn. Bitter Pecan.

[Illustration: Fig. 170]

Leaves 10'--12' long, with slender petioles, and 7--13 lanceolate
acuminate finely serrate leaflets, hoary-tomentose when they unfold, and
more or less villose in the autumn, thin and firm, dark yellow-green and
nearly glabrous above, pale yellow-green and puberulous below, 3'--5'
long, about 1-1/2' wide, the terminal leaflet gradually narrowed to the
acute base and short-stalked, the lateral often falcate, unsymmetrical
at the base, subsessile or short-stalked. Flowers: staminate in villose
aments 2'--3' long, light yellow-green and villose on the outer surface,
with oblong-ovate rounded lobes; pistillate in few fruited spikes,
oblong, slightly 4-angled, villose. Fruit oblong or oblong-obovoid,
apiculate at apex, slightly 4-winged at base, dark brown, more or less
covered with yellow scales, 1-1/2'--2' long, with a thin husk; nut
oblong-ovoid or oblong-obovoid, compressed, acute at the ends,
short-pointed at apex, apiculate at base, obscurely 4-angled, bright
red-brown, rough and pitted, with a thin brittle shell, thin papery
walls, and a low basal ventral partition; seed very bitter, bright
red-brown, flattened, its lobes rounded and slightly divided at apex,
longitudinally grooved and deeply penetrated on the outer face by the
prominent reticulated folds of the inner surface of the shell of the
nut.

A tree, sometimes 100 deg. high on the bottoms of the Brazos River, with a
tall straight trunk 3 deg. in diameter, and ascending branches, or on the
borders of prairies in low wet woods usually 15 deg.--25 deg. tall, with a short
trunk 8'--10' in diameter, small spreading branches forming a narrow
round-topped head, and slender branchlets coated at first with thick
hoary tomentum sometimes persistent until the autumn, bright red-brown
and marked by occasional large pale lenticels during their first winter
and by the large concave obcordate leaf-scars nearly surrounding the
lowest axillary bud, becoming darker in their second season and dark or
light gray-brown in their third year. Winter-buds covered with light
yellow articulate hairs; the terminal oblong, acute, or acuminate,
somewhat compressed, about 1/4' long, and rather longer than the upper
lateral bud. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, light reddish brown, and roughened
by closely appressed variously shaped plate-like scales. Wood
close-grained, tough and strong, light red-brown, with pale brown
sapwood.

Distribution. Bottom-lands and low wet woods; valley of the lower Brazos
River, Texas; near Lake Charles, Calcasieu Parish, and Laurel Hill, West
Feliciana Parish, Louisiana; near Natchez, Adams County, Mississippi;
valley of the Arkansas River (Arkansas Post, Arkansas County, and Van
Buren, Crawford County), Arkansas.


            3. Carya cordiformis K. Koch. Pignut. Bitternut.

[Illustration: Fig. 171]

Leaves 6'--10' long, with slender pubescent or hirsute petioles, and
7--9 lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate or obovate long-pointed sessile
leaflets coarsely serrate except at the equally or unequally cuneate or
subcordate base, thin and firm, dark yellow-green and glabrous above,
lighter and pubescent below, especially along the midrib, 4'--6' long,
3/4'--1-1/4' wide, or occasionally 2'--4' wide (var. _latifolia_ Sarg.).
Flowers: staminate in slightly pubescent aments, 3'--4' long, coated
with rufous hairs like its ovate acute bract; stamens 4, with yellow
anthers deeply emarginate and villose at apex; pistillate in 1 or
2-flowered spikes, slightly 4-angled, covered with yellow scurfy
tomentum. Fruit cylindric or slightly compressed, 3/4'--1-1/2' long,
obovoid to subglobose, or oblong and acute at apex (var. _elongata_
Ashe), 4-winged from the apex to about the middle, with a thin
puberulous husk, more or less thickly coated with small yellow scales;
nut ovoid or oblong, often broader than long, compressed and marked at
base with dark lines along the sutures and alternate with them,
depressed or obcordate, and abruptly contracted into a long or short
point at apex, gray tinged with red or light reddish brown, with a thin
brittle shell; seed bright reddish brown, very bitter, much compressed,
deeply rugose, with irregular cross-folds.

A tree, often 100 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
stout spreading branches forming a broad handsome head, and slender
branchlets marked by oblong pale lenticels, bright green and covered
more or less thickly with rusty hairs when they first appear, reddish
brown and glabrous or puberulous during their first summer, reddish
brown and lustrous during the winter and ultimately light gray, with
small elevated obscurely 3-lobed obcordate leaf-scars. Winter-buds
compressed, scurfy pubescent, bright yellow; terminal 1/3'--3/4' long,
oblique at apex, with 2 pairs of scales; lateral 2-angled, often
stalked, 1/8'--1/4' long, with ovate pointed slightly accrescent scales
keeled on the back. Bark 1/3'--3/4' thick, light brown tinged with red,
and broken into thin plate-like scales separating on the surface into
small thin flakes. Wood heavy, very hard, strong, tough, close-grained,
dark brown, with thick light brown or often nearly white sapwood;
largely used for hoops and ox-yokes, and for fuel.

Distribution. Low wet woods near the borders of streams and swamps or on
high rolling uplands often remote from streams, southern Maine to Quebec
and Ontario, the northern shores of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan,
northern Minnesota, southeastern Nebraska, eastern Kansas, eastern
Oklahoma, and southward to northwestern Florida, Dallas County, Alabama,
and eastern Texas; generally distributed, but not very abundant in all
the central states east and west of the Appalachian Mountains; ranging
farther north than the other species, and growing to its largest size on
the bottom-lands of the lower Ohio basin; the common Hickory of Iowa,
Nebraska, and Kansas.

A natural hybrid, x _C. Brownii_ Sarg. of _C. cordiformis_ with _C.
pecan_, with characters intermediate between those of its supposed
parents, occurs on bottom-land of the Arkansas River near Van Buren,
Crawford County, Arkansas. Probably of the same parentage is the
so-called Galloway Nut found in Hamilton County, Ohio. Another hybrid, x
_C. Brownii_ var. _varians_ Sarg., probably of the same parentage also,
occurs near Van Buren. x _C. Laneyi_ Sarg., a natural hybrid evidently
of _C. cordiformis_ with _C. ovata_, has been found in Rochester, New
York, and trees considered varieties of the same hybrid, var.
_chateaugayensis_ Sarg., occur near the mouth of the Chateaugay River,
Province of Quebec, and at Summertown, Ontario.


                 4. Carya aquatica Nutt. Water Hickory.

[Illustration: Fig. 172]

Leaves 9'--15' long, with slender dark red puberulous or tomentose
petioles, and 7--13 ovate-lanceolate long-pointed falcate leaflets
symmetrical and rounded or cuneate and unsymmetrical and oblique at
base, finely or coarsely serrate, sessile or stalked, 3'--5' long,
1/2'--1-1/2' wide, covered with yellow glandular dots, thin, dark green
above, brown and lustrous or tomentose on the lower surface, especially
on the slender midrib and primary veins, the terminal leaflet more or
less decurrent by its wedge-shaped base on a slender stalk or rarely
nearly sessile. Flowers: staminate in solitary or fascicled hirsute
aments 2-1/2'--3' long, covered like their bract with yellow glandular
pubescence; stamens 6, with yellow puberulous anthers; pistillate in
several flowered spikes, oblong, slightly flattened, 4-angled,
glandular-pubescent. Fruit often in 3 or 4-fruited clusters, much
compressed, usually broadest above the middle, rounded at the slightly
narrowed base, rounded or abruptly narrowed at apex, conspicuously
4-winged, dark brown or nearly black, covered more or less thickly with
bright yellow-scales, 1-1/2' long, 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a thin brittle
husk splitting tardily and usually only to the middle; nut flattened,
slightly obovoid, nearly as broad as long, rounded and abruptly
short-pointed at apex, rounded at the narrow base, 4-angled and ridged,
dark reddish brown, and longitudinally and very irregularly wrinkled,
with a thin shell; seed oblong, compressed, dark brown, irregularly and
usually longitudinally furrowed, very bitter.

A tree, occasionally 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 2 deg. in
diameter, slender upright branches forming a narrow head, and slender
dark reddish brown or ashy gray lustrous branchlets marked by numerous
pale lenticels, at first slightly glandular and coated with loose pale
tomentum, glabrous or puberulous during the summer, and marked during
the winter by small nearly oval or obscurely 3-lobed slightly elevated
leaf-scars, growing dark red-brown and ultimately gray. Winter-buds
slightly flattened, acute, dark reddish brown, covered with caducous
yellow scales; terminal 1/8'--1/4' long, often villose; axillary much
smaller, frequently nearly sessile, often solitary. Bark 1/2'--2/3'
thick, separating freely into long loose plate-like light brown scales
tinged with red. Wood heavy, strong, close-grained, rather brittle, dark
brown, with thick light-colored or often nearly white sapwood;
occasionally used for fencing and fuel.

Distribution. River swamps often inundated during a considerable part of
the year from southeastern Virginia southward through the coast regions
to the shores of Indian River and the valley of the Suwanee River,
Florida, through the maritime portions of the Gulf states to the valley
of the Brazos River, Texas, and northward through western Louisiana to
southeastern Missouri, and to northeastern Louisiana, western
Mississippi, and the valley of the lower Wabash River, Illinois; passing
into the var. _australis_ Sarg. with narrower leaflets, smaller
ellipsoidal fruit, pale red-brown nuts without longitudinal wrinkles,
and with close not scaly bark of the trunk. A large tree in dry sandy
soil; high banks of the St. John's River, near San Mateo, Putnam County,
near Jupiter, Palm Beach County, banks of the Caloosahatchie River at
Alma, Lee County, and Old Town, Lafayette County, Florida; near
Marshall, Harrison County, Texas.


             5. Carya myristicaeformis Nutt. Nutmeg Hickory.

[Illustration: Fig. 173]

Leaves 7'--14' long, with slender terete scurfy-pubescent petioles, and
7--9, occasionally 5, ovate-lanceolate to broadly obovate acute leaflets
usually equally or sometimes unequally cuneate or rounded at the narrow
base, coarsely serrate, short-stalked or nearly sessile, thin and firm,
dark green above, more or less pubescent or nearly glabrous and silvery
white and very lustrous below, 4'--5' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a pale
scurfy pubescent midrib; changing late in the season to bright
golden-bronze color and then very conspicuous. Flowers: staminate in
aments 3'--4' long and coated like the ovate-oblong acute bract and
calyx of the flower with dark brown scurfy pubescence; stamens 6, with
yellow anthers; pistillate oblong, narrowed at the ends, slightly
4-angled, covered with thick brown scurfy pubescence. Fruit usually
solitary, ellipsoidal or slightly obovoid, 4-ridged to the base, with
broad thick ridges, 1-1/2' long, coated with yellow-brown scurfy
pubescence, the husk not more than 1/32' thick, splitting nearly to the
base; nut ellipsoidal or sometimes slightly obovoid, 1' long, 3/4'
broad, rounded and apiculate at the ends, smooth, dark reddish brown,
and marked by longitudinal broken bands of small gray spots covering the
entire surface at the ends with a thick hard and bony shell, a thick
partition, and a low thin dorsal division; seed sweet, small, dark
brown; the lobes deeply 2-lobed at apex.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk often 2 deg. in diameter,
stout slightly spreading branches forming a comparatively narrow rather
open head, and slender branchlets coated with lustrous golden or brown
scales often persistent until the second year, light brown or ashy gray
during their first winter, ultimately dark reddish brown, and marked by
small scattered pale lenticels and small oval emarginate elevated
leaf-scars. Winter-buds covered with thick brown scurvy pubescence;
terminal 1/8'--1/4' long, ovoid, rather obtuse; axillary much smaller,
acute, slightly flattened, sessile or short-stalked, often solitary.
Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, dark brown tinged with red, and broken
irregularly into small thin appressed scales. Wood hard, very strong,
tough, close-grained, light brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood of
80--90 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Banks of rivers and swamps in rich moist soil or rarely on
higher ground; eastern South Carolina, central Alabama, eastern, and
northwestern (bluffs of the Yazoo River at Yazoo City) Mississippi,
southern Arkansas, western Louisiana, southeastern Oklahoma to Clear
Boggy Creek, western Choctaw County, and in Beaumont County, Texas; on
the mountains of northeastern Mexico; rare and local; abundant only in
southern Arkansas.


      6. Carya ovata K. Koch. Shellbark Hickory. Shagbark Hickory.

[Illustration: Fig. 174]

Leaves 8'--14' long, with stout glabrous or pubescent petioles, and 5 or
rarely 7 ovate to ovate-lanceolate or obovate leaflets, acuminate or
rarely rounded at apex, more or less thickly ciliate on the margins,
finely serrate except toward the usually cuneate base, dark yellow-green
and glabrous above, paler, glabrous and lustrous or puberulous below,
the terminal leaflet decurrent on a slender stalk, 5'--7' long, 2'--3'
wide, rather larger than the sessile or short-stalked upper leaflets,
and two or three times as large as those of the lowest pair. Flowers:
staminate opening after the leaves have grown nearly to their full size,
in slender light green glandular-hirsute aments 4'--5' long,
glandular-hirsute, their elongated ovate-lanceolate acute bract two or
three times as long as the ovate concave rounded or acute calyx-lobes;
stamens 4, with yellow or red anthers hirsute above the middle;
pistillate in 2--5-flowered spikes, 1/3' long, clothed with rusty
tomentum. Fruit solitary or in pairs, subglobose, rather longer than
broad or slightly obovoid, depressed at apex, dark reddish brown or
nearly black at maturity, roughened by small pale lenticels, glabrous or
pilose, 1'--2-1/2' long, the husk, 1/8'--1/2' thick, splitting freely to
the base; nut oblong, nearly twice as long as broad, or obovoid and
broader than long, compressed, prominently or obscurely 4-ridged and
angled, acute and gradually or abruptly narrowed or rounded or nearly
truncate at apex, gradually narrowed and rounded at base, pale or nearly
white, with a usually thin shell; seed light brown, lustrous, sweet,
with an aromatic flavor.

A tree, 70 deg.--90 deg. and occasionally 120 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk
3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, in the forest often free of branches for 50 deg.--60 deg.
above the ground and then divided into a few small limbs forming a
narrow head, or with more space sometimes dividing near the ground or at
half the height of the tree into stout slightly spreading limbs, forming
a narrow inversely conic round-topped head of more or less pendulous
branches, and stout branchlets marked with oblong pale lenticels,
covered at first with caducous brown scurf and coated with pale
glandular pubescence, soon bright reddish brown, and lustrous, glabrous
or pubescent, growing dark gray in their second year and ultimately
light gray, and marked by pale and slightly elevated ovate semiorbicular
or obscurely 3-lobed leaf-scars. Winter-buds: terminal broadly ovoid,
rather obtuse, 1/2'--3/4' long, 1/3'--1/2' broad, the 3 or 4 outer
scales nearly triangular, acute, dark brown, pubescent and hirsute on
the outer surface, the exterior scales often abruptly narrowed into long
rigid points and deciduous before the unfolding of the leaves, the inner
scales lustrous, covered with resinous glands, yellow-green often tinged
with red, oblong-obovate, pointed, becoming 2-1/2'--3' long and 1/2'
broad, usually persistent until after the fall of the staminate aments;
axillary buds coated at first with thick white tomentum, becoming
1/3'--1/2' long when fully grown. Bark light gray, 3/4'--1' thick,
separating in thick plates often a foot or more long and 6'--8' wide,
and more or less closely attached to the trunk by the middle, giving it
the shaggy appearance to which this tree owes its common name. Wood
heavy, very hard and strong, tough, close-grained, flexible, light
brown, with thin nearly white sapwood; largely used in the manufacture
of agricultural implements, carriages, wagons, and for axe-handles,
baskets, and fuel. The nut is the common Hickory nut of commerce.

Distribution. Low hills and the neighborhood of streams and swamps in
rich deep moderately moist soil; southern Maine to the valley of the St.
Lawrence River near Montreal, along the northern shores of Lakes Erie
and Ontario to central Michigan, central Wisconsin, southeastern
Minnesota, eastern Iowa and southeastern Nebraska, and southward to
western Florida, northern Alabama and Mississippi, and to eastern
Kansas, eastern Oklahoma, and eastern Texas; ranging further north than
other Hickories with the exception of _C. cordiformis_; and in the
Carolinas ascending to 3000 deg. above the sea in valleys on the western
slope of the Blue Ridge. Variable in the size and shape of the nut and
in the character and amount of pubescence on the leaves and branchlets.
These varieties are distinguished: var. _Nuttallii_ Sarg., with nuts
rounded, obcordate or rarely pointed at apex, rounded or abruptly
pointed at base, much compressed, and only about 3/5' long and
2/5'--1/2' broad; not rare and widely distributed northward. Var.
_complanata_ Sarg., with oblong-obovoid fruit and broadly obovoid much
compressed slightly angled nuts cuneate at base and rounded, truncate or
slightly obcordate at apex; a single tree on the Drushel Farm near Mt.
Hope, Holmes County, Ohio. Var. _ellipsoidalis_ Sarg., with ellipsoidal
much compressed nuts abruptly long-pointed at apex, and slender reddish
branchlets; near Hannibal, Marion County, and Oakwood, Rolles County,
northeastern Missouri, and Indian River, Lewis County, and near
Rochester, Munroe County, New York. Var. _pubescens_ Sarg., differing in
the dense pubescence of pale fascicled hairs on the young branchlets,
and on the petioles, rachis and under surface of the leaflets; bottoms
of the Savannah River, Calhoun Falls, Abbeville County, South Carolina,
bottom of Little River, Walker County, Georgia, Chattanooga Creek,
Hamilton County, Tennessee, Valley Head, DeKalb County, Alabama, and
Columbus, Lowndes County, Starkville, Oktibbeha County, and Brookville,
Noxubee County, Mississippi. More distinct is


                  Carya ovata var. fraxinifolia Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 175]

Leaves 7'--9' long, with slender glabrous or puberulous petioles and 5
lanceolate to slightly oblanceolate acuminate finely serrate leaflets
glabrous except on the under side of the midrib, the terminal leaflet
4'--7' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, the lateral sessile, unsymmetrical at
base, those of the upper pair often larger than the terminal leaflet,
those of the lower pair 2'--2-1/2' long and 1'--1-1/4' wide. Flowers as
in the species. Fruit obovoid, usually rounded at apex, compressed,
about 1-1/4' long, the husk splitting freely to the base, 1/6'--1/5' in
thickness; nut much compressed, rounded at the ends, prominently angled.

A large tree with bark separating in long loose plates, and slender
reddish glabrous or puberulous branchlets.

Distribution. Near Rochester, Munroe County, New York; common; near
Kingston, Ontario, and westward through Ohio and Indiana; at Keosauqua,
Van Buren County, Iowa, and near Myers, Osage County, Oklahoma.


       7. Carya carolinae-septentrionalis Schn. Shagbark Hickory.

[Illustration: Fig. 176]

Leaves 4'--8' long, with slender glabrous petioles, and usually 5 but
occasionally 3 lanceolate long-pointed leaflets gradually narrowed at
the acuminate symmetrical or unsymmetrical base, coarsely serrate,
ciliate with long white hairs as the leaves unfold, thin, dark green
above, pale yellow-green and lustrous below, the upper leaflets 3'--4'
long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, and about twice as large as those of the lower
pair, turning dull brown or yellow-brown some time before falling.
Flowers: staminate in slightly villose aments, glandular-hirsute on the
outer surface, with linear elongated acuminate villose bracts; stamens
4; anthers puberulous; pistillate usually in 2-flowered spikes, oblong
and covered with clustered golden hairs, their bract linear and ciliate
on the margins. Fruit broader than high, or short-oblong, slightly
depressed at apex, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, dark red-brown, roughened by small
pale lenticels, the husk 1/8'--3/8' thick, splitting freely almost to
the base; nut ovoid, compressed, prominently 4-angled, acute at ends,
nearly white or pale brown, with a thin shell; seed light brown, sweet.

A tree, on moist bottom-lands sometimes 80 deg. tall, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, and short small branches forming a narrow oblong head, or on
dry hillsides usually not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. tall, with a trunk
generally not exceeding a foot in diameter, and slender red-brown
branchlets marked by numerous small pale lenticels and by the small low
truncate or slightly obcordate leaf-scars, becoming ultimately dull
gray-brown. Winter-buds: terminal ovoid, gradually narrowed to the
obtuse apex, about 1/4' long, with glabrous bright red-brown and
lustrous acute and apiculate strongly keeled spreading outer scales, the
inner scales becoming when fully grown bright yellow, long-pointed, and
sometimes 2' long; axillary buds oblong, obtuse, not more than 1/16'
long. Bark light gray, 1/4'--3/4' thick, separating freely into thick
plates often a foot or more long, 3' or 4' wide, and long-persistent,
giving to the trunk the shaggy appearance of the northern Shagbark
Hickory. Wood hard, strong, very tough, light reddish brown, with thin
nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Dry limestone hills, river-bottoms and low flat often
inundated woods, frequently in clay soil; central North Carolina to
northern Georgia, and through western North Carolina to eastern
Tennessee, eastern Mississippi, and in Cullman and Dallas Counties,
Alabama.


           8. Carya laciniosa Schn. Big Shellbark. King Nut.

[Illustration: Fig. 177]

Leaves 15'--22' long, with stout glabrous or pubescent petioles often
persistent on the branches during the winter, and 5--9, usually 7, ovate
to oblong-lanceolate or broadly obovate leaflets, the upper 5'--9' long
and 3'--5' wide and generally two or three times as large as those of
the lowest pair, usually equilateral and acuminate at apex, equally or
unequally cuneate or rounded at the often oblique base, finely serrate,
sessile or short-stalked, dark green and lustrous above, pale
yellow-green or bronzy brown and covered with soft pubescence below.
Flowers: staminate in aments 5'--8' long, glabrous or covered with
rufous scurfy tomentum, with linear-lanceolate acute bracts two or three
times as long as the broad rounded calyx-lobes; anthers hirsute, yellow,
more or less deeply emarginate; pistillate in 2--5-flowered spikes,
oblong-ovoid, about twice as long as broad, slightly angled, clothed
with pale tomentum, their linear bracts acute much longer than the
nearly triangular bractlets and calyx-lobe. Fruit solitary or in pairs,
ellipsoidal, ovoid or subglobose, depressed at apex, roughened with
minute orange-colored lenticels, downy or glabrous, light orange-colored
or dark chestnut-brown at maturity, 1-3/4'--2-1/2' long and 1-1/4'--2'
broad, with a hard woody husk pale and marked on the inside with dark
delicate veins, and 1/4'--1/3' thick; nut ellipsoidal or slightly
obovoid, longer than broad or sometimes broader than long, flattened and
rounded at the ends, or gradually narrowed and rounded at base and
occasionally acuminate at apex, more or less compressed, prominently
4-ridged and angled or often 6-ridged, furnished at base with a stout
long point, light yellow to reddish brown, 1-1/4'--2-1/2' long and
1-1/2'--1-3/4' wide, with a hard bony shell sometimes 1/4' thick; seed
light chestnut-brown, very sweet.

A tree, occasionally 120 deg. high, with a straight slender trunk often free
of branches for more than half its height and rarely exceeding 3 deg. in
diameter, comparatively small spreading branches forming a narrow oblong
head, and stout dark or light orange-colored branchlets at first pilose
or covered with pale or rufous pubescence or tomentum, roughened by
scattered elevated long pale lenticels, orange-brown and glabrous or
puberulous during their first winter, and marked by oblong 3-lobed
emarginate leaf-scars. Winter-buds: terminal ovoid, rather obtuse,
sometimes 1' long and 2/3' wide, and three or four times as large as the
axillary buds, usually covered by 11 or 12 scales, the outer dark brown,
puberulous, generally keeled, with a long point at apex, the inner
scales obovate, pointed or rounded at apex, light green tinged with red,
or bright red or yellow, covered with silky pubescence on the outer
face, slightly resinous, becoming 2'--3' long and 1' wide. Bark 1'--2'
thick, light gray, separating into broad thick plates frequently 3 deg.--4 deg.
long, sometimes remaining for many years hanging on the trunk. Wood
heavy, very hard, strong and tough, close-grained, very flexible, dark
brown, with comparatively thin nearly white sapwood. The large nuts are
often sold in the markets of western cities and commercially are not
often distinguished from those of the Shellbark Hickory.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands usually inundated during several weeks
of every year; central and western New York and southeastern Ontario,
and westward through southern Ohio, southern Michigan, Indiana and
Illinois to southeastern Iowa and southeastern Nebraska, through
Missouri and Arkansas to southeastern Kansas and northeastern Oklahoma,
and southward through eastern Pennsylvania to western West Virginia; in
southeastern Tennessee; banks of the Alabama River, Dallas County,
Alabama, and in West Feliciana Parish, Louisiana.

x _Carya Nussbaumerii_ Sarg. with leaves like those of _C. laciniosa_,
slender branchlets, and large fruit of the shape of that of the Pecan
but without sutural wings and white or nearly white nuts, believed to be
a hybrid of these species, has been found near Fayetteville, St. Clair
County, Illinois, at Mt. Vernon, Posey County, Indiana, near Burlington,
Des Moines County, Iowa, and from the neighborhood of Rockville, Bates
County, Missouri.

Trees intermediate in character between _C. laciniosa_ and _C. ovata_
growing on the bottoms of the Genessee River at Golah, Munroe County,
New York, and believed to be hybrids of these species, are x _C.
Dunbarii_ Sarg.


                    9. Carya alba K. Koch. Hickory.

[Illustration: Fig. 178]

Leaves glandular, resinous, fragrant, 8'--12' long, with petioles
covered like the rachis and the under surface of the leaflets with
fascicled hairs, and 5 or 7 oblong-lanceolate to obovate-lanceolate
leaflets gradually or abruptly acuminate, mostly equilateral, equally or
unequally rounded or cuneate at base, minutely or coarsely serrate,
sessile or short-stalked, dark yellow-green and rather lustrous above,
lustrous, paler or light orange-colored or brown on the lower surface,
the upper leaflets 5'--8' long and 3'--5' wide, and two or three times
as large as those of the lowest pair. Flowers: staminate in aments
4'--5' long, with slender light green stems coated with fascicled hairs,
pale yellow-green, scurfy-pubescent, with elongated ovate-lanceolate
bracts ending in tufts of long pale hairs, and three or four times as
long as the calyx-lobes; stamens 4, with oblong bright red hirsute
anthers; pistillate in crowded 2--5-flowered spikes, slightly contracted
above the middle, coated with pale tomentum, the bract ovate, acute,
sometimes 1/4' long, about twice as long as the broadly ovate nearly
triangular bractlets and calyx-lobes; stigmas dark red. Fruit
ellipsoidal or obovoid, gradually narrowed at the ends, acute at apex,
abruptly contracted toward the base, rarely obovoid with a stipe-like
base (var. _ficoides_ Sarg.), or ovoid with a long acuminate apex (var.
_ovoidea_ Sarg.), pilose or nearly glabrous, dark red-brown, 1-1/2'--2'
long, with a husk about 1/8' thick splitting to the middle or nearly to
the base; nut nearly globose, ellipsoidal, obovoid-oblong or ovoid,
narrowed at ends, rounded at base, acute, and sometimes attenuated and
long-pointed at apex, much or only slightly compressed, obscurely or
prominently 4-ridged, light reddish brown, becoming darker and sometimes
red with age, with a very thick hard shell and partitions; in drying
often cracking transversely; seed small, sweet, dark brown, and
lustrous.

A tree, rarely 100 deg. high, usually much smaller, with a tall trunk
occasionally 3 deg. in diameter, comparatively small spreading branches
forming a narrow or often a broad round-topped head of upright rigid or
of gracefully pendulous branches, and stout branchlets clothed at first
with pale fascicled hairs, rather bright brown, nearly glabrous or more
or less pubescent, and marked by conspicuous pale lenticels during their
first season, becoming light or dark gray, with pale emarginate
leaf-scars almost equally lobed, or elongated with the lowest lobe two
or three times as long as the others. Winter-buds: terminal broadly
ovoid, acute or obtuse, 1/2'--3/4' long, two or three times as large as
the axillary buds, the three or four outer bud-scales ovate, acute,
often keeled and apiculate, thick and firm, dark reddish brown and
pilose, usually deciduous late in the autumn, the inner scales ovate,
rounded or acute and short-pointed at apex, light green covered with
soft silky pubescence on the outer, and often bright red and pilose on
the inner surface, becoming 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/2' broad. Bark
1/2'--3/4' thick, close, slightly ridged by shallow irregular
interrupted fissures and covered by dark gray closely appressed scales.
Wood very heavy, hard, tough, strong, close-grained, flexible, rich dark
brown, with thick nearly white sapwood; used for the same purposes as
that of the Shellbark Hickory.

Distribution. Eastern Massachusetts southward to Lake County, Florida,
and eastern Texas, and through Ohio, southwestern Ontario, southern
Michigan, Illinois and Indiana to southeastern Iowa, and through
Missouri to eastern Oklahoma; comparatively rare at the north, growing
on dry slopes and ridges and less commonly on alluvial bottom-lands;
absent from eastern Canada, northern and western New England, and New
York except in the neighborhood of the coast; the most abundant and
generally distributed Hickory-tree of the southern states, growing to
its largest size in the basin of the lower Ohio River and in Missouri
and Arkansas; commonly in southern Arkansas and eastern Texas, and
occasionally in other southern states represented by var. _subcoriacea_
Sarg., differing in its larger, thicker, more pubescent leaflets, more
prominently angled fruit with a thicker husk, larger nuts, and in its
longer winter-buds often 4/5' long and 3/4' in diameter.

x _Carya Schneckii_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _C. alba_ and _C.
pecan_, has been found at Lawrenceville, Lawrence County, Illinois, and
near Muscatine, Muscatine County, Iowa.


                       10. Carya leiodermis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 179]

Leaves 12'--14' long, with slender petioles and rachis slightly or
densely pubescent with fascicled hairs, becoming glabrous or nearly
glabrous, and 7 or rarely 5 thin finely serrate leaflets, long-pointed
at apex, and gradually narrowed, cuneate and unsymmetrical at base, at
first hoary tomentose below and pubescent above, becoming dark green and
lustrous on the upper surface and pale and slightly pubescent on the
lower surface, especially on the stout midrib, the terminal
oblong-obovate with a stalk 1/5'--3/5' in length, or nearly sessile, of
the same shape and often smaller than the nearly sessile upper leaflets,
4'--5' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide, and much larger than the lanceolate
lower leaflets. Flowers: staminate opening after the leaves have grown
nearly to their full size, in slender puberulous aments 4'--4-1/2' long;
bract of the flower ovate, lanceolate, ciliate on the margins with long
white hairs mixed with stipitate glands, a third longer than the ciliate
calyx-lobes; stamens 4, anthers red, covered with long rigid white
hairs; pistillate in short spikes, their involucre and bracts densely
clothed with white hairs. Fruit broadly obovoid, smooth, glabrous or
puberulous, covered with scattered white scales, 1-1/2'--1-3/4' long,
about 1-1/4' in diameter, the husk 1/5' to nearly 1/4' thick, opening
freely to the base usually only by two sutures; nut ellipsoidal or
slightly obovoid, little compressed, rounded at the ends, tinged with
red, with a shell 1/6'--1/5' thick; seed small and sweet.

A tree 60 deg.--75 deg. tall with a trunk occasionally 3 deg. in diameter, stout
often pendulous branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and slender
reddish brown lustrous branchlets puberulous or pubescent when they
first appear, becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous by the end of their
first season. Winter-buds: terminal acute, about 1/2' long, the outer
scales pubescent, the inner covered with appressed pale hairs and
ciliate on the margins; axillary buds ovoid and rounded at apex or
subglobose. Bark close, pale, only slightly ridged.

Distribution. Low wet woods; Louisiana to southern Arkansas, and in
northwestern Mississippi (bluffs, Yazoo County); most abundant in
western Louisiana from the neighborhood of the coast to the valley of
Red River, and in Tangipahoa Parish east of the Mississippi River.

Passing into var. _callicoma_ Sarg., differing in the thinner husk of
the fruit and in the bright red color of the unfolding leaves.

Distribution. Low wet woods; valley of the Calcasieu River (near Lake
Charles), western Louisiana to that of the Neches River (near Beaumont),
Texas; in western and southern Mississippi (Warren, Adams, Hinds,
Lafayette, Copiah, Lowndes and Oktibbeha Counties).


                        11. Carya pallida Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 180]

Leaves 7'--15' long, with slender petioles and rachis covered, like the
under side of the midrib, with prominent persistent clusters of
fascicled hairs mixed with silvery scales, and usually 7, rarely 9,
lanceolate or oblanceolate leaflets, the terminal rarely obovate, finely
serrate, resinous, fragrant, acuminate and long-pointed at apex, cuneate
or rounded and often unsymmetrical at base, covered in spring with small
silvery peltate scales, and at maturity light green and lustrous above,
pale and pubescent or puberulous below, the terminal short-stalked or
nearly sessile, 4'--6' long and 1'--2' wide, and as large or slightly
larger than the upper lateral leaflets, those of the lower pairs usually
not more than 2' long and 1/2' wide. Flowers: staminate in aments
covered with fascicled hairs and silvery scales, 2-1/2'--5' long,
puberulous and glandular on the outer surface, with linear acuminate
bracts; stamens 4, anthers hirsute; pistillate usually solitary, oblong,
covered with yellow scales, their bract ovate-lanceolate, ciliate on the
margin. Fruit pubescent and covered with yellow scales, ellipsoidal to
obovoid, broad-obovoid, subglobose to depressed-globose, and from
1/2'--1-1/2' in length, with a husk from 1/8'--1/6' in thickness,
splitting tardily to the base by 2 or 3 of the sutures, or occasionally
remaining unopened until midwinter; nut white, rounded at the ends, or
obcordate or obtusely pointed at apex, compressed, more or less
prominently ridged nearly to the base, with a shell 1/8'--1/12' thick;
seed small and sweet.

A tree occasionally 90 deg.--110 deg. high, with a tall trunk 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, usually not more than 30 deg.--40 deg. tall, with a trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, stout branches, the upper erect, the lower often pendulous,
and slender red-brown glabrous or pubescent branchlets. Winter-buds
acute or obtuse, reddish brown, puberulous and covered with silvery
scales, the terminal 1/4' long with 6--9 scales and rather larger than
the lateral buds usually covered with fewer scales. Bark of large trees
grown in good soil pale and slightly ridged, that of trees on dry
ridges, rough, deeply furrowed, dark gray and southward often nearly
black. Wood brown with nearly white sapwood; probably little used except
as fuel.

Distribution. Sandy soil in the neighborhood of Cape May, New Jersey, in
southern Delaware, and in the southern part of the Maryland peninsula;
common in rich soil in Gloucester and James City Counties, Virginia,
growing here to its largest size, and southward from southeast Virginia
through the Piedmont region of North and South Carolina, ascending to
altitudes of 2200 deg. in the mountain valleys of these states; common in
northern and central Georgia and southeastern Tennessee, occasionally
reaching the Georgia coast and the southwestern part of that state; in
western Florida, through northern and central Alabama to Dallas County,
and through southern Mississippi to northeastern Louisiana (near
Kentwood, Tangipahoa Parish); in Mississippi extending northward to the
valley of the Yazoo River in Yazoo County; in northern Tennessee
(Lexington, Henderson County); in Alabama the common Hickory on the dry
gravelly and poor soils of the upland table-lands and ridges of the
central part of the state.


                    12. Carya glabra Sweet. Pignut.

                         _Carya porcina_ Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 181]

Leaves 8'--12' long, with slender glabrous petioles and rachis, and 5 or
rarely 7 lanceolate or oblanceolate finely serrate leaflets acuminate at
the ends, yellow-green and glabrous above, glabrous, or pubescent on the
midrib below, the terminal leaflet sometimes obovate, 4'--4-1/2' long
and 5' or 6' wide, and raised on a glabrous or sparingly pubescent
stalk, 1/4'--1/2' in length, the lateral leaflets sessile, those of the
upper pair about the size of the terminal leaflet, and two or three
times larger than those of the lower pair. Flowers: staminate in
short-stalked pubescent aments 2'--2-1/2' long, yellow-green, the bract
villose, much longer than the calyx-lobes; stamens 4, anthers yellow,
villose toward the apex; pistillate in few-flowered spikes, oblong,
coated with hoary tomentum like the lanceolate acuminate bract. Fruit
obovoid, compressed, rounded at apex, gradually narrowed below and often
abruptly contracted into a stipe-like base, about 1' long and 3/4' wide,
with a husk from 1/12'--1/8' in thickness, opening late by one or two
sutures or often remaining closed; nut obovoid, compressed, without
ridges, rounded or slightly obcordate at apex, gradually narrowed and
rounded below, with a hard thick shell; seed small and sweet.

A tree 60 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--2-1/2 deg. in diameter, with small
spreading often drooping branches forming a tall narrow head, and
slender glabrous reddish branchlets marked by pale lenticels.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, light brown, glabrous, 1/3'--1/2' long and
1/5'--1/4' in diameter, the inner scales covered with close pubescence.
Bark close, ridged, light gray. Wood heavy, hard, strong and tough,
flexible, light or dark brown, with thick lighter-colored sapwood; used
for the handles of tools and in the manufacture of wagons and
agricultural implements, and largely for fuel.

Distribution. Hillsides and dry ridges; southwestern Vermont to western
New York, southeastern Ontario, southern Indiana and southwestern
Illinois, and southward to Delaware, the District of Columbia and
eastern Virginia, and along the Appalachian Mountains to North Carolina;
in northern, central and eastern Georgia, northern Alabama and eastern
Mississippi.

The name "Pignut" usually applied to this tree and to the forms of _C.
ovalis_ Sarg., especially in the north, properly belongs to _C.
cordiformis_ Schn.

Passing into


                   Carya glabra var. megacarpa Sarg.

                        _Carya megacarpa_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 182]

Leaves 12'--14' long, with slender glabrous petioles and 5--7 lanceolate
to oblanceolate leaflets long-pointed and acuminate at apex, gradually
narrowed and unsymmetrical at base, finely serrate, glabrous or very
rarely pubescent, often furnished below with small clusters of axillary
hairs, the three upper 8'--10' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide and about
twice as large as those of the lowest pair. Flowers: staminate in
slightly villose aments 2-1/2'--3' in length, villose, their bract
long-pointed, acuminate, villose, twice longer than the calyx-lobes,
stamens 4--6, anthers yellow, villose above the middle; pistillate in
short-stalked spikes, their involucre only slightly angled, covered with
pale yellow hairs, the bract acuminate, twice longer than the bractlets
and calyx-lobes. Fruit oblong-obovoid with a stipe-like base to
short-obovate and rounded or abruptly cuneate at base, rarely depressed
at apex, slightly flattened, often covered with bright yellow scales,
1'--2' long, 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, with a husk 1/8'--1/5' in
thickness, opening tardily to the middle usually by one or by two
sutures, or often remaining closed; nut broadest toward the rounded apex
or oblong and occasionally acute at apex, gradually narrowed and acute
at base, often compressed, slightly or rarely prominently angled (f.
_angulata_ Sarg.), with a shell 1/8'--1/6' in thickness; seed small and
sweet.

A tree 50 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk up to 2 deg. in diameter, stout spreading
and drooping branches, and stout or rarely slender glabrous branchlets,
reddish brown at the end of their first season, becoming dark
gray-brown. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, glabrous, up to 1/2' in length,
the inner scales puberulous. Bark close, only slightly ridged, light or
dark gray.

Distribution. Rochester, Munroe County, New York, through southern Ohio
and Indiana to southern Illinois (Tunnel Hill, Johnson County); coast of
New Jersey; District of Columbia and southward to the shores of Indian
River and the valley of the Callusahatchie River, Florida, and through
southern Alabama to western Louisiana; one of the commonest Hickories in
the coast region of the south Atlantic and east Gulf states,
occasionally ranging inland to central and northern Georgia and western
Mississippi.


                         13. Carya ovalis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 183]

Leaves 6'--10' long, with slender petioles often scurfy-pubescent early
in the season, soon glabrous, and 7 or rarely 5 lanceolate to
oblanceolate, or occasionally obovate finely serrate leaflets,
long-pointed and acuminate or rarely rounded at apex, cuneate and
unsymmetrical at base, early in the season often scurfy-pubescent and
furnished below with small axillary tufts of pale hairs, soon glabrous,
the upper 6' or 7' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, and raised on a stalk
1/4'--1/2' in length, the lateral sessile, those of the upper pairs as
large or slightly smaller than the terminal leaflet. Flowers: staminate
in puberulous aments 6'--7' long, pubescent, their bracts twice longer
than the ovate acute calyx-lobes; stamens 4, anthers yellow, thickly
covered with pale hairs; pistillate in 1 or 2-flowered spikes, obovoid,
more or less thickly covered with yellow scales. Fruit ellipsoidal,
acute or rounded at apex, rounded at base, puberulous, 1'--1-1/4' long,
about 3/4' in diameter, with a husk 1/12'--1/10' in thickness, splitting
freely to the base; nut pale, oblong, slightly flattened, rounded at
base, acute or acuminate and 4-angled at apex, the ridges extending for
one-third or rarely for one-half of its length, with a shell rarely more
than 1/5' in thickness; seed small and sweet.

A tree sometimes 100 deg. high, with a tall trunk occasionally 3 deg. in
diameter, small spreading branches forming a narrow often pyramidal
head, and slender lustrous red-brown branchlets marked by pale
lenticels, often slightly pubescent when they first appear, soon
glabrous. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, acute or acuminate; the terminal
often 1/2' long and twice as large as the lateral, the outer scales
red-brown, lustrous and glabrous, the inner covered with close pale
tomentum. Bark slightly ridged, pale gray, usually separating freely
into small plate-like scales, or occasionally close. Wood heavy, hard
and tough, flexible, light or dark brown, with thick lighter-colored
sapwood; used for the handles of tools, in the manufacture of wagons and
agricultural implements, and largely for fuel.

Distribution. Hillsides and rich woods; western New York, eastern
Pennsylvania and the District of Columbia to southern Illinois and
central Iowa (Ames, Story County), and southward to the mountains of
North Carolina and Tennessee, and to central Georgia and Alabama;
usually rare and local; most abundant and generally distributed in
Indiana. With its varieties usually but incorrectly called "Pignut."

The following varieties differing in the shape of their fruit are
distinguished:


                   Carya ovalis var. obcordata Sarg.

                  _Carya microcarpa_ Darling. in part.
                  _Hicoria microcarpa_ Britt. in part.

[Illustration: Fig. 184]

Fruit subglobose to short-oblong or slightly obovoid, 1'--1-1/4' in
diameter, with a husk 1/12'--1/8' in thickness, splitting freely to the
base or nearly to the base by often narrow-winged sutures; nut much
compressed, slightly angled and often broadest above the middle, rounded
and usually more or less obcordate at apex, narrowed and rounded at
base.

Distribution. Southern New England to southern Wisconsin, southwestern
Missouri, western North Carolina, central and eastern Georgia, eastern
Mississippi and central Alabama; the common and most widely distributed
northern variety of _Carya ovalis_; common in the mountain districts of
central Alabama; varying to the f. _vestita_ Sarg. with stouter
branchlets covered during their first year with rusty tomentum and more
or less pubescent in their second and third seasons, leaflets slightly
pubescent below, and with more compressed nuts and puberulous
winter-buds. A single tree near Davis Pond, Knox County, Indiana.


                    Carya ovalis var. odorata Sarg.

                  _Carya microcarpa_ Darling. in part.
                  _Hicoria microcarpa_ Britt. in part.
             _Hicoria glabra_ var. _odorata_ Sarg. in part.

[Illustration: Fig. 185]

Fruit subglobose or slightly longer than broad, much flattened,
1/2'--3/5' in diameter, with a husk not more than 1/24' in thickness,
splitting freely to the base by sutures sometimes furnished with narrow
wings; nut compressed, rounded at apex, rounded or acute at base,
slightly or not at all ridged, pale or nearly white, with a shell 1/12'
or less in thickness.

Distribution. Southern New England, eastern Pennsylvania and the
District of Columbia to western New York, and southeastern Ontario, and
through Ohio and Indiana to southern Illinois; near Atlanta, Georgia,
and Starkville, Oktibbaha County, Mississippi; less variable in the size
and shape of the fruit than the other varieties of _C. ovalis._


                    Carya ovalis var. obovalis Sarg.

                    _Hicoria glabra_ Sarg. in part.

[Illustration: Fig. 186]

Fruit more or less obovoid, about 1' long and 4/5' in diameter, with a
husk 1/12'--1/8' thick, splitting freely to the base.

Distribution. Southern New England to Missouri and northern Arkansas; on
the mountains of North Carolina, on the coast of Georgia and in north
central Alabama. The common "Pignut" in the middle western states,
varying to f. _acuta_ Sarg. with nuts pointed at the ends and closer
bark; only near Rochester, Munroe County, New York.

Other forms of _C. ovalis_ are var. _hirsuta_ Sarg. (_Hicoria glabra
hirsuta_ Ashe) with obovoid compressed fruit narrowed into a stipitate
base, with a husk 1/12'--1/8' in thickness, scaly bark, pubescent
winter-buds, leaves with pubescent petioles and leaflets pubescent on
the lower surface; a common tree on the mountains of North Carolina up
to altitudes of 2000 deg. above the sea; and var. _borealis_ Sarg. (_Hicoria
borealis_ Ashe) with pubescent branchlets and winter-buds, leaves
pubescent early in the season, ellipsoidal or ovoid flattened fruit with
a husk 1/8'--1/5' in thickness, an ovoid nut ridged to the base, and
scaly bark; only in southeastern Michigan.


                       14. Carya floridana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 187]

Leaves 6'--8' long, with slender petioles rusty pubescent when they
first appear, soon glabrous, with 5 or rarely 7 lanceolate to
oblanceolate leaflets long-pointed and acuminate at apex, unsymmetrical
and rounded or cuneate at base, serrate with remote cartilaginous teeth,
sessile or the terminal leaflet short-stalked, covered when they unfold
with rufous pubescence, soon glabrous, at maturity thin, conspicuously
reticulate-venulose, yellow-green above, often brownish below, the upper
three 3-1/2'--4' long, 1'--2' wide, and about twice larger than those of
the lowest pair. Flowers: staminate in long-stalked scurfy pubescent
aments 1'--1-1/2' in length, produced at the base of branchlets of the
year from the axils of bud-scales, and often of leaves, scurfy
pubescent, their bract ovate, acuminate, a third longer than the
calyx-lobes; stamens 4 or 5, anthers yellow, slightly villose near the
apex; pistillate in 1 or 2-flowered spikes, obovoid, thickly covered,
like their bracts, with yellow scales. Fruit obovoid, gradually
narrowed, rounded and sometimes slightly depressed at apex, narrowed
below into a short stipe-like base, occasionally slightly winged at the
sutures, often roughened by prominent reticulate ridges, puberulous and
covered with small yellow scales, 4/5'--1-1/2' long, 3/4'--1' in
diameter with a husk 1/12'--1/8' thick, splitting freely to the base by
2 or 3 sutures; nut pale or reddish, subglobose, not more than 3/5' in
diameter, or ovoid or rarely oblong, acute at base, narrowed and rounded
at apex, slightly compressed, with a shell 1/12'--1/8' in thickness.

A tree 50 deg.--70 deg. high with a trunk up to 20' in diameter, slender
spreading branches forming a broad head, and slender branchlets at first
coated with rufous pubescence, soon puberulous or glabrous, bright
red-brown and marked by pale lenticels during their first winter; or in
dry sand often a shrub producing abundant fruit on stems 3 deg. or 4 deg. high.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute or obtuse, the outer scales covered with thick
rusty pubescence and more or less thickly with yellow or rarely silvery
scales, the inner coated with pale pubescence; the terminal 1/5'--1/3'
in length and twice as large as the axillary buds. Bark slightly ridged,
close dark gray-brown. Wood dark brown, with pale sapwood; probably used
only for fuel.

Distribution. Dry sandy ridges and low hills, Florida; east coast,
Volusia County to Jupiter Island, Palm Beach County; in the interior of
the peninsula as a shrub, from Orange to De Soto Counties, and on the
shores of Pensacola Bay.


                       15. Carya Buckleyi Durand.

                  _Carya texana_ Buckl., not Le Conte.

[Illustration: Fig. 188]

Leaves 8'--12' long, with slender petioles rusty pubescent and sparingly
villose early in the season, and 5--7, usually 7, lanceolate to
oblanceolate acuminate bluntly serrate sessile leaflets, the terminal
occasionally broadly obovate and abruptly pointed, and sometimes raised
on a winged stalk 1/4--1/2' in length, when they unfold thickly covered
with rusty pubescence mixed with small white scales and villose on the
lower side of the midrib and veins, and at maturity dark green,
lustrous, glabrous or puberulous along the midrib above, paler, glabrous
or sparingly villose and furnished with small tufts of axillary hairs
below, the upper three leaflets 4'--6' long and 2'--2-1/4' wide, and
twice the size of those of the lowest pair. Flowers: staminate in rusty
pubescent aments 2'--3' long, their bract slender, long acuminate, 3 or
4 times longer than the acuminate calyx-lobes; stamens 4 or 5, anthers
yellow, slightly villose toward the apex; pistillate in 1 or 2-flowered
short-stalked spikes, slightly angled, thickly coated with rufous hairs
like the bract and bractlets. Fruit subglobose, puberulous,
1-1/4'--1-3/4' in diameter, with a husk 1/12'--1/8' thick, splitting
freely to the base by slightly winged sutures; nut slightly compressed,
rounded at base, abruptly narrowed and acute at apex, 4-angled above the
middle or nearly to the base, dark reddish brown, conspicuously
reticulate-venulose with pale veins, with a shell about 1/8' thick; in
drying often cracking longitudinally between the angles; seed small and
sweet.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--45 deg. or rarely 60 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--24' in
diameter, large spreading often drooping more or less contorted branches
forming a narrow head, and slender light red-brown branchlets marked by
pale lenticels, more or less densely rusty pubescent during their first
season and dark gray-brown and glabrous or nearly glabrous the following
year. Winter-buds ovoid, covered with rusty pubescence mixed with
silvery scales, furnished at apex with long pale hairs; the terminal bud
abruptly contracted and long-pointed at apex, 2/5'--1/2' in length and
1/4'--1/3' in diameter, and 2 or 3 times larger than the flattened acute
lateral buds. Bark thick, deeply furrowed, rough, dark often nearly
black. Wood hard, brittle, little used except for fuel.

Distribution. Dry sandy uplands with Post and Black Jack Oaks; northern
and eastern Texas (Grayson, Cherokee, San Augustine and Atascosa
Counties), and in central Oklahoma (dry sand hills, Muskogee County).


                  Carya Buckleyi var. arkansana Sarg.

                        _Carya arkansana_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 189]

Differing from _Carya Buckleyi_ in the shape of the fruit and sometimes
in the bark of the trunk. Fruit obovoid, rounded at apex, rounded or
gradually narrowed or abruptly contracted into a more or less developed
stipe at base, or ellipsoidal, or ovoid and rounded at the ends,
4/5'--1-1/2' in length and in diameter, with a husk 1/12'--1/6' thick,
splitting to the middle or nearly to the base by slightly winged
sutures; nut oblong to slightly obovoid, rounded at the ends,
compressed, slightly 4-angled occasionally to the middle, pale brown,
with a shell 1/6'--1/5' in thickness; seed small and sweet.

A tree from 60 deg.--75 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg. in diameter; southward
usually much smaller. Bark on some trees dark gray, irregularly
fissured, separating into thin scales, and on others close, nearly black
and deeply divided into rough ridges.

Distribution. Dry hillsides, rocky ridges, or southward on sandy upland;
southwestern Indiana (Knox County), southern Illinois, northeastern
Missouri and southward through Missouri and Arkansas to eastern
Oklahoma, western Louisiana and northern and eastern Texas to the valley
of the Atascosa River, Atascosa County; the common Hickory of the Ozark
Mountain region, Arkansas, and here abundant on dry rocky ridges at
altitudes of 1200 deg.--1800 deg.; in Texas the common Hickory from the coast to
the base of the Edwards Plateau; trees with the smallest fruit
northward; those with the largest fruit with thickest husks in
Louisiana, and in southern Arkansas (f. _pachylemma_ Sarg.), a tree with
slender nearly glabrous branchlets, deeply fissured pale gray bark,
rusty pubescent winter-buds and fruit 2-1/2' long and 2' in diameter,
with a husk 1/2' in thickness.


                   Carya Buckleyi var. villosa Sarg.

                 _Hicoria glabra_ var. _villosa_ Sarg.
                        _Hicoria villosa_ Ashe.
                         _Carya villosa_ Schn.
                 _Carya glabra_ var. _villosa_ Robins.

[Illustration: Fig. 190]

Leaves 6'--10' long, with slender petioles and rachis pubescent with
fascicled hairs early in the season, generally becoming glabrous, and
5--7, usually 7, lanceolate to oblanceolate finely serrate leaflets
long-pointed and acuminate at apex, cuneate or rounded and often
unsymmetrical at base, sessile or the terminal leaflet sometimes
short-stalked, dark green and glabrous above, pale and pubescent below,
the lower side of the midrib often covered with fascicled hairs, the
upper leaflets 3'--4' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, and twice as long as
those of the lowest pair. Flowers: staminate in aments pubescent with
fascicled hairs, 4'--8' long, pubescent, their bract acuminate, not much
longer than the rounded calyx-lobes; pistillate in 1 or 2-flowered
spikes, rusty pubescent, slightly angled. Fruit obovoid to ellipsoidal,
rounded at apex, cuneate and often abruptly narrowed into a stipitate
base, rusty pubescent and covered with scattered yellow scales, about 1'
long and 3/4' in diameter, with a husk 1/12' in thickness, splitting
tardily to the base by 1 or 2 sutures or indehiscent; nut ovoid, rounded
at base, pointed at apex, only slightly angled, faintly tinged with red,
with a shell rarely more than 1/12' in thickness; seed small and sweet.

A tree 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, stout often
contorted branches and slender branchlets covered at first with rusty
pubescence mixed with fascicled hairs and pubescent or glabrous during
their first winter. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, covered with rusty
pubescence mixed with yellow scales, often furnished near the apex with
tufts of white hairs, the terminal 1/4' long and about twice as large as
the compressed axillary buds.

Distribution. Dry rocky hills, Allenton, Saint Louis County, Missouri.
Distinct from other forms of _Carya Buckleyi_ in the often indehiscent
fruit and more numerous and longer fascicled hairs, and possibly better
considered a species.




                             IX. BETULACEAE.


Trees, with sweet watery juice, without terminal buds, their slender
terete branchlets marked by numerous pale lenticels and lengthening by
one of the upper axillary buds formed in early summer, and alternate
simple penniveined usually doubly serrate deciduous stalked leaves,
obliquely plicately folded along the primary veins, their petioles in
falling leaving small semioval slightly oblique scars showing three
equidistant fibro-vascular bundle-scars; stipules inclosing the leaf in
the bud, fugacious. Flowers vernal, appearing with or before the
unfolding of the leaves, or rarely autumnal, monoecious, the staminate
1--3 together in the axils of the scales of an elongated pendulous
lateral ament and composed of a 2--4-parted membranaceous calyx and
2--20 stamens inserted on a receptacle, with distinct filaments and
2-celled erect extrorse anthers opening longitudinally, or without a
calyx, the pistillate in short lateral or capitate aments, with or
without a calyx, a 2-celled ovary, narrowed into a short style divided
into two elongated branches longer than the scales of the ament and
stigmatic on the inner face or at the apex, and a single anatropous
pendulous ovule in each cell of the ovary. Fruit a small mostly 1-celled
1-seeded nut, the outer layer of the shell light brown, thin and
membranaceous, the inner thick, hard, and bony. Seed solitary by
abortion, filling the cavity of the nut, suspended, without albumen, its
coat membranaceous, light chestnut-brown; cotyledons thick and fleshy,
much longer than the short superior radicle turned toward the minute
hilum.

Of the six genera, all confined to the northern hemisphere, five are
found in North America; of these only Corylus is shrubby.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Scales of the pistillate ament deciduous; nut wingless, more or less
        inclosed in an involucre formed by the enlargement of the bract
        and bractlets of the flower; staminate flowers solitary in the
        axils of the scales of the ament; calyx 0; pistillate flowers
        with a calyx.
    Staminate aments covered during the winter: involucre of the fruit
          flat, 3-cleft, foliaceous.
                                                            1. Carpinus.
    Staminate aments naked during the winter: involucre of the fruit
          bladder-like, closed.
                                                              2. Ostrya.
  Scales of the pistillate ament persistent and forming a woody
        strobile; nut without an involucre, more or less broadly winged;
        staminate flowers 3--6 together in the axils of the scales of
        the ament; calyx present; pistillate flowers without a calyx.
    Pistillate aments solitary, their scales 3-lobed, becoming thin,
          brown, and woody, deciduous; stamens 2; filaments 2-branched,
          each division bearing a half-anther; winter-buds covered by
          imbricated scales.
                                                              3. Betula.
    Pistillate aments racemose, their scales erose or 5-toothed,
          becoming thick, woody, and dark-colored, persistent; stamens
          1--3 or 4; filaments simple; wings of the nut often reduced to
          a narrow border; winter-buds without scales.
                                                               4. Alnus.




                        1. CARPINUS L. Hornbeam.


Trees, with smooth close bark, hard strong close-grained wood, elongated
conic buds covered by numerous imbricated scales, the inner lengthening
after the opening of the buds. Leaves open and concave in the bud,
ovate, acute, often cordate; stipules strap-shaped to oblong-obovate.
Flowers: staminate in aments emerging in very early spring from buds
produced the previous season near the ends of short lateral branchlets
of the year and inclosed during the winter, composed of 3--20 stamens
crowded on a pilose receptacle adnate to the base of a nearly sessile
ovate acute coriaceous scale longer than the stamens; filaments short,
slender, 2-branched, each branch bearing a 1-celled oblong yellow
half-anther hairy at the apex; pistillate in lax semi-erect aments
terminal on leafy branches of the year, in pairs at the base of an ovate
acute leafy deciduous scale, each flower subtended by a small acute
bract with two minute bractlets at its base; calyx adnate to the ovary
and dentate on the free narrow border. Nut ovoid, acute, compressed,
conspicuously longitudinally ribbed, bearing at the apex the remnants of
the calyx, marked on the broad base by a large pale scar and separating
at maturity in the autumn from the leaf-like 3-lobed conspicuously
serrate green involucre formed by the enlargement of the bract and
bractlets of the flower and inclosing only the base of the nut, fully
grown at mid-summer and loosely imbricated into a long-stalked open
cluster. (_Eucarpinus._)

Carpinus is confined to the northern hemisphere, and is distributed from
the Province of Quebec through the eastern United States to the
highlands of Central America in the New World, and from Sweden to
southern Europe, Asia Minor, the temperate Himalayas, Korea, southern
China, Japan and Formosa in the Old World. Fifteen or sixteen species
are recognized. Of the exotic species, the European and west Asian
_Carpinus Betulus_ L. is frequently planted as an ornamental tree in the
northeastern United States, where some of the species of eastern Asia
promise to become valuable.

_Carpinus_ is the classical name of the Hornbeam.


          1. Carpinus caroliniana Walt. Hornbeam. Blue Beech.

[Illustration: Fig. 191]

Leaves often somewhat falcate, long-pointed, sharply doubly serrate with
stout spreading glandular teeth, except at the rounded or wedge-shaped
often unequal base, pale bronze-green, and covered with long white hairs
when they unfold, at maturity thin and firm, pale dull blue-green above,
light yellow-green and glabrous or puberulous below, with small tufts of
white hairs in the axils of the veins, 2'--4' long, 1'--1-3/4' wide,
with a slender yellow midrib, numerous slender veins deeply impressed
and conspicuous above, and prominent cross veinlets; turning deep
scarlet and orange color late in the autumn; petioles slender, terete,
hairy, about 1/3' long, bright red while young; stipules
ovate-lanceolate, acute, pubescent, hairy on the margins, bright red
below, light yellow-green at the apex, 1/3' long. Flowers: staminate
aments 1-1/2' long when fully grown, with broadly ovate acute
boat-shaped scales green below the middle, bright red above; pistillate
aments 1/2'--3/4' long, with ovate acute hairy green scales; styles
scarlet. Fruit: nut 1/3' long, its involucre short-stalked, with one of
the lateral lobes often wanting, coarsely serrate, but usually on one
margin only of the middle lobe, 1'--1-1/2' long, nearly 1' wide, crowded
on slender terete pubescent red-brown stems 5'--6' in length.

A bushy tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with a short fluted trunk occasionally 2 deg.
in diameter, long slightly zigzag slender tough spreading branches
pendulous toward the ends, and furnished with numerous short thin
lateral branches growing at acute angles, and branchlets at first pale
green coated with long white silky hairs, orange-brown and sometimes
slightly pilose during the summer, becoming dark red and lustrous during
their first winter and ultimately dull gray tinged with red. Winter-buds
ovoid, acute, about 1/8' long, with ovate acute chestnut-brown scales
white and scarious on the margins. Bark light gray-brown, sometimes
marked with broad dark brown horizontal bands, 1/16'--1/8' thick. Wood
light brown, with thick nearly white sapwood; sometimes used for levers,
the handles of tools, and other small articles.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps, generally in deep rich
moist soil; Nova Scotia and southern and western Quebec to the northern
shores of Georgian Bay, southward to the shores of Indian River and
those of Tampa Bay, Florida, and westward to central Minnesota, eastern
Iowa (Sharpy County), eastern Nebraska (reported), eastern Kansas,
eastern Oklahoma, and eastern Texas; reappearing on the mountains of
southern Mexico and Central America; common in the eastern and central
states; most abundant and of its largest size on the western slopes of
the southern Alleghany Mountains and in southern Arkansas and eastern
Texas.




                     2. OSTRYA Scop. Hop Hornbeam.


Trees, with scaly bark, heavy hard strong close-grained wood, and acute
elongated winter-buds formed in early summer and covered by numerous
imbricated scales, the inner lengthening after the opening of the bud.
Leaves open and concave in the bud; petioles slender, nearly terete,
hairy; stipules strap-shaped to oblong-obovate. Flowers: staminate in
long clustered sessile or short-stalked aments developed in early summer
from lateral buds near the ends of short lateral branchlets of the year
and coated while young with hoary tomentum, naked and conspicuous during
the winter, and composed of 3--14 stamens crowded on a pilose receptacle
adnate to the base of an ovate concave scale rounded and abruptly
short-pointed at the apex, ciliate on the margins, longer than the
stamens; filaments short, 2-branched, each branch bearing a 1-celled
half-anther hairy at the apex; pistillate in erect lax aments terminal
on short leafy branches of the year, in pairs at the base of an
elongated ovate acute leaf-like ciliate scale persistent until
midsummer, each flower inclosed in a hairy sack-like involucre formed by
the union of a bract and 2 bractlets; calyx adnate to the ovary,
denticulate on the free narrow border. Nut ovoid, acute, flattened,
obscurely longitudinally ribbed, crowned with the remnants of the calyx,
marked at the narrow base by a small circular pale scar, inclosed in the
much enlarged pale membranaceous conspicuously longitudinally veined
reticulate-venulose involucres of the flower, short, pointed and hairy
at the apex, hirsute at the base, with sharp rigid stinging hairs,
imbricated into a short strobile fully grown at midsummer, and suspended
on a slender hairy stem.

Ostrya is widely distributed in the northern hemisphere from Nova Scotia
to Texas, northern Arizona, and to the highlands of southern Mexico and
Guatemala in the New World, and through southern Europe and southwestern
Asia, and in northern Japan and on the Island of Quelpart in the Old
World. Of the four species now recognized two are North American.

_Ostrya_ is the classical name of the Hop Hornbeam.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acuminate or acute at apex.
                                                1. O. virginiana (A, C).
  Leaves elliptic or obovate, acute or rounded at apex.
                                                   2. O. Knowltonii (F).


         1. Ostrya virginiana K. Koch. Hop Hornbeam. Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 192]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, gradually narrowed into a long slender point
or acute at apex, narrowed and rounded, cordate, or wedge-shaped at the
often unequal base, sharply serrate, with slender incurved callous teeth
terminating at first in tufts of caducous hairs, when they unfold light
bronze-green, glabrous above and coated below on the midrib and primary
veins with long pale hairs, at maturity thin and extremely tough, dark
dull yellow-green above, light yellow-green and furnished with
conspicuous tufts of pale hairs in the axils of the veins below, 3'--5'
long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a slender midrib impressed and puberulous
above, light yellow and pubescent below, and numerous slender veins
forked near the margins; turning clear yellow before falling in the
autumn; petioles hairy about 1/4' long; stipules rounded and often
short-pointed at apex, ciliate on the margins with long pale hairs,
hairy on the back, about 1/2' long and 1/8' wide. Flowers: staminate
aments about 1/2' long during their first season, with light red-brown
rather loosely imbricated scales narrowed into a long slender point,
becoming when the flowers open 2' long, with broadly obovate scales
rounded and abruptly contracted at apex into a short point, ciliate on
the margins, green tinged with red above the middle, light brown toward
the base; pistillate aments slender, about 1/4' long, on thin hairy
stems, their scales lanceolate, acute, light green, often flushed with
red above the middle, hirsute at the apex, decreasing in size from the
lowest. Fruit: nuts 1/3' long, about 1/8' wide, rather abruptly narrowed
below the apex, their involucres in clusters 1-1/2'--2' long and
2/3'--1' wide, on slender hairy stems about 1' in length.

A tree, occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a short trunk 2 deg. in diameter,
usually not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. tall, with a trunk 18'--20' thick, long
slender branches drooping at the ends and forming a round-topped or open
head frequently 50 deg. across, and slender, very tough branchlets, light
green, coated with pale appressed hairs when they first appear, becoming
light orange color and very lustrous by midsummer, glabrous, dark
red-brown and lustrous during their first winter, and then growing
gradually darker brown and losing their lustre; or covered like the
petioles and peduncles with short erect glandular hairs (var.
_glandulosa_ Sarg.). Winter-buds ovoid, light chestnut-brown, slightly
puberulous, 1/4' long. Bark about 1/4' thick, broken into thick narrow
oblong closely appressed plate-like light brown scales slightly tinged
with red on the surface. Wood strong, hard, tough, durable, light brown
tinged with red or often nearly white, with thick pale sapwood of 40--50
layers of annual growth; used for fence-posts, handles of tools,
mallets, and other small articles.

Distribution. Dry gravelly slopes and ridges often in the shade of oaks
and other large trees; Island of Cape Breton and the shores of the Bay
of Chaleur, through the valley of the St. Lawrence River, and along the
northern shores of Lake Huron to western Ontario, Manitoba, Minnesota,
eastern North Dakota, the foothills of the Black Hills of South Dakota,
eastern, northern and northwestern Nebraska, eastern Kansas and
Oklahoma, and southward to northern Florida and eastern Texas; most
abundant and of its largest size in southern Arkansas and in Texas. From
Quebec and Ontario to western New England, western New York, Ohio and in
Central Michigan, the glandular form prevails: the two forms occur in
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Indiana, northern Illinois, southwestern
Missouri, Oklahoma, and southward on the high Appalachian Mountains.


                  2. Ostrya Knowltonii Cov. Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 193]

Leaves elliptic to obovate, acute or round at apex, gradually narrowed
and often unequal at the rounded cuneate rarely cordate base, sharply
serrate with small triangular callous teeth, covered with loose pale
tomentum when they unfold, at maturity dark yellow-green and pilose
above, pale and soft-pubescent below, 1'--2' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with
a slender yellow midrib slightly raised on the upper side, and slender
primary veins connected by obscure reticulate veinlets; turning dull
yellow in the autumn before falling; petioles 1/8'--1/4' long; stipules
pale yellow-green, often tinged with red toward the apex, 1/2' long,
about 1/2' wide. Flowers: staminate aments on stout stalks covered with
rufous tomentum and sometimes 1/2' long, rarely sessile, about 1/2' long
during their first season, with dark brown puberulous scales gradually
contracted into a long slender subulate point, becoming when the flowers
open 1'--1-1/4' long, with broadly ovate concave scales abruptly
narrowed into a nearly triangular point, yellow-green near the base,
bright red above the middle; pistillate aments about 1/4' long, with
ovate-lanceolate light yellow-green puberulous scales ciliate on the
margins. Fruit: nuts 1/4' long, gradually narrowed at the apex, their
involucres 1' long, nearly glabrous at the apex, sometimes slightly
stained with red toward the base, in clusters 1'--1-1/2' long and about
3/4' broad, on stems 1/2' in length.

A tree 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, usually divided
1 deg. or 2 deg. above the ground into 3 or 4 stout upright stems 4'--5' thick,
slender pendulous often much contorted branches forming a narrow
round-topped symmetrical head, and slender branchlets dark green and
coated with hoary tomentum when they first appear, dark red-brown and
pubescent during their first summer, becoming light cinnamon-brown,
glabrous, and lustrous in the winter, and ultimately ashy gray.
Winter-buds ovoid, dark brownish red, about 1/8' long. Bark internally
bright orange color, 1/8' thick, separating into loose hanging
plate-like scales light gray slightly tinged with red, and 1'--2' long
and wide. Wood light reddish brown, with thin sapwood.

Distribution. On the southern slope of the canyon of the Colorado River
in Coconino County, Arizona, at altitudes of 6000 deg.--7000 deg. above the sea
(Hance trail, seventy miles north of Flagstaff); in the canyon of Oak
Creek, south of Flagstaff (_P. Lowell_); and on Grand River, Utah (Moab,
Grant County, _M. E. Jones_).




                          3. BETULA L. Birch.


Trees, with smooth resinous bark marked by long longitudinal lenticels,
often separating freely into thin papery plates, becoming thick, deeply
furrowed, and scaly at the base of old trunks, short slender branches
more or less erect and forming on young trees a narrow symmetrical
pyramidal head, becoming horizontal and often pendulous on older trees,
tough branchlets, short stout spur-like 2-leaved lateral branchlets much
roughened by the crowded leaf-scars of many years, and elongated
winter-buds covered by numerous ovate acute scales, and fully grown and
bright green at midsummer. Leaves open and convex in the bud, often
incisely lobed; stipules ovate and acute or oblong-obovate, scarious.
Flowers in 3-flowered cymes, the lateral flowers of the cyme subtended
by bractlets adnate to the base of the scale of the ament; staminate
aments long, pendulous, solitary or clustered, appearing in summer or
autumn in the axils of the last leaves of a branchlet or near the ends
of short lateral branchlets, erect and naked during the winter, their
scales in the spring broadly ovate, rounded, short-stalked, yellow or
orange-color below the middle and dark chestnut-brown and lustrous above
it; staminate flowers composed of a membranaceous 4-lobed calyx often
2-lobed by suppression, the anterior lobe obovate, rounded at apex, as
long as the stamens, much longer than the minute posterior lobe, and of
2 stamens inserted on the base of the calyx, with short 2-branched
filaments, each branch bearing an erect half-anther; pistillate aments
oblong or cylindric, terminal on the short spur-like lateral branchlets,
their scales closely imbricated, oblong-ovate, 3-lobed, light yellow,
often tinged with red above the middle, accrescent, becoming brown and
woody at maturity, and forming sessile or stalked erect or pendulous
short or elongated strobiles usually ripening in the autumn, deciduous
with the nuts from the slender rachis; calyx of the pistillate flower 0;
ovary sessile, compressed, with styles stigmatic at apex. Nut minute,
oval or obovoid, compressed, bearing at the apex the persistent stigmas,
marked at the base by a small pale scar, the outer coat of the shell
produced into a marginal wing interrupted at the apex.

Betula is widely distributed from the Arctic circle to Texas in the New
World, and to southern Europe, the Himalayas, China, and Japan in the
Old World, some species forming great forests at the north, or covering
high mountain slopes. Of the twenty-eight or thirty species now
recognized twelve are found in North America; of these nine are trees.
Of exotic species the European and Asiatic _Betula pendula_ Roth. in a
number of forms is a common ornamental tree in the northern states,
where several of the Birch-trees of eastern Asia also flourish. Many of
the species produce wood valued by the cabinet-maker, or used in the
manufacture of spools, shoe-lasts, and other small articles. The thin
layers of the bark are impervious to water and are used to cover
buildings, and for shoes, canoes, and boxes. The sweet sap provides an
agreeable beverage.

_Betula_ is the classical name of the Birch-tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Strobiles oblong-ovoid, nearly sessile, erect, the lateral lobes of
        their scales broad and slightly divergent; wing not broader than
        the nut; leaves with 9--11 pairs of veins; bark of young
        branches aromatic.
    Leaves heart-shaped or rounded at base; scales of the strobiles
          glabrous; bark dark brown, not separating into thin layers.
                                                     1. B. lenta (A, C).
    Leaves cuneate or slightly heart-shaped at base; scales of the
          strobiles pubescent; bark yellow, or silvery white, rarely
          dull yellowish brown; separating into thin layers.
                                                        2. B. lutea (A).
  Strobiles oblong or cylindric, erect, spreading or pendant, on slender
        peduncles; wing broader than the nut; leaves with 5--9 pairs of
        veins.
    Strobiles oblong, erect, ripening in May or June, their scales
          pubescent, deeply lobed, the lateral lobes erect; leaves
          rhombic-ovate, glaucescent and more or less silky-pubescent
          beneath; bark light reddish-brown, separating freely into thin
          persistent scales.
                                                     3. B. nigra (A, C).
    Strobiles cylindric, pendant or spreading.
      Scales of the strobiles pubescent, with recurved lateral lobes,
            the middle lobe triangular, nearly as broad as long; leaves
            long-pointed; petioles slender, elongated.
        Leaves triangular to rhombic, bright green and lustrous; bark
              chalky white, not separable into thin layers.
                                                  4. B. populifolia (A).
        Leaves ovate, cuneate to truncate or rounded at base, dull
              blue-green; bark white tinged with pink, lustrous, not
              easily separable into thin layers.
                                                     5. B. coerulea (A).
      Scales of the strobiles with ascending or spreading lateral lobes,
            the middle lobe usually acuminate, longer than broad; leaves
            acute or acuminate.
        Bark separating freely into thin layers; scales of the strobiles
              glabrous.
          Bark creamy white, or in some forms orange-brown; leaves
                ovate.
                                          6. B. papyrifera (A, B, C, F).
          Bark dull reddish brown or nearly white; leaves rhombic to
                deltoid-ovate.
                                                  7. B. alaskana (A, B).
        Bark not separable into thin layers, dark brown; scales of the
              strobiles glabrous or puberulous; branchlets glandular.
          Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, truncate or rounded at the
                broad base.
                                             8. B. fontinalis (B, F, G).
          Leaves broad-ovate to elliptic, acute, rounded or abruptly
                short-pointed, cuneate at base.
                                                    9. B. Eastwoodae (F).


             1. Betula lenta L. Cherry Birch. Black Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 194]

Leaves ovate to oblong-ovate, acute or acuminate, gradually narrowed and
often unequal at the cordate or rounded base, sharply serrate with
slender incurved teeth, or very rarely laciniately lobed (f. _laciniata_
Rehdr.), when they unfold light green, coated on the lower surface with
long white silky hairs, and slightly hairy on the upper surface, at
maturity thin and membranaceous, dark dull green above, light
yellow-green below, with small tufts of white hairs in the axils of the
veins, 2-1/2'--6' long, 1-1/2'--3' wide, with a yellow midrib and
primary veins prominent and hairy on the lower surface, and obscure
reticulate cross veinlets; turning bright clear yellow late in the
autumn; petioles stout, hairy, deeply grooved on the upper side,
3/4'--1' long; stipules ovate, acute, light green or nearly white,
scarious and ciliate above the middle. Flowers: staminate aments during
the winter about 3/4' long, nearly 1/4' thick, with ovate acute
apiculate scales bright red-brown above the middle and light brown below
it, becoming 3'--4' long; pistillate aments 1/2'--3/4' long, about 1/8'
thick, with ovate pale green scales rounded at the apex; styles light
pink. Fruit: strobiles oblong-ovoid, sessile, erect, glabrous,
1'--1-1/2' long, about 1/2' thick; nut obovoid, pointed at base, rounded
at apex, about as broad as its wing.

A tree, with aromatic bark and leaves, 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk
2 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, slender branches spreading almost at right angles,
becoming pendulous toward the ends and gradually forming a narrow
round-topped open graceful head, and branchlets light green, slightly
viscid and pilose when they first appear, soon turning dark
orange-brown, lustrous during the summer, bright red-brown in their
first winter, becoming darker and finally dark dull brown slightly
tinged with red. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, about 1/4' long, with ovate
acute light chestnut-brown loosely imbricated scales, those of the inner
ranks becoming 1/2'--3/4' long. Bark on young stems and branches close,
smooth, lustrous, dark brown tinged with red, and marked by elongated
horizontal pale lenticels, becoming on old trunks 1/2'--3/4' thick,
dull, deeply furrowed and broken into large thick irregular plates
covered with closely appressed scales. Wood heavy, very strong and hard,
close-grained, dark brown tinged with red, with thin light brown or
yellow sapwood of 70--80 layers of annual growth; largely used for
floors, in the manufacture of furniture and for fuel, and occasionally
in ship and boat-building. Sweet birch-oil distilled from the wood and
bark is used for medicinal purposes and for flavoring as a substitute
for oil of wintergreen, and beer is obtained by fermenting the sugary
sap.

Distribution. Rich uplands from southern Maine to northwestern Vermont,
and eastern Ohio and southward to northern Delaware and along the
Appalachian Mountains up to altitudes of 4000 deg. to northern Georgia; in
Alabama, and in eastern Kentucky and Tennessee; a common forest tree at
the north, and of its largest size on the western slopes of the southern
Alleghany Mountains.

x _Betula Jackii_ Schn., a natural hybrid of _B. lenta_ with _B. pumila_
Michx., has appeared in the Arnold Arboretum.


            2. Betula lutea Michx. Yellow Birch. Gray Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 195]

Leaves ovate to oblong-ovate, acuminate or acute at apex, gradually
narrowed to the rounded cuneate or rarely heart-shaped usually oblique
base, sharply doubly serrate, when they unfold bronze-green or red, and
pilose with long pale hairs above and on the under side of the midrib
and veins, at maturity dull dark green above, yellow-green below,
3'--4-1/2' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a stout midrib and primary veins
covered below near the base of the leaf with short pale or rufous hairs;
turning clear bright yellow in the autumn; petioles slender, pale
yellow, hairy, 3/4'--1' long; stipules ovate, acute, light green tinged
with pink above the middle, about 1/2' long. Flowers: staminate aments
during the winter 3/4'--1' long, about 1/8' thick, with ovate rounded
scales light chestnut-brown and lustrous above the middle, ciliate on
the margins, becoming 3'--3-1/2' long and 1/3' thick; pistillate aments
about 2/3' long, with acute scales, pale green below, light red and
tipped with clusters of long white hair at apex, and pilose on the back.
Fruit: strobiles erect, sessile, short-stalked, pubescent, 1'--1-1/2'
long, about 3/4' thick; nut ellipsoidal to obovoid, about 1/8' long,
rather broader than its wing.

A tree, with slightly aromatic bark and leaves, occasionally 100 deg. high,
with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, spreading and more or less pendulous
branches forming a broad round-topped head, and branchlets at first
green and covered with long pale hairs, light orange-brown and pilose
during their first summer, becoming glabrous and light brown slightly
tinged with orange, and ultimately dull and darker. Winter-buds about
1/4' long, somewhat viscid and covered with loose pale hairs during the
summer, becoming light chestnut-brown, acute, and slightly puberulous in
winter. Bark of young stems and of the branches bright silvery gray or
light orange color, very lustrous, separating into thin loose persistent
scales more or less rolled on the margins, becoming on old trees 1/2'
thick, reddish brown, and divided by narrow irregular fissures into
large thin plates covered with minute closely appressed scales, or
sometimes dull yellowish brown (_B. alleghaniensis_ Britt.). Wood heavy,
very strong, hard, close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thin
nearly white sapwood; largely used for floors, in the manufacture of
furniture, button and tassel moulds, boxes, the hubs of wheels, and for
fuel.

Distribution. Moist uplands, and southward often in swamps; one of the
largest deciduous-leaved trees of northeastern America; Newfoundland and
along the northern shores of the Gulf of St. Lawrence to the valley of
Rainy River, and southward to Long Island (Cold Spring Harbor) and
western New York, Pennsylvania, northern Delaware, southeastern Ohio,
northern Indiana, southwestern Wisconsin, northern, northeastern and
central Iowa, and from the mountains of Virginia and West Virginia to
the highest peaks of North Carolina and Tennessee at altitudes between
3000 deg. and 5000 deg.; very abundant and of its largest size in the eastern
provinces of Canada and in northern New York and New England; small and
rare in southern New England and southward.

x _Betula Purpusii_ Schn. believed to be a natural hybrid of _B. lutea_
with _B. pumila_ var. _glandulifera_ Regel has been found in Michigan
and in Tamarack Swamps in Hennepin, Pine and Anoka Counties, Minnesota.


               3. Betula nigra L. Red Birch. River Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 196]

Leaves rhombic-ovate, acute, abruptly or gradually narrowed and cuneate
at base, doubly serrate, and on vigorous young branches often more or
less laciniately cut into acute doubly serrate lobes, when they unfold
light yellow-green and pilose above and coated below, especially on the
midrib and petioles, with thick white tomentum, at maturity thin and
tough, 1-1/2'--3' long, 1'--2' wide, deep green and lustrous above,
glabrescent, pubescent or ultimately glabrous below, except on the stout
midrib and remote primary veins; turning dull yellow in the autumn;
petioles slender, slightly flattened, tomentose, about 1/2' long;
stipules ovate, rounded or acute at apex, pale green, covered below with
white hairs. Flowers: staminate aments clustered, during the winter
about 7/8 long and 1/16' thick, with ovate rounded dull chestnut-brown
lustrous scales, becoming 2'--3' long and 1/8' thick; pistillate aments
about 1/3' long, with bright green ovate scales pubescent on the back,
rounded or acute at apex, and ciliate with long white hairs. Fruit
ripening in May and June; strobiles cylindric, pubescent, 1'--1-1/2'
long, 1/2' thick, erect on stout tomentose peduncles 1/2' long; nut
ovoid to ellipsoidal, 1/8' in length, pubescent or puberulous at apex,
about as broad as its thin puberulous wing, ciliate on the margin.

A tree, 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk often divided 15 deg.--20 deg. above the
ground into 2 or 3 slightly diverging limbs, and sometimes 5 deg. in
diameter, slender branches forming in old age a narrow irregular
picturesque crown, and branchlets coated at first with thick pale or
slightly rufous tomentum gradually disappearing before winter, becoming
dark red and lustrous, dull red-brown in their second year, and then
gradually growing slightly darker until the bark separates into the thin
flakes of the older branches; or often sending up from the ground a
clump of several small spreading stems forming a low bushy tree.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, about 1/4' long, covered in summer with thick
pale tomentum, glabrous or slightly puberulous, lustrous and bright
chestnut-brown in winter, the inner scales strap-shaped, light brown
tinged with red, and coated with pale hairs. Bark on young stems and
large branches thin, lustrous, light reddish brown or silvery gray,
marked by narrow slightly darker longitudinal lenticels, separating
freely into large thin papery scales persistent for several years, and
turning back and showing the light pink-brown tints of the freshly
exposed inner layers, becoming at the base of old trunks from 3/4'--1'
thick, dark red-brown, deeply furrowed and broken on the surface into
thick closely appressed scales. Wood light, rather hard, strong,
close-grained, light brown, with pale sapwood of 40--50 layers of annual
growth; used in the manufacture of furniture, wooden ware, wooden shoes,
and in turnery.

Distribution. Banks of streams, ponds, and swamps, in deep rich soil
often inundated for several weeks at a time; near Manchester, Hillsboro
County, New Hampshire, northeastern Massachusetts, Long Island, New
York, southward to northern Florida through the region east of the
Alleghany Mountains except in the immediate neighborhood of the coast,
through the Gulf states to the valley of the Navasota River, Brazos
County, Texas, and through Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma, southeastern
Kansas, and Missouri to Tennessee and Kentucky, southern and eastern
Iowa, southern Minnesota, the valley of the Eau Claire River, Eau Claire
County, Wisconsin, southern Illinois, the valley of the Kankakee River,
Indiana, and southern Ohio; the only semiaquatic species and the only
species ripening its seeds in the spring or early summer; attaining its
largest size in the damp semitropical lowlands of Florida, Louisiana,
and Texas; the only Birch-tree of such warm regions.

Often cultivated in the northeastern states as an ornamental tree,
growing rapidly in cultivation.


         4. Betula populifolia Marsh. Gray Birch. White Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 197]

Leaves nearly triangular to rhombic, long-pointed, coarsely doubly
serrate with stout spreading glandular teeth except at the broad
truncate or slightly cordate or cuneate base, thin and firm, dark green
and lustrous and somewhat roughened on the upper surface early in the
season by small pale glands in the axils of the conspicuous reticulate
veinlets, 2-1/2'--3' long, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout yellow
midrib covered with minute glands, and raised and rounded on the upper
side, and obscure yellow primary veins; turning pale yellow in the
autumn; petioles slender, terete, covered with black glands, often
stained with red on the upper side, 3/4'--1' long; stipules broadly
ovate, acute, membranaceous, light green slightly tinged with red.
Flowers: staminate aments usually solitary or rarely in pairs,
1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, about 1/8' thick during the winter, becoming
2-1/2'--4' long, with ovate acute apiculate scales; pistillate aments
slender, as long as their glandular peduncles about 1/2' in length, with
ovate acute pale green glandular scales. Fruit: strobiles cylindric,
pubescent, obtuse at apex, about 3/4' long and 1/3' thick, pendant or
spreading on slender stems; nut ellipsoidal to obovoid, acute or rounded
at base, a little narrower than its obovate wing.

A short-lived tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. or exceptionally 40 deg. high, with a trunk
rarely 18' in diameter, short slender often pendulous more or less
contorted branches usually clothing the stem to the ground and forming a
narrow pyramidal head, and branchlets roughened by small raised
lenticels, resinous-glandular when they first appear, gradually growing
darker, bright yellow and lustrous before autumn like the young stems,
bright reddish brown during their first winter, and ultimately white
near the trunk; often growing in clusters of spreading stems springing
from the stumps of old trees. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, pale
chestnut-brown, glabrous, about 1/4' long. Bark about 1/3' thick, dull
chalky white on the outer surface, bright orange on the inner, close and
firm, with dark triangular markings at the insertion of the branches,
becoming at the base of old trees thicker, nearly black, and irregularly
broken by shallow fissures. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained,
not durable, light brown, with thick nearly white sapwood; used in the
manufacture of spools, shoe-pegs and wood pulp, for the hoops of
barrels, and largely for fuel.

Distribution. Dry gravelly barren soil or on the margins of swamps and
ponds; Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and the valley
of the lower St. Lawrence River southward to northeastern, central and
on South Mountain, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and northern Delaware,
and westward through northern New England and New York, ascending
sometimes to altitudes of 1800 deg., to the southern shores of Lake Ontario,
and at the foot of Lake Michigan, Indiana; rare and local in the
interior, very abundant in the coast region of New England and the
middle states; springing up in great numbers on abandoned farm-lands or
on lands stripped by fire of their original forest covering; most
valuable in its ability to grow rapidly in sterile soil and to afford
protection to the seedlings of more valuable and less rapid-growing
trees.

A form with deeply divided leaves (var. _laciniata_ Loud.) and one with
purple leaves (var. _purpurea_ E & B) are occasionally cultivated.

A shrub believed to be a natural hybrid of _B. populifolia_ with _B.
pumila_ Michx. has been found near Mt. Mansfield, Vermont.


                 5. Betula coerulea Blanch. Blue Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 198]

Leaves ovate, long-pointed, broadly or narrowly concave-cuneate at the
entire often unequal base, sharply mostly doubly serrate above with
straight or incurved glandular often apiculate teeth, covered above when
they unfold with pale deciduous glands, at maturity dull bluish green
above, pale yellow-green below, and sparingly villose along the under
side of the slender yellow midrib and primary veins, 2'--2-1/2' long,
1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles slender, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, yellow more or
less deeply tinged with red. Flowers: staminate aments usually in pairs,
or singly or in 3's, 1-1/4'--2' long, about 3/16' thick, with ovate
rounded short-pointed scales; pistillate aments slender, about 1/3'
long, with acuminate pale green much reflexed scales. Fruit: strobiles
cylindric, pubescent, slightly narrowed at the obtuse apex, about 1'
long and 1/4' thick, pendant on slender peduncles 1/4'--1/2' in length;
nut ellipsoidal, much narrower than its broad wing.

A tree, rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
small ascending finally spreading branches, and slender branchlets
marked by numerous small raised pale lenticels, purplish and sparingly
villose when they first appear, soon glabrous, becoming bright
red-brown; often forming clumps of several stems. Bark thin, white
tinged with rose, lustrous, not readily separable into layers, the inner
bark light orange color.

Distribution. Moist slopes, Stratton and Windham, Windham County,
Vermont, at altitudes of about 1800 deg. (_W. H. Blanchard_), Haystack
Mountain, Aroostook County, Maine (_M. L. Fernald_); the American
representative of the European _Betula pendula_ Roth., and probably
widely distributed over the hills of northern New England and eastern
Canada. Perhaps with its variety best considered a natural hybrid
between _B. papyrifera_ and _B. populifolia_.

Apparently passing into a form with larger leaves often rounded and
truncate at the broad base, 3'--3-1/2' long and 2' wide, stouter
staminate aments, and strobiles frequently 1-1/2' long and 1/2' thick
(var. _Blanchardii_ Sarg. fig. 198 A). This under favorable conditions
is a tree 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 18' in diameter; common with
_Betula coerulea_ at Windham and Stratton, Vermont (_W. H. Blanchard_),
and on a hill near the coast in Washington County, Maine (_M. L.
Fernald_).


         6. Betula papyrifera Marsh. Canoe Birch. Paper Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 199]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate with a short broad point, coarsely
usually doubly and often very irregularly serrate except at the rounded
abruptly cuneate or gradually narrowed base, bright green,
glandular-resinous, pubescent and clothed below on the midrib and
primary veins and on the petioles with long white hairs when they
unfold, at maturity thick and firm, dull dark green and glandless or
rarely glandular on the upper surface, light yellow-green and glabrous
or puberulous, with small tufts of pale hairs in the axils of the
primary veins and covered with many black glands on the lower surface,
2'--3' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib marked, like
the remote primary veins, with minute black glands, turning light clear
yellow in the autumn; petioles stout, yellow, glandular, glabrous or
pubescent, 1/2'--3/4' long; stipules ovate, acute, ciliate on the
margins with pale hairs, light green. Flowers: staminate aments
clustered during the winter, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, about 1/8' thick, with
ovate, acute scales light brown below the middle, dark red-brown above
it, becoming 3-1/2'--4' long, and about 1/3' thick; pistillate aments
1'--1-1/4' long, about 1/16' thick, with light green lanceolate scales
long-pointed and acute or rounded at apex; styles bright red. Fruit:
strobiles cylindric, glabrous, about 1-1/2' long and 1/3' thick, hanging
on slender stalks, their scales very rarely entire (var. _elobata_
Sarg.); nut ellipsoidal, about 1/16' long, much narrower than its thin
wing.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg. tall, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, becoming
in old age, or when crowded by other trees, branchless below and
supporting a narrow open head of short pendulous branches, and
branchlets at first light green, slightly viscid, marked by scattered
orange-colored oblong lenticels and covered with long pale hairs, dark
orange color and glabrous or pubescent during the summer, becoming dull
red in their first winter, gradually growing dark orange-brown, lustrous
for four or five years and ultimately covered with the white papery bark
of older branches. Winter-buds obovoid, acute, about 1/4' long,
pubescent below the middle and coated with resinous gum at midsummer,
dark chestnut-brown, glabrous and slightly resinous during the winter,
their inner scales becoming strap-shaped, rounded at apex, about 1/2'
long and 1/8' wide. Bark on young trunks and large limbs thin, creamy
white or rarely bronze color or orange-brown and lustrous on the outer
surface, bright orange color on the inner, marked by long narrow
slightly darker colored raised lenticels, separating into thin papery
layers, pale orange color when first exposed to the light, becoming on
old trunks for a few feet above the ground sometimes 1/2' thick, dull
brown or nearly black, sharply and irregularly furrowed and broken on
the surface into thick closely appressed scales. Wood light, strong,
hard, tough, very close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thick
nearly white sapwood; largely used for spools, shoe-lasts, pegs, and in
turnery, the manufacture of wood-pulp, and for fuel. The tough resinous
durable bark impervious to water is used by all the northern Indians to
cover their canoes and for baskets, bags, drinking-cups, and other small
articles, and often to cover their wigwams in winter.

Distribution. Rich wooded slopes and the borders of streams, lakes, and
swamps scattered through forests of other trees; Labrador to the
southern shores of Hudson's Bay, and southward to Long Island, New York,
northern Pennsylvania, central Michigan, northern Wisconsin,
northern-central Iowa, eastern Nebraska, North and South Dakota and
Wyoming; common in the maritime provinces of Canada and North of the
Great Lakes, and in northern New England and New York; small and
comparatively rare in the coast region of southern New England and
southward; on the highest mountains of New England and northward the
var. _minor_ S. Wats and Cov. is common as a small shrub.

Often planted in the northeastern states as an ornamental tree.

x _Betula Sandbergii_ Britt. and its f. _maxima_ Rosend. generally
believed to be natural hybrids of _B. papyrifera_ and _B. pumila_ var.
_glandulifera_ Regl. occur in Tamarack swamps in Hennepin County,
Minnesota.

Passing into the following varieties.


                Betula papyrifera var. cordifolia Fern.

[Illustration: Fig. 200]

Leaves ovate, abruptly pointed and acuminate or acute at apex, cordate
at base, coarsely doubly serrate, glabrous or pilose on the under side
of the midrib and veins, often furnished below with axillary tufts of
pale hairs, 1-1/2'--3' long, 1'--2-1/2' wide; petioles glabrous or
rarely villose, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Fruit: strobiles 3/4'--2' long and
1/4'--1/2' thick, on villose peduncles up to 3/4' in length; scales
glabrous or pubescent.

A tree rarely more than 30 deg. tall, with slender glabrous or pubescent
branchlets, and at high altitudes on the New England mountains reduced
to a low shrub. Bark separating in thin layers, white or dark reddish
brown.

Distribution. Labrador and Newfoundland to northern New England, and
westward to the shores of Green Bay, Wisconsin, and those of Lake
Superior, Minnesota (Grand Marais, Cook County); on Mt. Mitchell, North
Carolina, at an altitude of 5550 deg. (_W. W. Ashe_).


                Betula papyrifera var. subcordata Sarg.

                       _Betula subcordata_ Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 201]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, slightly cordate or rounded at
base, rarely slightly lobed above the middle, finely often doubly
serrate with teeth pointing forward or spreading, glabrous, 2'--2-1/2'
long, 1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles sparingly villose or glabrous,
1/2'--3/4' in length. Fruit: strobiles drooping on slender peduncles
1'--1-1/2' long, about 1/3' thick, their scales puberulous, ciliate on
the margins, the middle lobe acute, rather longer than the broad
truncate lateral lobes; nut obovoid, cuneate at base, 1/12' long,
narrower than its wings.

A tree 25 deg.--40 deg. or occasionally 60 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, and slightly glandular glabrous red-brown branchlets. Bark
separating freely into thin layers, white or occasionally dark reddish
brown or orange color.

Distribution. Alberta (Crow Nest Pass, neighborhood of Jasper and
Cypress Hills), through northern Montana and Idaho to western
Washington, northeastern Oregon (Minum River Valley) and British
Columbia.


                Betula papyrifera var. montanensis Sarg.

                      _Betula montanensis_ Butler.

[Illustration: Fig. 202]

Leaves broadly ovate, acute at apex, truncate or rounded at base to
oblong-ovate or lanceolate and long-pointed and acuminate at apex,
narrowed and rounded at base, coarsely doubly serrate, thick, dark green
above, paler, sparingly pubescent and furnished with conspicuous tufts
of axillary hairs below, 3'--5' long, 2'--2-1/4' wide; petioles
puberulous, 3/4'--1' in length. Flowers unknown. Fruit: strobiles
cylindric, 1-3/4'--2' long, 1/2' thick, pendent on puberulous peduncles
1/2'--3/4' in length, their scales puberulous, finely ciliate on the
margins, the slender base of those below the middle of the ament rather
more than twice as long as the expanded upper portion of the scale.

A tree 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, and slender
branchlets red-brown, lustrous, marked by small pale lenticels and
puberulous during their first season. Winter-buds narrow-obovoid,
acuminate, dark red-brown, resinous, 1/3' long. Bark white, or dark gray
or brown.

Distribution. Shore of Yellow Bay, Flathead Lake, Flathead County,
Montana, and at Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho.


               Betula papyrifera var. occidentalis Sarg.

                      _Betula occidentalis_ Hook.

[Illustration: Fig. 203]

Leaves ovate, acute, or abruptly acuminate at apex, rounded or
occasionally cordate or rarely cuneate at the broad base, coarsely and
generally doubly serrate with straight or incurved glandular teeth, thin
and firm in texture, dull dark green above, pale yellow-green below, and
puberulous on both sides of the stout yellow midrib and slender primary
veins, 3'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles stout, glandular, at first
tomentose, ultimately pubescent or puberulous, about 3/4' long; stipules
oblong-obovate, rounded and acute or apisculate at apex, ciliate on the
margin, puberulous, glandular-viscid. Flowers: staminate aments during
the winter about 3/4' long and 1/8' thick, with ovate scales rounded or
abruptly narrowed and acute at apex; puberulous on the outer surface,
ciliate on the margins, becoming 3'--4' long and about 1/4' thick;
pistillate aments about 1' long and 1/16' thick, with acuminate bright
green scales. Fruit: strobiles cylindric, puberulous, spreading,
1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, 1/4'--1/2' thick, on stout peduncles 3/4' in
length, their scales ciliate on the margins; nut oval, about 1/16' in
length, and nearly as wide as its wings.

A tree, 100 deg.--120 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, comparatively
small branches often pendulous on old trees, and pale orange-brown
branchlets more or less glandular and coated with long pale hairs when
they first appear, becoming bright orange-brown and nearly destitute of
glands during their first winter, and in their second year orange-brown,
glabrous, and very lustrous. Winter-buds acute, bright orange-brown,
1/8'--1/4' long, their light brown inner scales sometimes becoming 3/4'
in length. Bark thin, marked by long oblong horizontal raised lenticels,
dark orange-brown or white, very lustrous, separating freely into thin
papery layers displaying in falling the bright orange-yellow inner bark.

Distribution. Banks of streams and lakes; southwestern British Columbia
and northwestern Washington and eastward through eastern Washington and
northern Idaho to northern Montana west of the continental divide;
nowhere common and probably of its largest size on the alluvial banks of
the lower Fraser River, and on the islands of Puget Sound.


    Betula papyrifera var. kenaica A. Henry. Red Birch. Black Birch.

                        _Betula kenaica_ Evans.

[Illustration: Fig. 204]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, broadly cuneate or somewhat rounded at
the entire base, irregularly coarsely often doubly serrate, glabrous,
dark dull green above, pale yellow-green below, 1-1/2'--2' long,
1'--1-3/4' wide, with a slender yellow midrib and 5 pairs of thin
primary veins; petioles slender, 3/4'--1' long. Flowers: staminate
aments clustered, 1' long, with ovate acute scales apiculate at apex,
puberulous on the outer surface; pistillate aments, 1/3'--1/2' long,
about 1/16' thick, on slender glandular pubescent peduncles 1/2'--3/4'
in length; scales acuminate light green strongly reflexed; styles bright
red. Fruit: strobiles cylindric, glabrous, 1' long, their scales ciliate
on the margins; nut oval, somewhat narrower than its thin wing.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--20' in diameter, wide-spreading
branches, stout branchlets marked by numerous small pale lenticels,
bright red-brown during 2 or 3 years, gradually becoming darker. Bark
thin, more or less furrowed, very dark brown or nearly black near the
base of the trunk, grayish white or light reddish brown and separating
into thin layers higher on the stem and on the branches.

Distribution. Coast of Alaska from Cook Inlet southward to the head of
the Lynn Canal.


                 7. Betula alaskana Sarg. White Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 205]

Leaves rhombic to deltoid-ovate, long-pointed, truncate, rounded or
broadly cuneate, or on leading shoots occasionally cordate at the entire
base, coarsely and often doubly glandular-serrate, thin, dark green
above, pale and yellow-green below, 1-1/2'--3' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide,
with a slender midrib and primary veins pubescent or ultimately glabrous
below; petioles often bright red, somewhat hairy at first, finally
glabrous, about 1' long; Flowers: staminate aments clustered, sessile,
1' long, 1/8' thick, with ovate acuminate scales puberulous on the outer
surface, and bright red, with yellow margins; pistillate aments slender,
cylindric, glandular, 1' long, 1/8' thick, on stout peduncles nearly
1/2' in length. Fruit: strobiles glabrous, pendulous or spreading,
1'--1-1/4' long, 1/3'--1/2' thick, their scales ciliate on the margins;
nut oval, narrower than its broad wing.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg., occasionally 80 deg., high, with a trunk 6'--12'
in diameter, slender erect and spreading or pendulous branches, and
glabrous bright red-brown branchlets more or less thickly covered during
their first year with resinous glands sometimes persistent until the
second or third season. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse at the gradually
narrowed apex, about 1/4' long, with light red-brown shining outer
scales sometimes ciliate on the margins, and oblong rounded scarious
inner scales hardly more than 1/2' long when fully grown. Bark thin,
marked by numerous elongated dark slightly raised lenticels, dull
reddish brown or sometimes nearly white on the outer surface, light red
on the inner surface, close and firm, finally separable into thin
plate-like scales.

Distribution. Valley of the Saskatchewan northwestward to the valley of
the Yukon, growing sparingly near the banks of streams in forests of
coniferous trees and in large numbers on sunny slopes and hillsides; the
common Birch-tree of the Yukon basin.

x _Betula commixta_ Sarg., a shrub, growing on the tundra near Dawson,
Yukon Territory, is believed to be a hybrid between _B. alaskana_ and
_B. glandulosa_ Michx.


                8. Betula fontinalis Sarg. Black Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 206]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, sharply and often doubly serrate,
except at the rounded or abruptly cuneate often unequal base, and
sometimes slightly laciniately lobed, pale green, pilose above, and
covered by conspicuous resinous glands when they unfold, at maturity
thin and firm, dark dull green above, pale yellow-green, rather lustrous
and covered by minute glandular dots below, 1'--2' long, 3/4'--1' wide,
with a slender pale midrib, remote glandular veins, and rather
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning dull yellow in the autumn;
petioles stout, puberulous, light yellow, glandular-dotted, flattened on
the upper side, often flushed with red, 1/3'--1/2' long; stipules
broadly ovate, acute or rounded at apex, slightly ciliate, bright green,
soon becoming pale and scarious. Flowers: staminate aments clustered,
1/2'--3/4' long and 1/16' thick during the winter, with ovate acute
light chestnut-brown scales pale and slightly ciliate on the margins,
becoming 2'--2-1/2' long, and about 1/8' thick, with apiculate scales;
pistillate aments short-stalked, about 3/4' long, with ovate acute green
scales; styles bright red. Fruit: strobiles cylindric, rather obtuse,
puberulous or nearly glabrous, 1'--1-1/4' long, 1/2' thick, erect or
pendulous on slender glandular peduncles, 1/4' to nearly 3/4' in length;
their scales ciliate, puberulous, the lateral lobes ascending, shorter
than the middle lobe; nut ovoid or obovoid, puberulous at apex, nearly
as wide as its wing.

A tree 20 deg.--25 deg. high with a short trunk, rarely more than 12' or 14' in
diameter, ascending spreading and somewhat pendulous branches forming a
broad open head, and slender branchlets, when they first appear light
green glabrous or puberulous and covered with lustrous resinous glands
persistent during their second season, and dark red-brown in their first
winter; more commonly shrubby, with many thin spreading stems forming
open clusters, 15 deg.--20 deg. high; often much lower, and frequently crowded
in almost impenetrable thickets. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, very
resinous, chestnut-brown, 1/4' long. Bark about 1/4' thick, dark bronze
color, very lustrous, marked by pale brown longitudinal lenticels
becoming on old trunks often 6'--8' long and 1/4' wide. Wood soft and
strong, light brown, with thick lighter-colored sapwood; sometimes used
for fuel and fencing.

Distribution. Moist soil near the banks of streams usually in mountain
canyons; generally distributed, although nowhere very common: valley of
the Saskatchewan (Saskatoon), Saskatchewan, westward to the basin of the
upper Fraser and Pease Rivers, British Columbia, southward along the
Rocky Mountains to eastern Utah, northern New Mexico and Arizona, the
valleys of the Shasta region and the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada,
northern California, and eastward in the United States to the eastern
foothills of the Rocky Mountains of Colorado, the Black Hills of South
Dakota, and northwestern Nebraska. Passing into


                  Betula fontinalis var. Piperi Sarg.

                         _Betula Piperi_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 207]

A tree occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high with a tall trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, short spreading branches, and usually longer and often
narrower strobiles.

Distribution. Spokane, Spokane County, Almota and Pullman, Whitman
County, eastern Washington.


                       9. Betula Eastwoodae Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 208]

Leaves broad-ovate to elliptic, acute, rounded or abruptly short-pointed
at apex, coarsely serrate except at the cuneate base, thick, glabrous,
dark green above, pale below, reticulate-venulose, the veinlets more
conspicuous on the lower surface, 1'--1-1/2' long, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide;
petioles slender, glabrous 1/5'--1/3' in length; stipules scarious,
ovate-oblong, rounded at apex. Flowers: staminate aments usually
solitary or in pairs, sessile, 1'--1-1/4' long, 1/5' thick, with broadly
ovate pubescent dark red scales acute and apiculate at apex; pistillate
aments 1/2' long, about 1/12' thick, with acute light green scales.
Fruit: strobiles pendulous on peduncles 1/3'--1/2' long, cylindric, 3/4'
in length, about 1/6' thick, their scales glabrous longer than broad,
the lobes narrowed at the rounded apex, ciliate, the lateral slightly
spreading, one third shorter than the terminal lobe.

A tree 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk rarely more than 6' in diameter, and
slender red glabrous branchlets thickly covered with circular white
glands. Bark close, chestnut-brown, marked by conspicuous horizontal
white lenticels, about 1/5' thick.

Distribution. Swamps near Dawson, Yukon Territory, forming jungles with
_Betula glandulosa_ Michx., _B. alaskana_ Sarg., and various Willows; as
a large shrub in Jasper Park near Jasper, Alberta.




                           4. ALNUS L. Alder.


Trees and shrubs, with astringent scaly bark, soft straight-grained
wood, naked stipitate winter-buds formed in summer and nearly inclosed
by the united stipules of the first leaf, becoming thick, resinous, and
dark red. Leaves open and convex in the bud, falling without change of
color; stipules of all but the first leaf ovate, acute, and scarious.
Flowers vernal, or rarely opening in the autumn from aments of the year,
in 1--3-flowered cymes in the axils of the peltate short-stalked scales
of stalked aments formed in summer or autumn in the axils of the last
leaves of the year or of those of minute leafy bracts; staminate aments
elongated, pendulous, paniculate, naked and erect during the winter,
each staminate flower subtended by 3--5 minute bractlets adnate to the
scales of the ament, and composed of a 4-parted calyx, and 1--3 or
usually 4 stamens inserted on the base of the calyx opposite its lobes,
with short simple filaments; pistillate aments ovoid or oblong, erect,
stalked, produced in summer in the axils of the leaves of a branch
developed from the axils of an upper leaf of the year, and below the
staminate inflorescence, inclosed at first in the stipules of the first
leaf, emerging in the autumn and naked during the winter, or remaining
covered until early spring; pistillate flowers in pairs, each flower
subtended by 2--4 minute bractlets adnate to the fleshy scale of the
ament becoming at maturity thick and woody, obovate, 3--5-lobed or
truncate at the thickened apex, forming an ovoid or subglobose strobile
persistent after the opening of its closely imbricated scales; calyx 0;
ovary compressed; nut minute, bright chestnut-brown, ovoid to oblong,
flat, bearing at the apex the remnants of the style, marked at the base
by a pale scar, the outer coat of the shell produced into lateral wings
often reduced to a narrow membranaceous border.

Alnus inhabits swamps, river bottom-lands, and high mountains, and is
widely and generally distributed through the northern hemisphere, often
forming the most conspicuous feature of vegetation on mountain slopes,
ranging at high altitudes southward in the New World through Central
America to Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia, and to upper Assam and Japan in
the Old World. Of the eighteen or twenty species now recognized nine are
North American; of these, six attain the size and habit of trees. Of the
exotic species, _Alnus vulgaris_ Hill., a common European, north
African, and Asiatic timber-tree, was introduced many years ago into the
northeastern states, where it has become locally naturalized. The wood
of Alnus is very durable in water, and the astringent bark and strobiles
are used in tanning leather and in medicine.

_Alnus_ is the classical name of the Alder.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers opening in spring with or after the leaves; stamens 4;
        pistillate aments inclosed during the winter; wing of the nut
        broad; leaves ovate, sinuately lobed, lustrous on the lower
        surface.
                                                1. A. sinuata (B, F, G).
  Flowers opening in winter or early spring before the unfolding of the
        leaves; pistillate aments usually naked during the winter.
    Wing of the nut broad; leaves ovate or elliptic, rusty-pubescent on
          the lower surface; pistillate aments often inclosed during the
          winter; stamens 4.
                                                     2. A. rubra (B, G).
    Wing of the nut reduced to a narrow border.
      Stamens 4; leaves oblong-ovate, glabrous or puberulous on the
            lower surface.
                                             3. A. tenuifolia (B, F, G).
      Stamens usually 2, or 3.
        Leaves ovate or oval.
                                            4. A. rhombifolia (B, F, G).
        Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute.
                                                 5. A. oblongifolia (H).
  Flowers opening in autumn from aments of the year; stamens 4; wing of
        the nut reduced to a narrow border; leaves oblong-ovate or
        obovate, dark green and lustrous above, pale yellow-green below.
                                                     6. A. maritima (A).


                     1. Alnus sinuata Rydb. Alder.

                        _Alnus sitchensis_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 209]

Leaves ovate, acute, full and rounded and often unsymmetrical and
somewhat oblique or abruptly narrowed and cuneate at base, divided into
numerous short acute lateral lobes, sharply and doubly serrate with
straight glandular teeth, glandular-viscid as they unfold, at maturity
membranaceous, yellow-green on the upper surface, pale and very lustrous
on the lower surface, glabrous, or villose along the under side of the
stout midrib with short brown hairs also forming tufts in the axils of
the numerous slender primary veins, 3'--6' long, 1-1/2'--4' wide;
petioles stout, grooved, abruptly enlarged at the base, 1/2'--3/4' in
length; stipules oblong to spatulate, rounded and apiculate at apex,
puberulous, about 1/4' long. Flowers: staminate aments sessile, in pairs
in the axils of the upper leaves sometimes reduced to small bracts, and
single in the axil of the leaf next below, during the winter about 1/2'
long and 1/8' thick, with dark red-brown shining puberulous apiculate
scales, becoming when the flowers open from spring to midsummer 4' or 5'
long, with a puberulous light red rachis and ovate acute apiculate
3-flowered scales; calyx-lobes rounded, shorter than the 4 stamens;
pistillate aments in elongated panicles, inclosed during winter in buds
formed the previous summer in the axils of the leaves of short lateral
branchlets, long-pedunculate, 1/3' long, 1/6' thick. Fruit: strobiles on
slender peduncles in elongated sometimes leafy panicles 4'--6' in
length, oblong, 1/2'--5/8' long, about 1/3' thick, their truncate scales
thickened at the apex; nut oval, about as wide as its wings.

A tree, sometimes 40 deg. high, with a trunk 7'--8' in diameter, short small
nearly horizontal branches forming a narrow crown, and slender slightly
zigzag branchlets puberulous and very glandular when they first appear,
bright orange-brown and lustrous and marked by numerous large pale
lenticels during their first season, much roughened during their second
year by the elevated crowded leaf-scars, becoming light gray.
Winter-buds acuminate, dark purple, covered especially toward the apex
with close fine pubescence, about 1/2' long. Bark thin bluish gray, with
bright red inner bark; often a shrub only a few feet tall spreading into
broad thickets.

Distribution. Northwest coast from the borders of the Arctic Circle to
the high mountains of northern California; common in the valley of the
Yukon and eastward through British Columbia to Alberta, and through
Washington and Oregon to the western slopes of the Rocky Mountains in
Montana; at the north with dwarf Willows, forming great thickets; in
southeastern Alaska often a tall tree on rich moist bottom-lands near
the mouths of mountain streams, and at the upper limits of tree growth a
low shrub; very abundant in the valley of the Yukon on the wet banks of
streams and often arborescent in habit; in British Columbia and the
United States generally smaller and a shrub, growing usually only at
altitudes of more than 3000 deg. above the sea, and often forming thickets
on the banks of streams and lakes.


                      2. Alnus rubra Bong. Alder.

                         _Alnus oregona_ Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 210]

Leaves ovate to elliptic, acute, abruptly or gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, crenately lobed, dentate with minute gland-tipped
teeth, and slightly revolute on the margins, covered when they unfold
with pale tomentum, at maturity thick dark green and glabrous or pilose
with scattered white hairs above, clothed below with short rusty
pubescence, 3'--5' long, 1-3/4'--3' wide, or on vigorous branchlets
sometimes 8'--10' long, with a broad midrib and primary veins green on
the upper side and orange-colored on the lower, the primary veins
running obliquely to the points of the lobes and connected by
conspicuous slightly reticulate cross veinlets; petioles orange-colored,
nearly terete, slightly grooved, 1/4'--3/4' in length; stipules ovate,
acute, pale green flushed with red, tomentose, 1/8'--1/4' long. Flowers:
staminate aments in red-stemmed clusters, during the winter 1-1/4' long,
1/8' thick, with dark red-brown lustrous closely appressed scales,
becoming 4'--6' long and 1/4' thick, with ovate acute orange-colored
glabrous scales; calyx yellow, with ovate rounded lobes rather shorter
than the 4 stamens; pistillate aments in short racemes usually inclosed
during the winter in buds formed during the early summer and opening in
the early spring, 1/3'--1/2' long, about 1/16' thick, with dark red
acute scales; styles bright red. Fruit: strobiles raised on stout
orange-colored peduncles sometimes 1/2' in length, ovoid or oblong,
1/2'--1' long, 1/3'--1/2' thick, with truncate scales much thickened
toward the apex; nut orbicular to obovoid, surrounded by a membranaceous
wing.

A tree, usually 40 deg.--50 deg., occasionally 90 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes
3 deg. in diameter, slender somewhat pendulous branches forming a narrow
pyramidal head, and slender branchlets marked by minute scattered pale
lenticels, light green and coated at first with hoary tomentum sometimes
persistent until their second year, becoming during the first winter
bright red and lustrous and ultimately ashy gray. Winter-buds about 1/3'
long, dark red, covered with pale scurfy pubescence. Bark rarely more
than 3/4' thick, close, roughened by minute wart-like excrescences, pale
gray or nearly white, with a thin outer layer, and bright red-brown
inner bark. Wood light, soft, brittle, not strong, close-grained, light
brown tinged with red, with thick nearly white sapwood; in Washington
and Oregon largely used in the manufacture of furniture and for smoking
salmon; by the Indians of Alaska the trunks are hollowed into canoes.

Distribution. Shores of Yakutat Bay, southeastern Alaska, southward near
the coast to the canyons of the Santa Inez Mountains, Santa Barbara
County, California; common along the banks of streams, and of its
largest size near the shores of Puget Sound; in California most abundant
in Mendocino, Humboldt and Marin Counties, forming groves on
bottom-lands near the coast; often ranging inland for 20 or 30 miles,
and occasionally ascending to altitudes of 2000 deg. above the sea.


                    3. Alnus tenuifolia Nutt. Alder.

[Illustration: Fig. 211]

Leaves ovate-oblong, acute or acuminate, broad and rounded or cordate or
occasionally abruptly narrowed and cuneate at base, usually acutely
laciniately lobed and doubly serrate, when they unfold light green often
tinged with red, pilose on the upper surface and coated on the lower
with pale tomentum, at maturity thin and firm, dark green and glabrous
above, pale yellow-green and glabrous or puberulous below, 2'--4' long,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout orange-colored midrib impressed on the
upper side, and slender primary veins running to the points of the
lobes; petioles stout, slightly grooved, orange-colored, 1/2'--1' in
length; stipules ovate, acute, thin, and scarious, 1/2' long, about 1/8'
wide, covered with pale pubescence. Flowers: staminate aments 3 or 4 in
number in slender-stemmed racemes, nearly sessile or raised on stout
peduncles often 1/2' long, during the winter light purple, 3/4'--1' long
and 1/4' thick, becoming 1-1/2'--2' in length; calyx-lobes rounded,
shorter than the 4 stamens; pistillate aments naked during the winter,
dark red-brown, nearly 1/4' long, with acute apiculate loosely
imbricated scales, only slightly enlarged when the flowers open. Fruit:
strobiles obovoid-oblong, 1/3'--1/2' long, their scales much thickened,
truncate and 3-lobed at apex; nut nearly circular to slightly obovoid,
surrounded by a thin membranaceous border.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. tall, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, small
spreading slightly pendulous branches forming a narrow round-topped
head, and slender branchlets marked at first by a few large
orange-colored lenticels and coated with fine pale or rusty caducous
pubescence, becoming light brown or ashy gray more or less deeply
flushed with red in their first winter and ultimately paler; more often
shrubby, with several spreading stems, and at the north and at high
altitudes frequently only 4 deg.--5 deg. tall. Winter-buds 1/4'--1/3' long,
bright red, and puberulous. Bark rarely more than 1/4' thick, bright
red-brown and broken on the surface into small closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Banks of streams and mountain canyons from Francis Lake in
latitude 61 deg. north to the valley of the lower Fraser River, British
Columbia, eastward along the Saskatchewan to Prince Albert, and
southward through the Rocky Mountains to northern New Mexico; on the
Sierra Nevada of southern California, and in Lower California; the
common Alder of mountain streams in the northern interior region of the
continent; very abundant on the eastern slopes of the Cascade Mountains,
and on the southern California Sierras; forming great thickets at
6000 deg.--7000 deg. above the sea along the headwaters of the rivers of
southern California flowing to the Pacific Ocean; the common Alder of
eastern Washington and Oregon, and of Idaho and Montana; very abundant
and of its largest size in Colorado and northern New Mexico.


             4. Alnus rhombifolia Nutt. White Alder. Alder.

[Illustration: Fig. 212]

Leaves ovate or oval or sometimes nearly orbicular, rounded or acute at
apex, especially on vigorous shoots, gradually or abruptly narrowed and
cuneate at base, finely or sometimes coarsely and occasionally doubly
serrate, slightly thickened and reflexed on the somewhat undulate
margins, when they unfold pale green and covered with deciduous matted
white hairs, at maturity dark green and lustrous on the upper surface,
frequently marked, especially on the midrib, with minute glandular dots,
light yellow-green and slightly puberulous below, 2'--3' long,
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a stout yellow midrib and primary veins; petioles
slender, yellow, hairy, flattened and grooved on the upper side,
1/2'--3/4' long; stipules ovate, acute, scarious, puberulous, about 1/4'
in length. Flowers: staminate aments in slender-stemmed pubescent
clusters, usually short-stalked, during the summer dark olive-brown and
lustrous, 3/4'--1' long and about 1/16' thick, beginning to lengthen
late in the autumn before the leaves fall, fully grown and 4'--6' long
and 1/4' thick in January, with dark orange-brown scales, and deciduous
in February before the appearance of the new leaves; calyx yellow,
4-lobed, rather shorter than the 2 or occasionally 3 or rarely single
stamen; pistillate aments in short pubescent racemes emerging from the
bud in December, their scales broadly ovate and rounded. Fruit:
strobiles oblong, 1/3'--1/2' long, with thin scales slightly thickened
and lobed at apex, fully grown at midsummer, remaining closed until the
trees flower the following year; nut broadly ovoid, with a thin margin.

A tree, frequently 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, long slender branches pendulous at the ends, forming a wide
round-topped open head, and slender branchlets marked by small scattered
lenticels, at first light green and coated with pale caducous
pubescence, soon becoming dark orange-red and glabrous, and darker
during the winter and following summer. Winter-buds nearly 1/2' long,
very slender, dark red, and covered with pale scurfy pubescence. Bark on
old trunks 1' thick, dark brown, irregularly divided into flat often
connected ridges broken into oblong plates covered with small closely
appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, brittle, close-grained,
light brown, with thick lighter colored often nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams from northern Idaho to the eastern slope
of the Cascade Mountains of Washington and southeastern Oregon, and
southward from the valley of the Willamette River, Oregon (near Salem,
Marion County, _J. C. Nelson_) over the coast ranges and along the
western slopes of the Sierra Nevada to the mountains of southern
California (San Bernardino, San Jacinto, and Cuyamaca Ranges); the
common Alder of the valleys of central California, occasionally
ascending on the southern Sierra Nevada to altitudes of 8000 deg., and the
only species at low altitudes in the southern part of the state.


                   5. Alnus oblongifolia Torr. Alder.

                 _Alnus acuminata_ Sarg., not H. B. K.

[Illustration: Fig. 213]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute; or rarely obovate and rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, sharply and usually doubly
serrate, more or less thickly covered, especially early in the season,
with black glands, dark yellow-green and glabrous or slightly puberulous
above, pale and glabrous or puberulous below, especially along the
slender yellow midrib and veins, with small tufts of rusty hairs in the
axils of the primary veins, 2'--3' long, about 1-1/2' wide; petioles
slender, grooved, pubescent, 3/4' long; stipules ovate-lanceolate, brown
and scarious, about 1/4' in length. Flowers: staminate aments in short
stout-stemmed racemes, during the winter light yellow, 1/2'--3/4' long
and about 1/16' thick, becoming when the flowers open at the end of
February before the appearance of the leaves 2'--2-1/2' in length, with
ovate pointed dark orange-brown scales; calyx 4-lobed; stamens 3 or
occasionally 2, with pale red anthers soon becoming light yellow;
pistillate aments naked during the winter, 1/8' to nearly 1/4' long,
with light brown ovate rounded scales; stigmas bright red. Fruit:
strobiles 1/2'--1' long, with thin scales slightly thickened and nearly
truncate at apex; nut broadly ovoid, with a narrow membranaceous border.

A tree, in the United States rarely more than 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a
trunk sometimes 8' in diameter, long slender spreading branches forming
an open round-topped head, and slender branchlets slightly puberulous
when they first appear, light orange-red and lustrous during their first
winter, and marked by small conspicuous pale lenticels, becoming in
their second year dark red-brown or gray tinged with red and much
roughened by the elevated leaf-scars. Winter-buds acute, red, lustrous,
glabrous, 1/2' long. Bark thin, smooth, light brown tinged with red.

Distribution. Banks of streams in canyons of the mountains of southern
New Mexico and Arizona at altitudes of 4000 deg.--6000 deg. above the sea; in
Oak Creek Canyon near Flagstaff, northern Arizona (tree 100 deg. x 3 deg., _P.
Lowell_); and on the mountains of northern Mexico.


                     6. Alnus maritima Nutt. Alder.

[Illustration: Fig. 214]

Leaves oblong-ovate, or obovate, acute, acuminate or rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, remotely serrate with minute
incurved glandular teeth, and somewhat thickened on the slightly
undulate margins, when they unfold, light green tinged with red, hairy
on the midrib, veins, and petioles, and coated above with pale scurfy
pubescence, at maturity dark green, very lustrous, and covered below by
minute pale glandular dots, 3'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a stout
yellow midrib and primary veins prominent and glandular on the upper
side and slightly puberulous below; petioles stout, yellow, glandular,
flattened and grooved on the upper side, 1/2'--3/4' in length; stipules
oblong, acute, about 1/8' long, dark reddish brown, caducous. Flowers
opening in the autumn: aments appearing in July on branches of the year
and fully grown in August or early in September; staminate in short
scurfy-pubescent glandular-pitted racemes on slender peduncles sometimes
1' in length from the axils of upper leaves, covered at first with ovate
acute dark green very lustrous scales slightly ciliate on the margins
and furnished at apex with minute red points, at maturity 1-1/2'--2-1/2'
long, 1/4' to nearly 1/2' thick, with dark orange-brown scales raised on
slender stalks, and 4 bright orange-colored stamens; pistillate usually
solitary from the axils of the lower leaves on stout pubescent
peduncles, bright red at apex and light green below before opening, with
ovate acute scales slightly ciliate on the margins, about 1/8' long when
the styles protrude from between the scales, beginning to enlarge the
following spring. Fruit attaining full size at midsummer and then raised
on a stout peduncle, broadly ovoid, rounded and depressed at base,
gradually narrowed to the rather obtuse apex, about 5/8' long and 1/2'
broad, with thin lustrous scales slightly thickened and crenately lobed
at apex, turning dark reddish brown or nearly black and opening late in
the autumn and remaining on the branches until after the flowers open
the following year; nut oblong-obovoid, gradually narrowed and apiculate
at apex, with a thin membranaceous border.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 4'--5' in
diameter, small spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head,
slender slightly zigzag branchlets, light green and hairy at first, pale
yellow-green, very lustrous, slightly puberulous, marked with occasional
small orange-colored lenticels, and glandular with minute dark glandular
dots during their first summer, becoming dull light orange or reddish
brown in the winter, and ashy gray often slightly tinged with red the
following season; more often shrubby, with numerous slender spreading
stems 15 deg.--20 deg. tall. Winter-buds acute, dark red, coated with pale
lustrous scurfy pubescence, about 1/4' long. Bark 1/8' thick, smooth,
light brown or brown tinged with gray. Wood light, soft, close-grained,
light brown, with thick hardly distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of streams and ponds in southern Delaware and
Maryland, and in south central Oklahoma (Johnson and Bryan Counties).

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern states and
hardy as far north as Massachusetts.




                              X. FAGACEAE.


Trees, with watery juice, slender terete branchlets marked by numerous
usually pale lenticels, alternate stalked penniveined leaves, and narrow
mostly deciduous stipules. Flowers monoecious, the staminate in
unisexual heads or aments, composed of a 4--8-lobed calyx, and 4 or 8
stamens, with free simple filaments and introrse 2-celled anthers, the
cells parallel and contiguous, opening longitudinally; the pistillate
solitary or clustered, in terminal unisexual or bisexual spikes or
heads, subtended by an involucre of imbricated bracts becoming woody and
partly or entirely inclosing the fruit, and composed of a 4--8-lobed
calyx adnate to the 3--7-celled ovary with as many styles as its cells
and 1 or 2 pendulous anatropous or semianatropous ovules in each cell.
Fruit a nut 1-seeded by abortion, the outer coat cartilaginous, the
inner membranaceous or bony. Seed filling the cavity of the nut, without
albumen; seed-coat membranaceous; cotyledons fleshy, including the
minute superior radicle; hilum, basal, minute.

The six genera of this widely distributed family occur in North America
with the exception of Nothofagus, separated from Fagus to receive the
Beech-trees of the southern hemisphere.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN GENERA.

  Staminate flowers fascicled in globose-stalked heads; the pistillate
        in 2--4-flowered clusters.
                                                               1. Fagus.
  Staminate flowers in slender aments.
    Pistillate flowers in 2--5-flowered clusters below the staminate, in
          bisexual aments.
      Nut inclosed in a prickly burr.
        Leaves deciduous; ovary 6-celled; nut maturing in one season;
              branchlets lengthening by an upper axillary bud;
              bud-scales 4.
                                                            2. Castanea.
        Leaves persistent; ovary 3-celled; nut maturing at the end of
              the second season; branchlets lengthening by a terminal
              bud; bud-scales numerous.
                                                         3. Castanopsis.
      Nut inclosed only partly in a shallow cup covered by slender
            recurved scales united only at the base, free above.
                                                         4. Lithocarpus.
    Pistillate flowers solitary, in few-flowered unisexual spikes; nut
          more or less inclosed in a cup covered by thin or thickened
          scales, closely appressed or often free toward its rim.
                                                             5. Quercus.




                           1. FAGUS L. Beech.


Trees, with smooth pale bark, hard close-grained wood, and elongated
acute bright chestnut-brown buds, their inner scales accrescent and
marking the base of the branchlets with persistent ring-like scars.
Leaves convex and plicate along the veins in the bud, thick and firm,
deciduous; petioles short, nearly terete, in falling leaving small
elevated semioval leaf-scars, with marginal rows of minute
fibro-vascular bundle-scars; stipules linear-lanceolate, infolding the
leaf in the bud. Flowers vernal after the unfolding of the leaves;
staminate short-pedicellate, in globose many-flowered heads on long
drooping bibracteolate stems at base of shoots of the year or from the
axils of their lowest leaves, and composed of a subcampanulate
4--8-lobed calyx, the lobes imbricated in aestivation, ovate and rounded,
and 8--16 stamens inserted on the base of and longer than the calyx,
with slender filaments and oblong green anthers; pistillate in
2--4-flowered stalked clusters in the axils of upper leaves of the year,
surrounded by numerous awl-shaped hairy bracts, the outer bright red,
longer than the flowers, deciduous, the inner shorter and united below
into a 4-lobed involucre becoming at maturity woody, ovoid,
thick-walled, and covered by stout recurved prickles, inclosing or
partly inclosing the usually 3 nuts, and ultimately separating into 4
valves; calyx urn-shaped, villose, divided into 4 or 5 linear-lanceolate
acute lobes, its 3-angled tube adnate to the 3-celled ovary surmounted
by 3 slender recurved pilose styles green and stigmatic toward the apex
and longer than the involucre; ovules 2 in each cell. Nut ovoid,
unequally 3-angled, acute or winged at the angles, concave and
longitudinally ridged on the sides, chestnut-brown and lustrous, tipped
with the remnants of the styles, marked at the base by a small
triangular scar, with a thin shell covered on the inner surface with
rufous tomentum. Seed dark chestnut-brown, suspended with the abortive
ovules from the tip of the hairy dissepiment of the ovary pushed by the
growth of the seed into one of the angles of the nut; cotyledons sweet,
oily, plano-convex.

Fagus as here limited is confined to the northern hemisphere, with a
single American species and seven Old World species; of these one is
widely distributed through Europe, another is found in the Caucasus, and
the others are confined to eastern temperate Asia. Of exotic species,
the European _Fagus sylvatica_ L., an important timber-tree, is
frequently planted for ornament in the eastern states in several of its
forms, especially those with purple leaves, and with pendulous branches.
The wood of Fagus is hard and close-grained. The sweet seeds are a
favorite food of swine, and yield a valuable oil.

_Fagus_ is the classical name of the Beech-tree.


                   1. Fagus grandifolia Ehrh. Beech.

                        _Fagus americana_ Sweet.

[Illustration: Fig. 215]

Leaves remote at the ends of the branches and clustered on short lateral
branchlets, oblong-ovate, acuminate with a long slender point, coarsely
serrate with spreading or incurved triangular teeth except at the
gradually narrowed generally cuneate base, when they unfold pale green
and clothed on the lower surface and margins with long pale lustrous
silky hairs, at maturity dull dark bluish green above, light
yellow-green, very lustrous, and glabrous or rarely pilose below (f.
_pubescens_ Fern. & Rehd.) with tufts of long pale hairs in the axils of
the veins, 2-1/2'--5' long, 1'--3' wide, with a slender yellow midrib
covered above with short pale hairs, and slender primary veins running
obliquely to the points of the teeth; turning bright clear yellow in the
autumn; very rarely deeply laciniate; petioles hairy, 1/4'--1/2' length;
stipules ovate-lanceolate on the lower leaves, strap-shaped to
linear-lanceolate on the upper, brown or often red below the middle,
membranaceous, lustrous, 1'--1-1/2' long. Flowers opening when the
leaves are about one third grown; staminate in globose heads 1' in
diameter, on slender hairy peduncles about 2' long; pistillate in
usually 2-flowered clusters, on short clavate hoary peduncles 1/2'--3/4'
long. Fruit: involucres 1/2'--3/4' in length often shorter than the
nuts, on stout hairy club-shaped peduncles 1/4'--3/4' long, fully grown
at midsummer, and then puberulous, dark orange-green, and covered by
long slender recurved prickles red above the middle, becoming at
maturity in the autumn light brown and tomentose, with crowded much
recurved pubescent prickles, persistent on the branch after opening late
into the winter; nut about 3/4' long.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. but exceptionally 120 deg. high, sending up from
the roots numerous small stems sometimes extending into broad thickets
round the parent tree, in the forest with a long comparatively slender
stem free of branches for more than half its length, and short branches
forming a narrow head, in open situations short-stemmed, with a trunk
often 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, and numerous limbs spreading gradually and
forming a broad compact round-topped head of slender slightly drooping
branches clothed with short leafy laterals, and branchlets pale green
and coated with long soft caducous hairs when they first appear,
olive-green or orange-colored during their first summer, and
conspicuously marked by oblong bright orange lenticels, gradually
growing red, bright reddish brown during their first winter, darker
brown in their second season and ultimately ashy gray. Winter-buds
puberulous, especially toward the apex, 3/4' to nearly 1' long, about
1/8' broad, the inner scales hirsute on the inner surface and along the
margins and when fully grown often 1' long, lustrous, brown above the
middle, and reddish below. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick, with a smooth light
steel-gray surface. Wood hard, strong, tough, very close-grained, not
durable, difficult to season, dark or often light red, with thin nearly
white sapwood of 20--30 layers of annual growth; largely used in the
manufacture of chairs, shoe-lasts, plane-stocks, the handles of tools,
and for fuel. The sweet nuts are gathered and sold in the markets of
Canada and of some of the western and middle states.

Distribution. Rich uplands and mountain slopes, often forming nearly
pure forests, and southward on the bottom-lands of streams and the
margins of swamps; valley of the Restigouche River, New Brunswick, to
the northern shores of Lake Huron and the southern shores of Lake
Superior, and southward to Virginia, Ohio, Michigan, the ravines of Rock
River near Oregon, Ogle County, Illinois, Minnesota and northern
Missouri; southward passing into the var. _caroliniana_ Fern. & Rehd.,
differing in its ovate to short-ovate thicker leaves, usually rounded or
subcordate at base, and often less coarsely serrate or undulate on the
margins, glabrous or rarely densely soft pubescent below (f. _mollis_
Fern. & Rehd.), in the often shorter involucre of the fruit with shorter
and less crowded prickles; usually on the bottom-lands of streams and
the borders of swamps, New Jersey, and southern Ohio and Missouri to
western Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, eastern Texas, and
northeastern Oklahoma; ascending on the southern Appalachian Mountains
to altitudes of 3000 deg.; probably growing to its largest size in eastern
Louisiana.

The northern form is occasionally planted in the northern states as a
shade and park tree.




                      2. CASTANEA Adans. Chestnut.


Trees or shrubs, with furrowed bark, porous brittle wood, durable in the
ground, terete branchlets without terminal buds, axillary buds covered
by 2 pairs of slightly imbricated scales, the outer lateral, the others
accrescent, becoming oblong-ovate and acute and marking the base of the
branch with narrow ring-like scars, and stout perpendicular tap-roots;
producing when cut numerous stout shoots from the stump. Leaves
convolute in the bud, ovate, acute, coarsely serrate, except at the
base, with thin veins running to the points of the slender glandular
teeth, deciduous; petioles leaving in falling small elevated semioval
leaf-scars marked by an irregular marginal row of minute fibro-vascular
bundle-scars; stipules ovate to linear-lanceolate, acute, scarious,
infolding the leaf in the bud, caducous. Flowers opening in early
summer, unisexual, strong-smelling; the staminate, in 3--7-flowered
cymes, in the axils of minute ovate bracts, in elongated simple
deciduous aments first appearing with the unfolding of the leaves from
the inner scales of the terminal bud and from the axils of the lower
leaves of the year, composed of a pale straw-colored slightly puberulous
calyx deeply divided into 6 ovate rounded segments imbricated in the
bud, and 10--20 stamens inserted on the slightly thickened torus, with
filiform filaments incurved in the bud, becoming elongated and exserted,
and ovoid or globose pale yellow anthers; the pistillate scattered or
spicate at the base of the shorter persistent androgynous aments from
the axils of later leaves, sessile, 2 or 3 together or solitary within a
short-stemmed or sessile involucre of closely imbricated oblong acute
bright green bracts scurfy-pubescent or tomentose below the middle,
subtended by a bract and 2 lateral bractlets, each flower composed of an
urn-shaped calyx, with a short limb divided into 6 obtuse lobes, minute
sterile stamens shorter than the calyx-lobes, an ovary 6-celled after
fecundation, with 6 linear spreading white styles hairy below the middle
and tipped by minute acute stigmas, and 2 ovules in each cell, attached
on its inner angle, descending, semianatropous. Fruit maturing in one
season, its involucre inclosing 1--3 nuts, globose or short-oblong,
pubescent or tomentose and spiny on the outer surface, with elongated
ridged bright green ultimately brown branched spines fascicled between
the deciduous scales, coated on the inner surface with lustrous
pubescence, splitting at maturity into 2--4 valves; nut ovoid, acute,
crowned by the remnants of the style, bright chestnut-brown and
lustrous, tomentose or pubescent at apex, cylindrical, or when more than
1 flattened, marked at the broad base by a large conspicuous pale
circular or oval thickened scar, its shell lined with rufous or hoary
tomentum. Seed usually solitary by abortion, dark chestnut-brown, marked
at apex by the abortive ovules, with thick and fleshy more or less
undulate ruminate sweet farinaceous cotyledons.

Castanea is confined to the northern hemisphere, and is widely
distributed through eastern North America, southern Europe, northern
Africa, southwestern Asia, and central and northern China, Korea, and
Japan. Seven species are distinguished. In the countries of the
Mediterranean Basin much attention has been given to improving the fruit
of the native species _Castanea sativa_ Mill., which is occasionally
planted in the middle United States; in Japan the seeds of _Castanea
crenata_ S. & Zucc. in many varieties and in China those of _Castanea
mollissima_ Bl. are important articles of food. Castanea produces
coarse-grained wood very durable in contact with the soil, and rich in
tannin. Chestnut-trees suffer in the eastern United States from the
attacks of a fungus, _Endothia parasitica_ Anders. which has nearly
exterminated them in many parts of the country.

_Castanea_ is the classical name of the Chestnut-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Involucre of the fruit containing 2 or 3 flattened nuts.
                                                   1. C. dentata (A, C).
  Involucre of the fruit containing a single terete nut.
    Involucre of the fruit densely covered with spines; branchlets hoary
          tomentose.
                                                    2. C. pumila (A, C).
    Involucre of the fruit covered with scattered spines; branchlets
          glabrous or sparingly pilose.
                                                    3. C. alnifolia (C).


                  1. Castanea dentata Borkh. Chestnut.

[Illustration: Fig. 216]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute and long-pointed at apex, gradually
narrowed and cuneate at base, when they unfold puberulous on the upper
surface and clothed on the lower with fine cobweb-like tomentum, at
maturity thin, glabrous, dark dull yellow-green above, pale yellow-green
below, 6'--8' long, about 2' wide, with a pale yellow midrib and primary
veins; turning bright clear yellow late in the autumn; petioles stout,
slightly angled, puberulous, 1/2' long, often flushed with red; stipules
ovate-lanceolate, acute, yellow-green, puberulous, about 1/2' long.
Flowers: staminate aments about 1/2' long when they first appear, green
below the middle and red above, becoming when fully grown 6'--8' long,
with stout green puberulous stems covered from base to apex with crowded
flower-clusters; androgynous aments, slender, puberulous, 2-1/2'--5'
long, with 2 or 3 irregularly scattered involucres of pistillate flowers
near their base. Fruit: involucre attaining its full size by the middle
of August, 2'--2-1/2' in diameter, sometimes a little longer than broad,
somewhat flattened at apex, pubescent and covered on the outer surface
with crowded fascicles of long slender glabrous much-branched spines,
opening with the first frost and gradually shedding their nuts; nuts
usually much compressed, 1/2'--1' wide, usually rather broader than
long, coated at apex or nearly to the middle with thick pale tomentum,
the interior of the shell lined with thick rufous tomentum; seed very
sweet.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. high, with a tall straight columnar trunk
3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, or often when uncrowded by other trees with a short
trunk occasionally 10 deg.--12 deg. in diameter, and usually divided not far
above the ground into 3 or 4 stout horizontal limbs forming a broad low
round-topped head of slightly pendulous branches frequently 100 deg. across,
and branchlets at first light yellow-green sometimes tinged with red,
somewhat angled, lustrous, slightly puberulous, soon becoming glabrous
and olive-green tinged with yellow or brown tinged with green and
ultimately dark brown. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, about 1/4' long, with
thin dark chestnut-brown scales scarious on the margins. Bark from
1'--2' thick, dark brown and divided by shallow irregular often
interrupted fissures into broad flat ridges separating on the surface
into small thin closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong,
liable to check and warp in drying, easily split, reddish brown, with
thin lighter colored sapwood of 3 or 4 layers of annual growth; largely
used in the manufacture of cheap furniture and in the interior finish of
houses, for railway-ties, fence-posts, and rails. The nuts, which are
superior to those of the Old World chestnuts in sweetness were formerly
gathered in great quantities in the forest and sold in the markets of
the eastern cities.

Distribution. Southern Maine to Woodstock, Grafton County, New Hampshire
(rare) and to the valley of the Winooski River, Vermont, southern
Ontario, and southern Michigan, southward to Delaware and Ohio, southern
Indiana, and southwestern Illinois (Pulaski County) along the
Appalachian Mountains up to altitudes of 4000 deg. to northern Georgia, and
to western Florida (Crestview, Walton County) southeastern (Henry and
Dale Counties) and south central (Dallas County) Alabama, Northern,
central and southeastern Mississippi (Pearl River County), and to
central Kentucky and Tennessee; very common on the glacial drift of the
northern states and, except at the north, mostly confined to the
Appalachian hills; attaining its greatest size in western North Carolina
and eastern Tennessee.

Formerly sometimes planted in the eastern states as an ornamental and
timber tree, and for its nuts, of which several varieties have been
recognized.

x _Castanea neglecta_ Dode with leaves intermediate between those of _C.
dentata_ and _C. pumila_ and an involucre containing a single large nut
occurs on the Blue Ridge near Highlands, Macon County, North Carolina.


                  2. Castanea pumila Mill. Chinquapin.

[Illustration: Fig. 217]

Leaves oblong-elliptic to oblong-obovate, acute, coarsely serrate, with
slender rigid spreading or incurved teeth, gradually narrowed and
usually unequal and rounded or cuneate at base, when they unfold tinged
with red and coated above with pale caducous tomentum and below with
thick snowy white tomentum, at maturity rather thick and firm in
texture, bright yellow-green on the upper surface, hoary or silvery
pubescent on the lower, 3'--5' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide; turning dull
yellow in the autumn; petioles stout, pubescent, flattened on the upper
side, 1/4'--1/2' long; stipules light yellow-green, pubescent, those of
the 2 lowest leaves broad, ovate, acute, covered at apex by rufous
tomentum, on later leaves ovate-lanceolate, often oblique and acute,
becoming linear at the end of the branch. Flowers: staminate aments 1/2'
long when they first appear, pubescent, green below, bright red at apex,
becoming when fully grown 4'--6' long, with stout hoary tomentose stems
and crowded or scattered flower-clusters; androgynous aments silvery
tomentose, 3'--4' long; involucres 1-flowered, scattered at the base of
the ament or often spicate and covering its lower half, sessile or
short-stalked. _Fruit_: involucre 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, with thin
walls covered with crowded fascicles of slender spines tomentose toward
the base; nut ovoid, terete, rounded at the slightly narrowed base,
gradually narrowed and pointed at apex, more or less coated with silvery
white pubescence, dark chestnut-brown, very lustrous, 3/4'--1' long,
1/3' thick, with a thin shell lined with a coat of lustrous hoary
tomentum, and a sweet seed.

A round-topped tree, rarely 50 deg. high, with a short straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg.
in diameter, slender spreading branches, and branchlets coated at first
with pale tomentum, becoming during their first winter pubescent or
remaining tomentose at the apex, bright red-brown, glabrous, lustrous,
olive-green or orange-brown during their second season and ultimately
darker; east of the Mississippi River often a shrub spreading into broad
thickets by prolific stolons, with numerous intricately branched stems
often only 4 deg. or 5 deg. tall. Winter-buds ovoid, or oval, about 1/8' long,
clothed when they first appear in summer with thick hoary tomentum,
becoming red during the winter and scurfy-pubescent. Bark 1/2'--1'
thick, light brown tinged with red, slightly furrowed and broken on the
surface into loose plate-like scales. Wood light, hard, strong,
coarse-grained, dark brown, with thin hardly distinguishable sapwood of
3 or 4 layers of annual growth; used for fence-posts, rails, and
railway-ties. The sweet nuts are sold in the markets of the western and
southern states.

Distribution. Dry sandy ridges, rich hillsides and the borders of
swamps; southern New Jersey and Pennsylvania to central (Lake County)
and western Florida and westward through the Gulf States to the valley
of the Neches River, Texas, and through Arkansas to eastern Oklahoma and
southwestern Missouri; on the Appalachian Mountains ascending to
altitudes of 4500 deg.; most abundant and of its largest size in southern
Arkansas and eastern Texas.


                3. Castanea alnifolia Nutt. Chinquapin.

A low shrub spreading into broad thickets by underground stems, with
leaves pale pubescent on the lower surface; and distributed in the
neighborhood of the coast from the valley of the Cape Fear River, North
Carolina, to southern Georgia. Passing into


          Castanea alnifolia var. floridana Sarg. Chinquapin.

[Illustration: Fig. 218]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic, acute, acuminate or rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed and cuneate or rounded at base, irregularly
sinuate-toothed with apiculate teeth, hoary tomentose below when they
unfold, soon glabrous with the exception of the last leaves of vigorous
summer shoots, and at maturity thin, glabrous, dark green above, light
green and lustrous below, 3'--4' long and 1'--1-3/4' wide; petioles
stout, glabrous, about 1/12' in length. Flowers: staminate aments pale
pubescent, 4'--5' long; androgynous aments pubescent, as long or rather
longer with ten or twelve involucres of pistillate flowers below the
middle, often only the lowest being fertilized. Fruit: involucre
1-seeded, subglobose to short-oblong, pale tomentose, 3/4' to 1-1/4' in
diameter, covered with stout pubescent scattered spines divided at base
into numerous branches; nut ovoid, terete, acute, dark chestnut-brown,
lustrous, 1/2' to nearly 3/4' in length.

A tree occasionally 40 deg.--45 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes a foot in
diameter, small irregularly spreading branches forming a narrow head,
and slender glabrous or rarely pilose red-brown branchlets; more often a
shrub sometimes with broader obovoid leaves sometimes puberulous on the
lower surface.

Dry sandy soil; coast of North Carolina, near Wrightsville, New Hanover
County; Dover, near the Ogechee River, Screven County, Georgia;
Jacksonville, Duval County, and Panama City on Saint Andrew's Bay, Bay
County, Florida; near Selma, Dallas County, Alabama; and Covington, St.
Tammany Parish, Louisiana.

A tree only on the shores of Saint Andrew's Bay.




                         3. CASTANOPSIS Spach.


Trees, with scaly bark, astringent wood, and winter-buds covered by
numerous imbricated scales. Leaves convolute in the bud, 5-ranked,
coriaceous, entire or dentate, penniveined, persistent; stipules obovate
or lanceolate, scarious, mostly caducous. Flowers in 3-flowered cymes,
or the pistillate rarely solitary or in pairs, in the axils of minute
bracts, on slender erect aments from the axils of leaves of the year;
the staminate on usually elongated and panicled aments, and composed of
a campanulate 5 or 6-lobed or parted calyx, the lobes imbricated in the
bud, usually 10 or 12 stamens inserted on the slightly thickened torus,
with elongated exserted filiform filaments and oblong anthers, and a
minute hirsute rudimentary ovary; the pistillate on shorter simple or
panicled aments or scattered at the base of the staminate inflorescence,
the cymes surrounded by an involucre of imbricated scales; calyx
urn-shaped, the short limb divided into 6 obtuse lobes; abortive stamens
inserted on the limb of the calyx and opposite its lobes; ovary sessile
on the thin disk, 3-celled after fecundation, with 3 spreading styles
terminating in minute stigmas, and 2 ovules in each cell attached to its
interior angle. Fruit maturing at the end of the second or rarely of the
first season, its involucre inclosing 1--3 nuts, ovoid or globose,
sometimes more or less depressed, rarely obscurely angled, dehiscent or
indehiscent, covered by stout spines, tuberculate or marked by
interrupted vertical ridges; nut more or less angled by mutual pressure
when more than 1, often pilose, crowned with the remnants of the style,
marked at the base by a large conspicuous circular depressed scar, the
thick shell tomentose on the inner surface. Seed usually solitary by
abortion, bearing at apex the abortive ovules; cotyledons plano-convex,
fleshy, farinaceous.

Castanopsis inhabits California with two species, and southeastern Asia
where it is distributed with about twenty-five species from southern
China to the Malay Archipelago and the eastern Himalayas. Of the
California species one is usually arborescent and the other _Castanopsis
sempervirens_ Dudley is a low alpine shrub of the coast ranges and the
Sierra Nevada.

_Castanopsis_ from {kastana} and {opsis}, in allusion to its resemblance
to the Chestnut-tree.


 1. Castanopsis chrysophylla A. DC. Chinquapin. Golden-leaved Chestnut.

[Illustration: Fig. 219]

Leaves lanceolate or oblong-ovate, gradually narrowed at the ends or
sometimes abruptly contracted at apex into a short broad point, entire
with slightly thickened revolute margins, when they unfold thin, coated
below with golden yellow persistent scales and above with scattered
white scales, at maturity thick and coriaceous, dark green and lustrous
above, 2'--6' long, 1/2' to nearly 2' wide, with a stout midrib raised
and rounded on the upper side; turning yellow at maturity and falling
gradually at the end of their second or in their third year; petioles
1/4'--1/3' in length; stipules ovate, rounded or acute at apex, brown
and scarious, puberulous, 1/4'--1/3' long. Flowers appearing irregularly
from June until February in the axils of broadly ovate apiculate
pubescent bracts on staminate and androgynous scurfy stout-stemmed
aments 2'--2-1/2' long and crowded at the ends of the branches; calyx of
the staminate flower coated on the outer surface with hoary tomentum,
divided into broadly ovate rounded lobes much shorter than the slender
stamens; calyx of the pistillate flower oblong-campanulate, free from
the ovary, clothed with hoary tomentum, divided at apex into short
rounded lobes, rather shorter than the minute abortive stamens; anthers
red; ovary conic, hirsute, with elongated slightly spreading thick pale
stigmas. Fruit ripening at the end of the second season, involucre
globose, dehiscent, irregularly 4-valved, often slightly shorter than
the nuts, sessile, solitary, or clustered, tomentose and covered on the
outer surface by long stout or slender rigid spines, 1'--1-1/2' in
diameter, containing 1 or occasionally 2 nuts; nuts broadly ovoid,
acute, obtusely 3-angled, light yellow-brown and lustrous; seeds dark
purple-red, sweet and edible.

A tree, 50 deg.--100 deg. high, with a massive trunk 3 deg.--6 deg. in diameter,
frequently free of branches for 50 deg., stout spreading branches forming a
broad compact round-topped or conic head, and rigid branchlets coated
when they first appear with bright golden-yellow scurfy scales, dark
reddish brown and slightly scurfy during their first winter, and
gradually growing darker in their second season; often much smaller and
sometimes reduced to a shrub, 2 deg.--12 deg. high (var. _minor_ A. De
Candolle). Winter-buds fully grown at mid-summer, usually crowded near
the end of the branch, ovoid or subglobose, with broadly ovate apiculate
thin and papery light brown scales slightly puberulous on the back,
ciliate on the scarious often reflexed margins, the terminal about 1/4'
long and broad and rather larger than the often stipitate axillary buds.
Bark 1'--2' thick and deeply divided into rounded ridges 2'--3' wide,
broken into thick plate-like scales, dark red-brown on the surface and
bright red internally. Wood light, soft, close-grained, not strong,
light brown tinged with red, with thin lighter colored sapwood of 50--60
layers of annual growth; occasionally used in the manufacture of ploughs
and other agricultural implements.

Distribution. Skamania County, Washington, valley of the lower Columbia
River, Oregon, southward along the western slopes of the Cascade
Mountains, and in California along the western slopes of the Sierra
Nevada and through the coast ranges to the elevated valleys of the San
Jacinto Mountains, sometimes ascending to altitudes of 4000 deg. above the
sea; of its largest size in the humid coast valleys of northern
California.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of temperate Europe.




                           4. LITHOCARPUS Bl.


                            _Pasania_ Oerst.

Trees, with astringent properties, pubescence of fascicled hairs, deeply
furrowed scaly bark, hard close-grained brittle wood, stout branchlets,
and winter-buds covered by few erect or spreading foliaceous scales.
Leaves convolute in the bud, petiolate, persistent, entire or dentate,
with a stout midrib, primary veins running obliquely to the points of
the teeth, or on entire leaves forked and united near the margins, and
reticulate veinlets; stipules oblong-obovate to linear-lanceolate, those
of the upper leaves persistent and surrounding the buds during the
winter. Flowers in erect unisexual and in bisexual tomentose aments from
the axils of leaves of the year, from the inner scales of the terminal
bud or from separate buds in the axils of leaves of the previous year;
staminate in 3-flowered clusters in the axils of ovate rounded bracts,
the lateral flowers subtended by similar but smaller bracts, each flower
composed of a 5-lobed tomentose calyx, with nearly triangular acute
lobes, 10 stamens, with slender elongated filaments and small oblong or
emarginate anthers, and an acute abortive hairy ovary; pistillate
scattered at the base of the upper aments below the staminate flowers,
solitary in the axils of acute bracts, furnished with minute lateral
bractlets, and composed of a 6-lobed ovoid calyx, with rounded lobes,
inclosed in the tomentose involucral scales, 6 stamens, with abortive
anthers, an ovoid-oblong 3-celled ovary, 3 elongated spreading light
green styles thickened and stigmatic at apex, and 2 anatropous ovules in
each cell. Fruit an oval or ovoid nut maturing at the end of the second
season, 1-seeded by abortion, surrounded at base by the accrescent woody
cupular involucre of the flower, marked by a large pale circular basal
scar, the thick shell tomentose on the inner surface. Seed red-brown,
filling the cavity of the nut, bearing at apex the abortive ovules;
cotyledons thick and fleshy, yellow and bitter.

Lithocarpus is intermediate between the Oaks and the Chestnuts, and,
with the exception of one California species, is confined to
southeastern Asia, where it is distributed with many species from
southern Japan and southern China through the Malay Peninsula to the
Indian Archipelago.

_Lithocarpus_ from {lithos} and {karpos}, in allusion to the character
of the fruit.


      1. Lithocarpus densiflora Rehd. Tan Bark Oak. Chestnut Oak.

                   _Quercus densiflora_ Hook. & Arn.
                       _Pasania densiflora_ Oerst.

[Illustration: Fig. 220]

Leaves oblong or oblong-obovate, rounded or acute or rarely cordate at
base, acute or occasionally rounded at apex, or rarely lanceolate and
acuminate (f. _lanceolata_ Rehdr.) repand-dentate, with acute callous
teeth, or entire with thickened revolute margins, coated when they
unfold with fulvous tomentum and glandular on the margins with dark
caducous glands, at maturity pale green, lustrous and glabrous or
covered with scattered pubescence on the upper surface, rusty-tomentose
on the lower, ultimately becoming glabrous above and glabrate and bluish
white below, 3'--5' long, 3/4'--3' wide, with a midrib raised and
rounded on the upper side, thin or thick primary veins and fine
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; persistent until the end of their third
or fourth year; petioles stout, rigid, tomentose, 1/2'--3/4' in length;
stipules brown and scarious, hirsute on the outer surface. Flowers in
early spring and frequently also irregularly during the autumn; aments
stout-stemmed, 3'--4' long; staminate flowers crowded, hoary-tomentose
in the bud, their bracts tomentose. Fruit solitary or often in pairs, on
a stout tomentose peduncle 1/2'--1' in length; nut full and rounded at
base, gradually narrowed and acute or rounded at apex, scurfy-pubescent
when fully grown, becoming light yellow-brown, glabrous and lustrous at
maturity, 3/4'--1' long, 1/2'--1' thick, its cup shallow, tomentose with
lustrous red-brown hairs on the inner surface, and covered by long
linear rigid spreading or recurved light brown scales coated with
fascicled hairs, frequently tipped, especially while young, with dark
red glands and often tomentose near the base of the cup.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. but sometimes 150 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, stout branches ascending in the forest and forming a narrow
spire-like head, or in open positions spreading horizontally and forming
a broad dense symmetrical round-topped crown, and branchlets coated at
first with a thick fulvous tomentum of fascicled hairs often persistent
until the second or third year, becoming dark reddish brown and
frequently covered with a glaucous bloom; or sometimes reduced to a
shrub, with slender stems only a few feet high (var. _montana_ Rehdr.).
Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, 1/4'--1/3' long, often surrounded by the
persistent stipules of the upper leaves, with tomentose loosely
imbricated scales, those of the outer ranks linear-lanceolate,
increasing in width toward the interior of the bud, those of the inner
ranks ovate or obovate and rounded at apex. Bark 3/4'--1-1/2' thick,
deeply divided by narrow fissures into broad rounded ridges broken into
nearly square plates covered by closely appressed light red-brown
scales. Wood hard, strong, close-grained, brittle, reddish brown, with
thick darker brown sapwood; largely used as fuel. The bark is
exceedingly rich in tannin and is largely used for tanning leather.

Distribution. Valley of the Umpqua River, Oregon, southward through the
coast ranges to the Santa Inez Mountains, California, and along the
western slope of the Sierra Nevada up to elevations of 4000 deg. above the
sea to Mariposa County; very abundant in the humid coast region north of
San Francisco Bay and on the Santa Cruz and Santa Lucia Mountains, and
of its largest size in the Redwood forest of Napa and Mendocino
Counties; southward and on the Sierras less abundant and of smaller
size; the form _lanceolata_ in southern Oregon and in Del Norte and
Mendocino Counties, California; the var. _montana_ at high altitudes on
the Siskiyou Mountains, in the region of Mount Shasta and on the
northern Sierra Nevada.




                           5. QUERCUS L. Oak.


Trees or shrubs, with astringent properties, pubescence of fascicled
hairs, scaly or dark and furrowed bark, hard and close-grained or porous
brittle wood, slender branchlets marked by pale lenticels and more or
less prominently 5-angled. Winter-buds clustered at the ends of the
branchlets, with numerous membranaceous chestnut-brown slightly
accrescent caducous scales closely imbricated in 5 ranks, in falling
marking the base of the branchlet with ring-like scars. Leaves 5-ranked,
lobed, dentate or entire, often variable on the same branch,
membranaceous or coriaceous, the primary veins prominent and extending
to the margins or united within them and connected by more or less
reticulate veinlets, deciduous in the autumn or persistent until spring
or until their third or fourth year; petioles in falling leaving
slightly elevated semiorbicular more or less obcordate leaf-scars
broader than high, marked by the ends of numerous scattered
fibro-vascular bundles; stipules obovate to lanceolate, scarious,
caducous, or those of upper leaves occasionally persistent through the
season. Flowers vernal with or after the unfolding of the leaves;
staminate solitary in the axils of lanceolate acute caducous bracts, or
without bracts, in graceful pendulous clustered aments, from separate or
leaf-buds in the axils of leaves of the previous year, or from the axils
of the inner scales of the terminal bud or from those of the leaves of
the year; calyx campanulate, lobed or divided to the base into 4--7,
usually 6, membranaceous lobes; stamens 4--6, rarely 2, or 10--12,
inserted on the slightly thickened torus, with free filiform exserted
filaments and ovate-oblong or subglobose glabrous or rarely hairy
2-celled usually yellow anthers; pistillate solitary, subtended by a
caducous bract and 2 bractlets, in short or elongated few-flowered
spikes from the axils of leaves of the year; calyx urn-shaped, with a
short campanulate 6-lobed limb, the tube adnate to the incompletely 3 or
rarely 4 or 5-celled ovary inclosed more or less completely by an
accrescent involucre of imbricated scales, becoming the cup of the
fruit; styles as many as the cells of the ovary, short or elongated,
erect or incurved, dilated above, stigmatic on the inner face or at apex
only, generally persistent on the fruit; ovules anatropous or
semianatropous, 2 in each cell. Fruit a nut (_acorn_) maturing in one or
in two years, ovoid, subglobose, or turbinate, short-pointed at apex,
1-seeded by abortion, marked at base by a large conspicuous circular
scar, with a thick shell, glabrous or coated on the inner surface with
pale tomentum, more or less surrounded or inclosed in the accrescent
cupular involucre of the flower (_cup_), its scales thin or thickened,
loosely or closely imbricated. Seed marked at base or at apex or rarely
on the side by the abortive ovules; cotyledons thick and fleshy, usually
plano-convex and entire.

Quercus inhabits the temperate regions of the northern hemisphere and
high altitudes within the tropics, ranging in the New World southward to
the mountains of Colombia and in the Old World to the Indian
Archipelago. Two hundred and seventy-five species have been described;
of the North American species fifty-four are large or small trees. Of
exotic species, the European _Quercus Robur_ L., and _Quercus
sessiliflora_ Salisb., have been frequently cultivated as ornamental
trees in the eastern United States, where, however, they are usually
short-lived and unsatisfactory. Many of the species are important
timber-trees; their bark is often rich in tannin and is used for tanning
leather, and all produce wood valuable for fuel and in the manufacture
of charcoal.

_Quercus_ is the classical name of the Oak-tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Fruit maturing at the end of the second season (except 22); shell of
        the nut silky tomentose on the inner surface; leaves or their
        lobes bristle-tipped. Black Oaks.
    Stamens usually 4--6; styles elongated, finally recurved; abortive
          ovules apical.
      Leaves deciduous in their first autumn or winter.
        Leaves pinnately lobed, convolute in the bud.
          Leaves green on both surfaces.
            Scales of the cup of the fruit closely appressed.
              Leaves usually dull on the upper surface, 7--11-lobed; cup
                    of the fruit cup-shaped or in one variety broad and
                    saucer-shaped, its scales thin.
                                                     1. Q. borealis (A).
              Leaves lustrous.
                Leaves dimorphous, 5--7-lobed, axillary clusters of
                      hairs large and prominent; cup of the fruit
                      saucer-shaped or in one form deep cup-shaped.
                                                 2. Q. Shumardii (A, C).
                Leaves similar on upper and lower branches.
                  Cup of the fruit turbinate or deep cup-shaped.
                    Leaves 5-lobed, the lobes usually entire, rarely
                          furnished with tufts of axillary hairs below.
                                                       3. Q. texana (C).
                    Leaves 5--7-lobed, the lobes dentate, furnished with
                          tufts of axillary hairs below.
                                                4. Q. ellipsoidalis (A).
                  Cup of the fruit deep cup-shaped to turbinate; leaves
                        5--9-lobed, the lobes toothed.
                                                  5. Q. coccinea (A, C).
                  Cup of the fruit saucer-shaped.
                    Leaves 5--9-lobed.
                                                 6. Q. palustris (A, C).
                    Leaves 3--5-lobed.
                                                    7. Q. georgiana (C).
            Scales of the cup of the fruit more or less loosely
                  imbricated, forming a free margin on its rim.
              Leaves usually 7-lobed.
                Winter-buds tomentose.
                                                  8. Q. velutina (A, C).
                Winter-buds pubescent only at apex.
                                                    9. Q. Kelloggii (G).
              Leaves usually 3--5-lobed; winter-buds rusty pubescent.
                                                    10. Q. Catesbaei (C).
          Leaves whitish or grayish tomentulose below.
            Leaves mostly acutely 5-lobed, pale or silvery white below.
                                                  11. Q. ilicifolia (A).
            Leaves often dimorphous, 3--11-lobed, the lobes often
                  falcate.
                                                    12. Q. rubra (A, C).
        Leaves broad-obovate, often abruptly dilated at the wide
              obscurely lobed apex.
          Leaves rounded or cordate at base.
            Lower surface of the leaves orange color or brownish, the
                  upper scales of the cup forming with several rows a
                  thick rim on its inner surface, often reflexed.
                                              13. Q. marilandica (A, C).
            Lower surface of the leaves pale, the erect scales on the
                  rim of the cup in a single row.
                                                   14. Q. arkansana (C).
          Leaves cuneate at base.
            Leaves oblong-obovate.
                                                       15. Q. nigra (C).
            Leaves rhombic.
                                                    16. Q. rhombica (C).
        Leaves lanceolate-oblong or lanceolate-obovate, usually entire,
              involute in the bud. Willow Oaks.
          Leaves glabrous.
            Leaves lanceolate to oblanceolate, deciduous in autumn.
                                                  17. Q. Phellos (A, C).
            Leaves elliptic or rarely oblong-obovate, deciduous in the
                  late winter.
                                                  18. Q. laurifolia (C).
          Leaves tomentose or pubescent below, oblong-lanceolate to
                oblong-obovate.
            Leaves pale blue-green, hoary tomentose below.
                                                     19. Q. cinerea (C).
            Leaves dark green, pubescent below.
                                                  20. Q. imbricaria (A).
      Leaves not deciduous in the autumn, revolute in the bud (convolute
            in 23).
        Leaves mostly persistent until after the appearance of those of
              the following year.
          Leaves lanceolate, oblong-lanceolate or elliptic, pale and
                tomentose below.
                                                21. Q. hypoleuca (E, H).
          Leaves oval, orbicular to oblong, green and pubescent below;
                fruit maturing at the end of the first season.
                                                   22. Q. agrifolia (G).
        Leaves persistent until their second summer or autumn.
          Leaves lanceolate to oval or oblong-lanceolate, entire or
                serrate; cup of the fruit turbinate or tubular.
                                                  23. Q. Wislizenii (G).
          Leaves oval to oblong-obovate; cup of the fruit saucer-shaped
                or turbinate.
                                                  24. Q. myrtifolia (C).
    Stamens usually 6--8; styles dilated; abortive ovules basal or
          lateral; leaves persistent until their third or fourth season,
          involute in the bud.
      Leaves oblong, entire, dentate, or sinuate-toothed,
            fulvous-tomentose and ultimately pale on the lower surface;
            cup of the fruit usually thick.
                                              25. Q. chrysolepis (G, H).
      Leaves oblong-lanceolate, crenate-dentate or entire, pubescent or
            tomentose below; cup of the fruit usually thin.
                                                  26. Q. tomentella (G).
  Fruit maturing at the end of the first season; shell of the nut
        glabrous on the inner surface (hoary-tomentose in 27); abortive
        ovules basal; stamens 6--8; styles dilated; lobes of the leaves
        not bristle-tipped. White Oaks.
    Leaves mostly persistent until the appearance of those of the
          following year, revolute in the bud (convolute in 28).
      Leaves yellow-green.
        Fruit sessile or short-stalked.
          Leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire or repand-dentate; inner
                surface of the nut hoary tomentose.
                                                   27. Q. Emoryi (F, H).
          Leaves oblong or obovate, entire, sinuate-toothed or lobed.
                                                      28. Q. dumosa (G).
        Fruit long-stalked; leaves oblong, elliptic or obovate, pale,
              glabrous or in one form densely tomentose below.
                                                  29. Q. virginiana (C).
      Leaves blue-green.
        Fruit usually in many-fruited long-stalked clusters; leaves
              broad-obovate, coarsely reticulate-venulose.
                                                  30. Q. reticulata (H).
        Fruit solitary or in pairs.
          Cup of the fruit saucer-shaped; leaves ovate to ovate-oblong,
                entire.
                                                     31. Q. Toumeyi (H).
          Cup of the fruit cup-shaped or hemispherical,
                oblong-lanceolate to broad-obovate, pubescent below.
                                                   32. Q. arizonica (H).
          Cup of the fruit usually cup-shaped or turbinate.
            Leaves ovate, oval or obovate, usually cordate at base;
                  fruit rather long-stalked.
                                             33. Q. oblongifolia (E, H).
            Leaves oblong to obovate, usually cuneate or rounded or
                  cordate at base.
                                                 34. Q. Engelmannii (G).
    Leaves deciduous in their first season.
      Leaves blue-green.
        Arboreous; leaves oblong, lobed, spinescent-dentate or entire,
              pubescent below; cup of the fruit shallow cup-shaped.
                                                   35. Q. Douglasii (G).
        Arborescent or shrubby.
          Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, undulate-lobed; cup of the
                fruit saucer-shaped to cup-shaped.
                                                    36. Q. Vaseyana (C).
          Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic or lanceolate, undulate,
                serrate-toothed or irregularly lobed; cup of the fruit
                hemispheric to cup-shaped.
                                                    37. Q. Mohriana (C).
          Leaves oblong to oblong-ovate, slightly lobed or entire; cup
                of the fruit cup-shaped or rarely saucer-shaped.
                                                      38. Q. Laceyi (C).
      Leaves yellow-green.
        Leaves entire or slightly lobed.
          Leaves different on upper and lower branches, oblong to
                oblong-obovate, slightly lobed or entire.
            Cup of the fruit cup-shaped.
                                                    39. Q. annulata (C).
            Cup of the fruit shallow saucer-shaped.
                                                    40. Q. Durandii (C).
          Leaves similar on upper and lower branches, entire or slightly
                sinuate-lobed toward the apex, oblong or oblong-obovate.
                                                   41. Q. Chapmanii (C).
        Leaves more or less deeply sinuate-lobed.
          Leaves white-tomentulose below (sometimes green and pubescent
                in 43).
            Leaves obovate or oblong, lyrately pinnatifid or deeply
                  sinuate-lobed; cup of the fruit fringed by the awned
                  scales.
                                            42. Q. macrocarpa (A, C, F).
            Leaves obovate-oblong, deeply 5--9-lobed or pinnatifid; nut
                  often inclosed in the cup.
                                                   43. Q. lyrata (A, C).
          Leaves pubescent below.
            Leaves usually covered above with fascicled hairs, obovate,
                  3--5-lobed, their lobes truncate or rounded.
                                                 44. Q. stellata (A, C).
            Leaves glabrous above at maturity.
              Leaves obovate to oblong; cup of the fruit shallow
                    cup-shaped or slightly turbinate, its scales usually
                    thin.
                                                 45. Q. Garryana (B, G).
              Leaves oblong-obovate; cup of the fruit hemispheric, the
                    scales often much thickened.
                                                   46. Q. utahensis (F).
              Leaves oblong-obovate, deeply lobed; nut conic, elongated,
                    inclosed for one-third its length in the cup-shaped
                    cup.
                                                      47. Q. lobata (G).
          Leaves glabrate or puberulous below, oblong to oblong-obovate.
                                                 48. Q. leptophylla (F).
          Leaves glabrous below.
            Leaves oblong-obovate, usually 5-lobed.
                                                    49. Q. austrina (C).
            Leaves oblong-obovate, obliquely pinnatifid or 3--9-lobed.
                                                     50. Q. alba (A, C).
        Leaves coarsely sinuate-toothed. Chestnut Oaks.
          Fruit on peduncles much longer than the petioles; leaves
                obovate or oblong-obovate, generally sinuate-dentate or
                lobed, pubescent, and usually hoary on the lower
                surface.
                                                     51. Q. bicolor (C).
          Fruit on peduncles about as long or shorter than the petioles.
            Leaves obovate or oblong-obovate, cuneate or rounded at the
                  broad or narrow base, tomentose or pubescent and often
                  silvery white below.
                                                   52. Q. Prinus (A, C).
            Leaves obovate or oblong to lanceolate, acuminate, with
                  rounded or acute teeth.
                                                  53. Q. montana (A, C).
          Fruit sessile or nearly so; leaves oblong to lanceolate, acute
                or acuminate or broadly obovate, puberulous and pale,
                often silvery white on the lower surface.
                                            54. Q. Muehlenbergii (A, C).


                  1. Quercus borealis Michx. Red Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 221]

Leaves obovate or oblong, acute or acuminate, abruptly or gradually
cuneate or rounded at the broad or narrow base, usually divided about
half way to the midrib by wide oblique sinuses rounded at the bottom
into 11 or sometimes into 7 or 9 acute oblique ovate lobes tapering from
broad bases and mostly sinuately 3-toothed at apex with elongated
bristle-pointed teeth, or sometimes oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed
and cuneate at base, and sinuately lobed with broad acute usually entire
or slightly dentate lobes, when they unfold pink, covered with soft
silky pale pubescence on the upper surface and below with thick white
tomentum, soon glabrous, at maturity thin and firm, dark green, dull and
glabrous above, pale yellow-green, glabrous or rarely puberulous and
sometimes furnished with small tufts of rusty hairs in the axils of the
veins below, 5'--9' long, 4'--6' wide; falling early in the autumn after
turning dull or sometimes bright orange color or brown; petioles stout,
yellow or red, 1'--2' in length. Flowers: staminate in pubescent aments
4'--5' long; calyx divided into 4 or 5 narrow ovate rounded lobes
shorter than the stamens; pistillate on short glabrous peduncles, their
involucral scales broadly ovate, dark reddish brown, shorter than the
conspicuous linear acute bract of the flower and as long as the
lanceolate acute calyx-lobes; stigmas bright green. Fruit solitary or in
pairs, sessile or short-stalked, ovoid, gradually narrowed and acute at
apex or cylindric and rounded at apex, pale brown, lustrous, more or
less tomentose toward the ends, 1/2'--1' long; 1/2'--3/4' in diameter;
cup cup-shaped, puberulous on the inner surface, covered with small
closely appressed ovate acute red-brown pubescent scales slightly
thickened on the back toward the base of the cup, with a thin
dark-colored tip and margins.

A tree usually not more than 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, often much smaller, stout branches forming a narrow head, and
slender lustrous branchlets light green and covered with pale scurfy
pubescence when they first appear, dark red during their first winter
and ultimately dark brown. Winter-buds ovoid, gradually narrowed to the
acute apex, about 1/4' long, with thin ovate acute light chestnut-brown
scales. Bark on young stems and on the upper part of the limbs of old
trees 1'--1-1/2' thick, dark brown tinged with red and divided into
small thick appressed plates scaly on the surface. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, close-grained, light reddish brown, with thin lighter-colored
sapwood; used in construction, for the interior finish of houses, and in
furniture.

Distribution. Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, through Quebec to southern
Ontario, and southward to northern New England, western New York,
northern Pennsylvania (Presque Isle, Erie County), northern Michigan,
southeastern Wisconsin, central Minnesota, central Iowa (Winneshick
County), and on the Appalachian Mountains of North Carolina at altitudes
of about 4000 deg. Passing with many intermediate forms differing in the
size of the nut and in the depth of the cup into


              Quercus borealis var. maxima Ashe. Red Oak.

                     _Quercus rubra_ Du Roi, not L.

[Illustration: Fig. 222]

Fruit solitary or in pairs, sessile or short-stalked; nut ovoid to
slightly obovoid, gradually narrowed and rounded at apex, slightly
narrowed at base, usually 1'--1-1/4' long and 1/2'--2/3' thick,
occasionally not more than 2/3' long and thick, inclosed only at the
base in a thick saucer-shaped cup.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg., or occasionally 150 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg.
in diameter, and stout spreading and ascending branches forming a broad
head.

Distribution. Province of Quebec in the neighborhood of Montreal, and
southern Ontario, westward through southern Michigan to southeastern
Nebraska, and southward to northern Georgia, on the southern Appalachian
Mountains up to altitudes of 3000 deg., southern Kentucky, eastern and
central Tennessee, northeastern (Tishomingo County), northwestern (Yazoo
County), and central and southern (Hinds and Union Counties)
Mississippi, northern and southwestern Alabama (Dekalb, Cullman,
Jefferson, and Dallas Counties), northwestern Arkansas, and eastern
Kansas and Oklahoma; one of the largest and most generally distributed
trees of the northern states; rare and local in the south; of its
largest size in the region north of the Potomac and Ohio Rivers.

Often planted as a park and shade tree in the northeastern states and in
the counties of western and northern Europe; generally more successful
in Europe than other American Oaks.

x _Quercus Lowellii_ Sarg., a possible hybrid of _Quercus borealis_ and
_Q. ilicifolia_, has been found in the neighborhood of Seabury, York
County, Maine.

x _Quercus Porterii_ Trel., probably a hybrid of _Quercus borealis_ var.
_maxima_ and _Q. velutina_, has been found on Bowditch Hill, Jamaica
Plain, Suffolk County, Massachusetts, on College Hill, Easton,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, and near Columbus, Franklin County,
Ohio.

x _Quercus runcinata_ Engelm., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
borealis_ var. _maxima_ and _Q. imbricaria_ first found near St. Louis,
occurs also in the neighborhood of Independence, Jackson County, and at
Williamsville, Wayne County, Missouri, and in Richland and Wayne
Counties, Illinois.


                      2. Quercus Shumardii Buckl.

               _Quercus texana_ Sarg. in part, not Buckl.

[Illustration: Fig. 223]

Leaves obovate, seven rarely five-lobed, the lobes two or three-lobed
and sometimes dentate at apex, on leaves of lower branches short and
broad, and separated by narrow sinuses pointed or rounded in the bottom,
on upper branches deeply divided by broad rounded sinuses into narrow
acuminate lobes, when they unfold often tinged with red and covered with
pale loose tomentum deciduous before they are half grown, at maturity
glabrous, dark green and lustrous above, paler and furnished below with
large axillary tufts of pale hairs, 6'--8' long, 4'--5' wide, with a
thin midrib and slender primary veins running to the points of the
lobes; petioles slender, glabrous, 2'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in slender glabrous aments 6'--7' long; calyx divided into 4
or 5 rounded slightly villose lobes shorter than the stamens; pistillate
on pubescent peduncles, their involucral scales ovate, light brown,
pubescent; stigmas red. Fruit: nut oblong-ovoid, narrowed and rounded at
apex, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, 1/2'--1' in diameter, inclosed at the base only
in the thick saucer-shaped cup with a slightly incurved rim and covered
with closely appressed ovate pale pubescent or nearly glabrous scales
narrowed above the middle, abruptly long-pointed, thin or often
conspicuously tuberculate.

A tree up to 120 deg. high, with a tall trunk occasionally 5 deg. in diameter,
stout wide-spreading branches forming a broad rather open head, and gray
or grayish brown glabrous branchlets. Winter-buds ovoid, acute or
acuminate, about 1/4' long, with closely imbricated gray glabrous or
rarely pubescent scales. Bark 1'--1-1/2' thick, ridged, broken into
small appressed plates scaly on the surface. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, light reddish brown, often manufactured into lumber in
the Mississippi valley and considered more valuable than that of the
northern Red Oak.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps in moist rich soil; coast
region of Texas eastward from the Colorado River and ranging inland up
the valley of that river to Burnet County, southeastern Oklahoma,
through Arkansas, southeastern Kansas and Missouri to Fayette County,
Iowa, southern Illinois and Indiana, the neighborhood of Columbus,
Franklin County, Ohio, and southeastern Michigan (near Portage Lake,
Jackson County); through the eastern Gulf States to western and central
Florida and northward in the neighborhood of the coast to the valley of
the Neuse River, North Carolina; Chesapeake Beach, Calvert County,
Maryland (_W. W. Ashe_); ranging inland in the south Atlantic States to
Rome, Floyd County, Georgia, Calhoun Falls, Abbeville County, and
Columbia, Richland County, South Carolina, and Chapel Hill, Orange
County, North Carolina. Passing into


                 Quercus Shumardii var. Schneckii Sarg.

               _Quercus texana_ Sarg. in part, not Buckl.
                       _Quercus Schneckii_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 224]

Differing from the type in the deep cup-shaped cup of the fruit covered
with thin scales, rarely much thickened and tuberculate at base (only on
river banks near Vicksburg, Warren County, Mississippi), and connected
with it by forms with the cups of the fruit differing from saucer to
deep cup-shaped.

Distribution. Growing with _Quercus Shumardii_; more common in Texas and
in the Mississippi valley than the type, and ranging eastward through
Louisiana and Mississippi to central and southern Alabama, central and
southeastern Tennessee (neighborhood of Chattanooga), and central
Kentucky; apparently not reaching the Atlantic States.


                        3. Quercus texana Buckl.

[Illustration: Fig. 225]

Leaves widest above the middle, broad-cuneate, concave-cuneate or nearly
truncate at base, deeply or rarely only slightly divided by broad
sinuses rounded in the bottom into 5 or 7 lobes, the terminal lobe
3-lobed and acute at apex, the upper lateral lobes broad and more or
less divided at apex and much larger and more deeply lobed than those of
the lowest pair, when they unfold densely covered with fascicled hairs
and often bright red, soon glabrous, thin, dark green and lustrous
above, pale and lustrous and rarely furnished below with small
inconspicuous axillary tufts of pale hairs, 3'--3-1/2' long, 2-1/2'--3'
wide, with a thin midrib and slender primary veins running to the points
of the lobes; petioles slender, soon glabrous, 3/4'--1-1/2' in length.
Flowers: staminate in slender villose aments 3'--4' long; calyx thin,
villose on the outer surface, divided into 4 or 5 acute lobes shorter
than the stamens; pistillate on short hoary tomentose peduncles, their
involucral scales brown tinged with red; stigmas bright red. Fruit
short-stalked, usually solitary; nut ovoid, narrowed and rounded at
apex, light red-brown, often striate, 1/4'--3/4' long and broad,
sometimes acute, nearly 1' in length and not more than 1/3' in diameter;
cup turbinate, covered with thin ovate acuminate slightly appressed
glabrous scales, in the small fruit of trees on dry hills inclosing a
third or more of the nut, in the larger fruit of trees on better soil
comparatively less deep.

A tree on dry hills rarely more than 30 deg. tall, with a trunk 8'--10' in
diameter, small spreading or erect branches and slender red or reddish
brown glabrous or rarely pubescent branchlets; often a shrub; on better
soil at the foot of hills occasionally 50 deg. high with a trunk 12'--18' in
diameter. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/6'--1/4' long and covered with
closely imbricated acute slightly or densely pubescent red scales. Bark
light brown tinged with red, 3/4'--1' thick, deeply ridged and broken
into plate-like scales.

Distribution. Dry limestone hills and ridges, and in the more fertile
soil at their base; central and western Texas (Dallas, Tarrant County to
Travis and Bexar Counties), and to the Edwards Plateau (San Saba, Kerr,
Brown, Coke and Uvalde Counties); westward replaced by the var.
_chesosensis_ Sarg. differing in the acuminate lobes of the leaves and
smaller cups of the fruit; known only on the dry rocky slopes of the
Chesos Mountains, Brewster County, Texas; and by the var. _stellapila_
Sarg., differing in the presence of fascicled hairs on both surfaces of
the mature leaves and on the branchlets of the year; above Fort Davis,
Jeff Davis County, Texas.


            4. Quercus ellipsoidalis E. J. Hill. Black Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 226]

Leaves elliptic to obovate-orbicular, acute or acuminate, truncate or
broadly cuneate at base, deeply divided by wide sinuses rounded in the
bottom into 5--7 oblong lobes repandly dentate at apex, or often,
especially those of the upper pair, repandly lobulate, when they unfold
slightly tinged with red and hoary-tomentose, soon becoming glabrous
with the exception of small tufts of pale hairs in the axils of the
principal veins, at maturity thin and firm, bright green and lustrous
above, paler and sometimes entirely glabrous below, 3'--5' long,
2-1/2'--4' wide, with a stout midrib and primary veins and prominent
reticulate veinlets; late in the autumn turning yellow or pale brown
more or less blotched with purple; petioles slender, glabrous or rarely
puberulous, 1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers: staminate in puberulous
aments 1-1/2'--2' long; calyx campanulate, usually tinged with red,
2--5-lobed or parted into oblong-ovate or rounded segments, glabrous or
slightly villose, fringed at apex with long twisted hairs, about as long
as the 2--5 stamens, with short filaments and oblong anthers; pistillate
on stout tomentose 1--3-flowered peduncles, red, their involucral scales
broad, oblong, acute, hairy; calyx campanulate, 4--7-lobed, ciliate on
the margins. Fruit short-stalked or nearly sessile, solitary or in
pairs; nut ellipsoidal to subglobose, chestnut-brown, often striate and
puberulous, inclosed for one third to one half its length in a turbinate
or cup-shaped cup gradually narrowed at base, thin, light red-brown, and
covered by narrow ovate obtuse or truncate brown pubescent closely
appressed scales.

A tree, 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely 3 deg. in diameter, much
forked branches ascending above and often pendulous low on the stem,
forming a narrow oblong head, and slender branchlets covered at first
with matted pale hairs, bright reddish brown during their first winter,
becoming dark gray-brown or reddish brown in their second season.
Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse or acute, sometimes slightly angled, about
1/8' long, with ovate or oval red-brown lustrous slightly puberulous
outer scales ciliate on the margins. Bark thin, light yellow internally,
close, rather smooth, divided by shallow connected fissures into thin
plates, dark brown near the base of the tree, dull above, gray-brown and
only slightly furrowed on the large branches.

Distribution. In the neighborhood of Chicago, Illinois, to southeastern
Minnesota common; often covering large areas of sandy soil with a
stunted growth and on the prairies sometimes a low shrub; eastern Iowa
(Muscatine County), and the Lower Peninsular of Michigan (Montmorency,
Arenac, and St. Clair Counties).


         5. Quercus coccinea Muench. Scarlet Oak. Spanish Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 227]

Leaves oblong-obovate or elliptic, truncate or cuneate at base, deeply
divided by wide sinuses rounded in the bottom into 7 or rarely 9 lobes
repand-dentate at apex, the terminal lobe, ovate, acute, and 3-toothed,
the middle division the largest and furnished with 2 small lateral
teeth, the lateral lobes obovate, oblique or spreading, sometimes
falcate, usually broad and oblique at the coarsely toothed apex, when
they unfold bright red covered with loose pale pubescence above and
below with silvery white tomentum, green at the end of a few days, at
maturity thin and firm, bright green, glabrous and very lustrous above,
paler and less lustrous and sometimes furnished with small tufts of
rusty pubescence in the axils of the veins below, 3'--6' long,
2-1/2'--4' broad, with a yellow midrib and primary veins, late in the
autumn turning brilliant scarlet; petioles slender, terete,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate in slender glabrous aments
3'--4' long; calyx pubescent, bright red before opening, divided into 4
or 5 ovate acute segments shorter than the stamens; pistillate on
pubescent peduncles sometimes 1/2' long, bright red, their involucral
scales ovate, pubescent, shorter than the acute calyx-lobes. Fruit
sessile or stalked, solitary or in pairs; nut oval, oblong-ovate or
hemispheric, truncate or rounded at base, rounded at apex, 1/2'--1'
long, 1/3'--2/3' thick, light reddish brown and occasionally striate,
inclosed for one third to one half its length in a deep cup-shaped or
turbinate thin cup light reddish brown on the inner surface, covered by
closely imbricated oblong-ovate acute thin, or rarely much thickened
(var. _tuberculata_ Sarg.) light reddish brown slightly puberulous
scales.

A tree, 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, comparatively
small branches spreading gradually and forming a rather narrow open
head, and slender branchlets coated at first with loose scurfy
pubescence, soon pale green and lustrous, light red or orange-red in
their first winter and light or dark brown the following year; usually
much smaller. Winter-buds ellipsoidal or ovoid, gradually narrowed at
apex, 1/8'--1/4' long, dark reddish brown, and pale-pubescent above the
middle. Bark of young stems and branches smooth, light brown, becoming
on old trunks 1/2'--1' thick and divided by shallow fissures into
irregular ridges covered by small light brown scales slightly tinged
with red. Wood heavy, hard, strong, coarse-grained, light or reddish
brown, with thicker darker colored sapwood.

Distribution. Light dry usually sandy soil; valley of the Androscoggin
River, Maine, southern New Hampshire and Vermont to southern Ontario,
southward to the District of Columbia and along the Appalachian
Mountains to eastern Kentucky and Tennessee, and northern Georgia; in
central Georgia and northeastern Mississippi (near Corinth, Alcorn
County), and westward through New York, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and
southern Wisconsin to central Missouri (Jerome, Phelps County); in
eastern Oklahoma (Arkansas River valley near Fisher, Creek County, _G.
W. Stevens_); ascending to altitudes of nearly 5000 deg. on the southern
mountains; the prevailing Oak above 2500 deg. to the summits of the Blue
Ridge of the Carolinas; very abundant in the coast region from
Massachusetts Bay to southern New Jersey; less common in the interior,
growing on dry gravelly uplands, and on the prairies skirting the
western margins of the eastern forest.

Occasionally planted in the northeastern states and in Europe as an
ornamental tree valued chiefly for the brilliant autumn color of the
foliage.

x _Quercus Robbinsii_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
coccinea_ and _Q. ilicifolia_, occurs at North Easton, Bristol County,
Massachusetts.

x _Quercus Benderi_ Baenitz, a supposed hybrid of _Quercus coccinea_ and
_Q. borealis_ var. _maxima_, appeared several years ago in Silesia, and
a similar tree has been found in the Blue Hills Reservation near Boston.


        6. Quercus palustris Muench. Pin Oak. Swamp Spanish Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 228]

Leaves obovate, narrowed and cuneate or broad and truncate at base,
divided by wide deep sinuses rounded in the bottom into 5--7 lobes, the
terminal lobe ovate, acute, 3-toothed toward the apex, or entire, the
lateral lobes spreading or oblique, sometimes falcate, especially those
of the lowest pair, gradually tapering and acute at the dentate apex, or
obovate and broad at apex, when they unfold light bronze-green stained
with red on the margins, lustrous and puberulous above, coated below and
on the petioles with pale scurfy pubescence, at maturity thin and firm,
dark green and very lustrous above, pale below, with large tufts of pale
hairs in the axils of the conspicuous primary veins; 4'--6' long, 2'--4'
wide, with a stout midrib; late in the autumn gradually turning deep
scarlet; petioles slender, yellow, 1/2'--2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in hairy aments 2'--3' long; calyx puberulous and divided into
4 or 5 oblong rounded segments more or less laciniately cut on the
margins, shorter than the stamens; pistillate on short tomentose
peduncles, their involucral scales broadly ovate, tomentose, shorter
than the acuminate calyx-lobes; stigmas bright red. Fruit sessile or
short-stalked, solitary or clustered; nut nearly hemispheric, about 1/2'
in diameter, light brown, often striate, inclosed only at the base in a
thin saucer-shaped cup dark red-brown and lustrous within, and covered
by closely appressed ovate light red-brown thin puberulous scales.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, often
clothed with small tough drooping branches, or when crowded in the
forest sometimes 120 deg. high, with a trunk 60 deg.--70 deg. tall and 4 deg.--5 deg. in
diameter, slender branches beset with short-ridged spur-like laterals a
few inches in length, forming on young trees a broad pyramidal head,
becoming on older trees open and irregular, with rigid and more
pendulous branches often furnished at first with small drooping
branchlets, and slender tough branchlets dark red and covered by short
pale silvery tomentum, soon becoming green and glabrous, lustrous dark
red-brown or orange color in their first winter, growing darker in their
second year and ultimately dark gray-brown. Winter-buds ovoid, gradually
narrowed and acute at apex, about 1/8' long, with imbricated light
chestnut-brown scales puberulous toward the thin sometimes ciliate
margins. Bark of young trunks and branches smooth, lustrous, light brown
frequently tinged with red, becoming on older trunks 3/4'--1-1/4' thick,
light gray-brown, generally smooth and covered by small closely
appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, coarse-grained, light brown,
with thin rather darker colored sapwood; sometimes used in construction,
and for shingles and clapboards.

Distribution. Borders of swamps and river-bottoms in deep rich moist
soil; valley of the Connecticut River in western Massachusetts and
Connecticut; on Grand Isle in the Niagara River, New York to southern
Ontario and southwestern Michigan, and westward to eastern Iowa
(Muscatine County), and southward to southern West Virginia (Hardy and
Mercer Counties), southwestern Virginia (Wythe County), central North
Carolina (on Bowling's Creek, near Chapel Hill, Orange County, and on
Dutchman's Creek, Forsyth County); and to southern Kentucky, central
Tennessee, southern Arkansas (Fulton, Hempstead County), and
northeastern Oklahoma; rare and of small size in New England;
exceedingly common on the coast plain south of the Hudson River; very
abundant on the bottom-lands of the streams of the lower Ohio River.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the northeastern states and
occasionally in the countries of western and central Europe.


                   7. Quercus georgiana M. A. Curtis.

[Illustration: Fig. 229]

Leaves convolute in the bud, elliptic or obovate, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, divided generally about half way to the midrib by wide
or narrow oblique sinuses rounded in the bottom into 3--7 lobes, the
terminal lobe ovate, acute, or rounded and entire or frequently
furnished with 1 or 2 small lateral teeth, the lateral lobes oblique or
spreading, mostly triangular, acute and entire, or those of the upper
and of the middle pair often broad and repand-lobulate at the oblique
ends, sometimes gradually 3-lobed at the broad apex and narrowed and
entire below, or equally 3-lobed, with broad or narrow spreading lateral
lobes, or occasionally pinnatifid, when they unfold bright green tinged
with red, ciliate on the margins and coated on the midrib, veins, and
petioles with loose pale pubescence, at maturity thin, bright green and
lustrous above, paler below, and glabrous or furnished with tufts of
hairs in the axils of the primary veins, usually about 2-1/2' long and
1-1/2' wide; turning dull orange and scarlet in the autumn; petioles
slender, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in slender glabrous or
pubescent aments 2'--3' long; calyx divided into 4 or 5 broadly ovate
rounded segments rather shorter than the stamens; pistillate on short
glabrous slender peduncles; their involucral scales rather shorter than
the acute calyx-lobes, pubescent or puberulous; stigmas bright red.
Fruit short-stalked; nut ellipsoidal or subglobose, 1/3'--1/2' long,
light red-brown and lustrous, inclosed for one third to nearly one half
its length in a thick cup-shaped cup light red-brown and lustrous on the
inner surface, and covered by thin ovate bright light red-brown truncate
erose scales.

Distribution. Georgia; on Stone Mountain, and Little Stone Mountain,
Dekalb County; on a few other granite hills between the Yellow and
Oconee rivers in the region south and east of Stone Mountain (Winder,
Jackson County, Rockmart, Polk County and at Warm Springs, Meriwether
County).

Occasionally cultivated, and hardy in eastern Massachusetts.

x _Quercus Smallii_ Trel., a possible hybrid of _Quercus georgiana_ and
_Q. marilandica_, occurs on the slopes and summit of Little Stone
Mountain, Dekalb County, Georgia.


          8. Quercus velutina Lam. Black Oak. Yellow-bark Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 230]

Leaves ovate or oblong, rounded, cuneate or truncate at base, mostly
7-lobed and sometimes divided nearly to the middle by wide rounded
sinuses into narrow obovate more or less repand-dentate lobes, or into
elongated nearly entire mucronate lobes tapering gradually from a broad
base, the terminal lobe oblong, elongated, acute, furnished with small
lateral teeth, or broad, rounded, and coarsely repand-dentate, or
slightly divided into broad dentate lobes or sinuate-dentate, bright
crimson when they unfold, and covered above by long loose scattered
white hairs and below with thick pale or silvery white tomentum,
hoary-pubescent when half grown, and at maturity thick and firm or
subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, below yellow-green, brown
or dull copper color and more or less pubescent or glabrous with the
exception of tufts of rusty hairs in the axils of the principal veins,
3'--12' long and 2'--10' wide, but usually 5'--6' long and 3'--4' wide,
with a stout midrib and primary veins; late in the autumn turning dull
red, dark orange color, or brown, and falling gradually during the
winter; petioles stout, yellow, glabrous or puberulous, 3'--6' in
length. Flowers: staminate in tomentose or pubescent aments 4'--6' long;
calyx coated with pale hairs, with ovate acute lobes; pistillate on
short tomentose peduncles, their involucral scales ovate, shorter than
the acute calyx-lobes; stigmas bright red. Fruit sessile or
short-stalked, solitary or in pairs; nut ovoid-oblong, obovoid, oval or
hemispheric, broad and rounded at base, full and rounded at apex, light
red-brown, often striate, frequently coated with soft rufous pubescence,
1/2'--3/4' long and broad, or rarely 1' long and broad, inclosed for
about half its length or rarely nearly to the apex in the thin deeply
cup-shaped or turbinate cup dark red-brown on the inner surface, covered
by thin light chestnut-brown acute hoary scales closely appressed at the
base of the cup, loosely imbricated above the middle, with free scarious
tips forming a fringe-like border to its rim.

A tree, often 70 deg.--80 deg. and occasionally 150 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg.
in diameter, slender branches spreading gradually into a narrow open
head, stout branchlets coated at first with pale or fulvous scurfy
tomentum, becoming in their first winter glabrous, dull red or reddish
brown, growing dark brown in their second year or brown slightly tinged
with red. Winter-buds ovoid, strongly angled, gradually narrowed and
obtuse at apex, hoary-tomentose, 1/4'--1/2' long. Bark of young stems
and branches smooth, dark brown, deep orange color internally, becoming
3/4'--1-1/2' thick on old trunks, and deeply divided into broad rounded
ridges broken on the surface into thick dark brown or nearly black
closely appressed plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong,
coarse-grained, bright brown tinged with red, with thin lighter colored
sapwood; of little value except as fuel. The bark abounds in tannic acid
and is largely used in tanning, as a yellow dye, and in medicine.

Distribution. Dry gravelly uplands and ridges; coast of southern Maine
to northern Vermont, southern and western Ontario, the southern
peninsula of Michigan, northwestern, eastern and southern Iowa, and
southeastern Nebraska, and southward to western Florida, southern
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, eastern Kansas, northeastern Oklahoma
and eastern Texas to the valley of the Brazos River; one of the
commonest Oaks on the gravelly drift of southern New England and the
middle states; ascending on the southern Appalachian Mountains to
altitudes of about 4000 deg., and often forming a large part of the forest
growth on their foothills; abundant in all parts of the Mississippi
basin, and of its largest size in the valley of the lower Ohio River;
the common species of the Black Oak group reaching the south-Atlantic
and Gulf Coast, and here generally scattered on dry ridges through the
maritime Pine belt.

_Quercus velutina_, which is more variable in the form of its leaves
than the other North American Black Oaks, is easily recognized by the
bright yellow color of the inner bark, in early spring by the deep red
color of the unfolding leaves, becoming pale and silvery in a few days,
and by the large tomentose winter-buds. From western Missouri to
northwestern Arkansas a form occurs (var. _missouriensis_ Sarg.) with
the mature leaves covered above with fascicled hairs, and coated below
and on the petioles and summer branchlets with rusty pubescence, and
with broader more loosely imbricated hoary-tomentose cup-scales.


                 9. Quercus Kelloggii Newb. Black Oak.

                      _Quercus californica_ Coop.

[Illustration: Fig. 231]

Leaves oblong or obovate, truncate, cuneate or rounded at the narrow
base, 7 or rarely 5-lobed by wide and deep or shallow and oblique
sinuses rounded in the bottom, the terminal lobe ovate, 3-toothed at the
acute apex, the lateral lobes tapering gradually from the base or broad
and obovate, coarsely repand-dentate with acute pointed teeth, or rarely
entire, when they unfold dark red or purple and pilose above and coated
below and on the petioles with thick silvery white tomentum, at maturity
thick and firm, lustrous, dark yellow-green and glabrous or rarely
pubescent above, light yellow-green or brownish and glabrous or
pubescent, or occasionally hoary-tomentose below, 3'--6' long, 2'--4'
wide; turning yellow or brown in the autumn before falling; petioles
slender, yellow, 1'--2' in length. Flowers: staminate in hairy aments
4'--5' long; calyx pubescent, divided into 4 or 5 ovate acute segments
shorter than the stamens; anthers bright red; pistillate on short
tomentose peduncles, their involucral scales ovate, coated like the
acute calyx-lobes with pale tomentum; stigmas dark red. Fruit
short-stalked, solitary or clustered; nut oblong, ellipsoidal or
obovoid, broad and rounded at base, full and rounded or gradually
narrowed and acute at the puberulous apex, 1'--1-1/2' long, about 3/4'
broad, light chestnut-brown, often striate, inclosed for one fourth to
two thirds of its length in the deep cup-shaped cup light brown on the
inner surface, and covered by thin ovate-lanceolate lustrous light
chestnut brown scales, sometimes rounded and thickened on the back
toward the base of the cup, their tips elongated, thin and erose on the
margins, often forming a narrow fringe-like border to the rim of the
cup.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, stout
spreading branches forming an open round-topped head, and branchlets
coated at first with thick hoary caducous tomentum, bright red or brown
tinged with red, and usually glabrous or pubescent or puberulous during
their first winter, becoming dark red-brown in their second year;
frequently much smaller and at high elevations a small shrub (f.
_cibata_ Jeps.). Winter-buds ovoid, gradually narrowed and acute at
apex, about 1/4' long, with closely imbricated pale chestnut-brown
scales ciliate on the thin scarious margins and pubescent toward the
point of the bud. Bark of young stems and branches smooth, light brown,
becoming on old trunks 1'--1-1/2' thick, dark brown slightly tinged with
red or nearly black, divided into broad ridges at the base of old trees
and broken above into thick irregular oblong plates covered by minute
closely appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, very brittle, bright
red, with thin lighter colored sapwood; occasionally used as fuel.

Distribution. Valleys and mountain slopes; basin of the Mackenzie River
in western Oregon, southward over the California coast ranges, and along
the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada up to altitudes of 6500 deg. to the
Cuyamaca Mountains near the southern boundary of California; extending
across the Sierra Nevada to the foothills of Owens valley (_Jepson_) in
eastern California; rare in the immediate neighborhood of the coast; the
largest and most abundant Oak-tree of the valleys of southwestern Oregon
and of the Sierra Nevada, sometimes forming groves of considerable
extent in coniferous forests; of its largest size at altitudes of about
6000 deg. above the sea.


                10. Quercus Catesbaei Michx. Turkey Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 232]

Leaves oblong or obovate or nearly triangular, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, deeply divided by wide rounded sinuses into 3 or 5 or
rarely 7 lobes, the terminal lobe ovate, elongated, acute and entire or
repand-dentate, or obovate and coarsely equally or irregularly 3-toothed
at apex, the lateral lobes spreading, usually falcate, entire and acute,
tapering from the broad base, and broad, oblique, and repand-lobulate at
apex, or 3-toothed at the broad apex and gradually narrowed to the base,
coated when they unfold with rufous fascicled hairs, and when fully
grown thick and rigid, bright yellow-green and lustrous above, paler,
lustrous, and glabrous below, with large tufts of rusty hairs in the
axils of the veins, 3'--12' long, 1'--10' wide, but usually about 5'
long and wide, with a broad yellow or red-brown midrib; turning bright
scarlet before falling in the late autumn or early winter; petioles
stout, grooved, 1/4'--3/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in slender
hairy red-stemmed aments 4'--5' long; calyx puberulous and divided into
4 or 5 ovate acute lobes; pistillate on short stout tomentose peduncles,
their involucral scales bright red, pubescent, hairy at the margins;
stigmas dark red. Fruit short-stalked, usually solitary; nut oval, full
and rounded at the ends, about 1' long and 3/4' broad, dull light brown,
covered at the apex by a thin coat of snow-white tomentum, inclosed for
about one third its length in a thin turbinate cup often gradually
narrowed into a stout stalk-like base, light red-brown and lustrous on
the inner surface, covered by ovate-oblong rounded scales extending
above the rim of the cup and down over the upper third of the inner
surface, and hoary-pubescent except their thin bright red margins.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--30 deg., or occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk
rarely exceeding 2 deg. in diameter, stout spreading more or less contorted
branches forming a broad or narrow open irregular generally round-topped
head, and stout branchlets coated at first with fascicled hairs, nearly
glabrous and deep red when the leaves are half grown, dark red in their
first winter, gradually growing dark brown; generally much smaller and
sometimes shrubby. Winter-buds elongated, acute, 1/2' long, with light
chestnut-brown scales erose on the thin margins, and coated, especially
toward the point of the bud, with rusty pubescence. Bark 1/2'--1' thick,
red internally, dark gray tinged with red on the surface, and at the
base of old trunks becoming nearly black, deeply and irregularly
furrowed and broken into small appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, rather close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thick
lighter colored sapwood; largely used for fuel.

Distribution. Dry barren sandy ridges and sandy bluffs and hummocks in
the neighborhood of the coast; southeastern Virginia (near Zuni, Isle of
Wight County) to the shores of Indian River and Peace Creek, Florida,
and westward to eastern Louisiana; comparatively rare toward the western
limits of its range, and most abundant and of its largest size on the
high bluff-like shores of bays and estuaries in South Carolina and
Georgia; the prevailing tree with _Quercus cinerea_ in the flat woods of
the interior of the Florida peninsula as far south as the sandy ridges
in the neighborhood of Lake Istokpoga, De Soto County.

x _Quercus Mellichampii_ Trel. believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
Catesbaei_ and _Q. laurifolia_ occurs at Bluffton on the coast of South
Carolina, in the neighborhood of Orlando, Orange County and near San
Mateo, Putnam County, Florida.

x _Quercus Ashei_ Trel. believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus Catesbaei_
with _Q. cinerea_ occurs at Folkston and near Trader's Hill, Charlton
County and St. Mary's, Camden County, Georgia.

x _Quercus blufftonensis_ Trel., a probable hybrid of _Quercus Catesbaei_
and _Q. rubra_ L., has been found at Bluffton, South Carolina.

x _Quercus Walteriana_ Ashe, believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
Catesbaei_ and _Q. nigra_, is not rare in the immediate neighborhood of
the coast of South Carolina and Georgia, and occurs on sand hills in
Sampson County, North Carolina, near Jacksonville, Duval County,
Florida, at Mount Vernon, Mobile County and in the neighborhood of
Selma, Dallas County, Alabama.


           11. Quercus ilicifolia Wang. Bear Oak. Scrub Oak.

                          _Quercus nana_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 233]

Leaves obovate or rarely oblong, gradually or abruptly cuneate at base,
divided by wide shallow sinuses into 3--7, usually 5, acute lobes, the
terminal lobe ovate, elongated, rounded and 3-toothed or acute and
dentate or entire at apex, the lateral lobes spreading, mostly
triangular and acute, or those of the upper pair broad, oblique and
repand-lobulate or broad at apex, slightly 3-lobed and entire below, or
deeply 3-lobed above and sinuate below, or occasionally oblong to
oblong-obovate and entire, with undulate margins, when they unfold dull
red and puberulous or pubescent on the upper surface and coated on the
lower and on the petioles with thick pale tomentum, with conspicuous
tufts of silvery white hairs in the axils of the veins, at maturity
thick and firm, dark green and lustrous above, covered below with pale
or silvery white pubescence, 2'--5' long, 1-1/2'--3' wide, with a stout
yellow midrib and slender primary veins; turning dull scarlet or yellow
in the autumn; petioles slender, glabrous, or pubescent, 1'--1-1/2' in
length. Flowers: staminate in hairy aments 4'--5' long, and often
persistent until midsummer; calyx red or green tinged with red and
irregularly divided into 3--5 ovate rounded lobes shorter than the
stamens; anthers bright red ultimately yellow; pistillate on stout
tomentose peduncles, their involucral scales ovate, about as long as the
acute calyx-lobes, red and tomentose; stigmas dark red. Fruit produced
in great profusion, sessile or stalked, in pairs or rarely solitary; nut
ovoid, broad, flat or rounded at base, gradually narrowed and acute or
rounded at apex, about 1/2' long and broad, light brown, lustrous,
usually faintly striate, inclosed for about one half its length in the
cup-shaped or saucer-shaped cup often abruptly enlarged above the
stalk-like base, thick, light reddish brown within, and covered by thin
ovate closely imbricated red-brown puberulous scales acute or truncate
at apex, the minute free tips of the upper scales forming a fringe-like
border to the cup.

A tree, occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in diameter,
with slender spreading branches usually forming a round-topped head, and
slender branchlets dark green more or less tinged with red and
hoary-pubescent at first, during their first winter red-brown or ashy
gray and pubescent or puberulous, becoming glabrous and darker in their
second year and ultimately dark brown or nearly black; more frequently
an intricately branched shrub, with numerous contorted stems 3 deg.--10 deg.
tall. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, about 1/8' long, with dark
chestnut-brown rather loosely imbricated glabrous or pilose scales. Bark
thin, smooth, dark brown, covered by small closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Dry sandy barrens and rocky hillsides; coast of eastern
Maine southward through eastern and southern New England to southern and
southwestern Pennsylvania and along the Appalachian Mountains,
principally on their eastern slopes, to southern Virginia; on Crowder
and King Mountains, Gaston County, North Carolina; and westward to the
shores of Lake George and the valley of the Hudson River; common in
eastern and southern New England, in the Pine barrens of New Jersey, and
in eastern Pennsylvania.

x _Quercus Brittonii_ Davis, believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
ilicifolia_ and _Q. marilandica_, has been found on Staten Island, New
York, and at Ocean Grove, Monmouth County, New Jersey.

x _Quercus Giffordii_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
ilicifolia_ and _Q. Phellos_, has been found at May's Landing, Atlantic
County, New Jersey.

x _Quercus Rehderi_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
ilicifolia_ and _Q. velutina_, is not rare in eastern Massachusetts and
occurs on Martha's Vineyard (Chilmark).


               12. Quercus rubra L. Red Oak. Spanish Oak.

                        _Quercus digitata_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 234]

Leaves ovate to obovate, narrowed and rounded or cuneate at base, the
terminal lobe long-acuminate, entire or slightly lobed, often falcate,
usually longer than the 2 or 4 acuminate entire lateral lobes narrowed
from a broad base and often falcate, or oblong-obovate and divided at
the broad apex by wide or narrow sinuses broad and rounded in the bottom
into 3 rounded or acute entire or dentate lobes, and entire and
gradually narrowed below into an acute or rounded base (var. _triloba_
Ashe), the two forms usually occurring on different but sometimes on the
same tree, at maturity thin and firm, dark green and lustrous above,
coated below with soft close pale or rusty pubescence, 6'--7' long and
4'--5' wide, obscurely reticulate-venulose, with a stout tomentose
midrib and primary veins; turning brown or dull orange color in the
autumn; petioles slender, flattened, 1'--2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in tomentose aments, 3'--5' long; calyx thin and scarious,
pubescent on the outer surface, divided into 4 or 5 ovate rounded
segments; pistillate on stout tomentose peduncles, their involucral
scales coated with rusty tomentum, as long or rather shorter than the
acute calyx-lobes; stigmas dark red. Fruit sessile or short-stalked; nut
subglobose to ellipsoidal, full and rounded at apex, truncate and
rounded at base, about 1/2' long, bright orange-brown, inclosed only at
base or sometimes for one third its length in a thin saucer-shaped cup
flat on the bottom or gradually narrowed from a stalk-like base, or deep
and turbinate, bright red-brown on the inner surface, covered by thin
ovate-oblong reddish scales acute or rounded at apex and pale-pubescent
except on the margins.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, large
spreading branches forming a broad round-topped open head, and stout
branchlets coated at first, like the young leaves, with thick rusty or
orange-colored clammy tomentum, dark red or reddish brown and pubescent
or rarely glabrous during their first winter, becoming in their second
year dark red-brown or ashy gray. The var. _triloba_ usually 20 deg.--30 deg.
rarely 40 deg.--50 deg. high. Winter-buds ovoid or oval, acute, 1/8'--1/4' long,
with bright chestnut-brown puberulous or pilose scales ciliate with
short pale hairs. Bark 3/4'--1' thick, dark brown or pale, and divided
by shallow fissures into broad ridges covered by thin closely appressed
scales. Wood hard, strong, not durable, coarse-grained, light red, with
thick lighter colored sapwood; sometimes used in construction, and
largely as fuel. The bark is rich in tannin, and is used in tanning
leather and occasionally in medicine.

Distribution. Southeastern and southern Pennsylvania and southern New
Jersey southward to central Florida, through the Gulf states to the
valley of the Brazos River, Texas, and through eastern Oklahoma and
southwestern Missouri to central Tennessee and Kentucky, southern
Indiana and Illinois, southern Ohio (Black Fork Creek, Lawrence County),
and Kanawha County, West Virginia; in the north Atlantic states only in
the neighborhood of the coast and comparatively rare; very common in the
south Atlantic and Gulf states on dry hills between the coast plain and
the Appalachian Mountains; less abundant in the southern maritime Pine
belt. The var. _triloba_: rare and local. Pleasant Grove, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania and Jefferson County, Indiana, southward to central
and western Florida, southern Alabama and Mississippi, western Arkansas
and eastern Texas; on dry uplands near Milledgeville, Baldwin County,
Georgia, the prevailing form.


    Quercus rubra var. pagodaefolia Ashe. Swamp Spanish Oak. Red Oak.

                         _Quercus pagoda_ Rafn.
                      _Quercus pagodaefolia_ Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 235]

Leaves elliptic to oblong, acuminate, gradually narrowed and cuneate or
full and rounded or rarely truncate at base, deeply divided by wide
sinuses rounded in the bottom into 5--11 acuminate usually entire
repand-dentate lobes often falcate and spreading at right angles to the
midrib or pointed toward the apex of the leaf, when they unfold coated
with pale tomentum, thickest on the lower surface, and dark red on the
upper surface, at maturity dark green and very lustrous above, pale and
tomentose below, 6'--8' long and 5'--6' wide, with a stout midrib
usually puberulous on the upper side, slender primary veins arched to
the points of the lobes, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning
bright clear yellow before falling; petioles stout, pubescent or
tomentose, 1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers and Fruit as in the species.

A tree, sometimes 120 deg. high, with a trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, heavy
branches forming in the forest a short narrow crown, or in more open
situations wide-spreading or ascending and forming a great open head,
and slender branchlets hoary tomentose at first, tomentose or pubescent
during their first winter, and dark reddish brown and puberulous during
their second year. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, often prominently 4-angled,
about 1/4' long, with light red-brown puberulous scales sometimes
ciliate at the apex. Bark about 1' thick and roughened by small rather
closely appressed plate-like light gray, gray-brown or dark brown
scales. Wood light reddish brown, with thin nearly white sapwood;
largely manufactured into lumber in the Mississippi valley, and valued
almost as highly as white oak.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands and the alluvial banks of streams;
Maryland (Queen Anne County) and coast of Virginia to northern Florida,
and through the Gulf states and Arkansas to southern Missouri, western
Tennessee and Kentucky, and southern Illinois and Indiana; most abundant
and one of the largest and most valuable timber-trees in the river
swamps of the Yazoo basin, Mississippi, and of eastern Arkansas.
Differing chiefly from the type in the more numerous and more acuminate
lobes of the usually more elongated leaves usually paler on the lower
surface, and in the generally paler bark of the trunk; passing into
_Quercus rubra_ var. _leucophylla_ Ashe with leaves on upper branches
nearly as broad as long thickly covered below with brownish pubescence
and deeply divided into 5--7 lobes, and on lower branches slightly
obovate, less deeply divided, thin, dark green, sometimes pubescent
becoming glabrous above and often covered below with pale or brown
pubescence.

A tree sometimes 120 deg. high; in low rich soil; coast region of
southeastern Virginia, southward to western Florida and through the Gulf
states to the valley of the Neches River, Texas, and northward to
northern Arkansas; in southern Illinois (near Mt. Carmel, Wabash County)
and southwestern Indiana (near Hovey Lake, Posey County); abundant in
low woods about River Junction, Gadsden County, Florida, and in central
Mississippi.

x _Quercus Willdenoviana_ Zabel is believed in Europe to be a hybrid of
_Quercus rubra_ and _Quercus velutina_.


         13. Quercus marilandica Muench. Black Jack. Jack Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 236]

Leaves broadly obovate, rounded or cordate at the narrow base, usually 3
or rarely 5-lobed at the broad and often abruptly dilated apex, with
short or long, broad or narrow, rounded or acute, entire or dentate
lobes, or entire or dentate at apex, sometimes oblong-obovate,
undulate-lobed at the broad apex and entire below, or equally 3-lobed
with elongated spreading lateral lobes broad and lobulate at apex, when
they unfold coated with a clammy tomentum of fascicled hairs and bright
pink on the upper surface, at maturity thick and firm or subcoriaceous,
dark yellow-green and very lustrous above, yellow, orange color, or
brown and scurfy-pubescent below, usually 6'--7' long and broad, with a
thick broad orange-colored midrib; turning brown or yellow in the
autumn; petioles stout, yellow, glabrous or pubescent, 1/2'--3/4' in
length. Flowers: staminate in hoary aments 2'--4' long; calyx thin and
scarious, tinged with red above the middle, pale-pubescent on the outer
surface, divided into 4 or 5 broad ovate rounded lobes; anthers
apiculate, dark red; pistillate on short rusty-tomentose peduncles
coated like their involucral scales with thick rusty tomentum; stigmas
dark red. Fruit, solitary or in pairs, usually pedunculate; nut oblong,
full and rounded at the ends, rather broader below than above the
middle, about 3/4' long, light yellow-brown and often striate, the shell
lined with dense fulvous tomentum, inclosed for one third to nearly two
thirds of its length in a thick turbinate light brown cup puberulous on
the inner surface, and covered by large reddish brown loosely imbricated
scales often ciliate and coated with loose pale or rusty tomentum, the
upper scales smaller, erect, inserted on the top of the cup in several
rows, and forming a thick rim round its inner surface, or occasionally
reflexed and covering the upper half of the inner surface of the cup.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg., or occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk rarely
more than 1' in diameter, short stout spreading often contorted branches
forming a narrow compact round-topped or sometimes an open irregular
head, and stout branchlets coated at first with thick pale tomentum,
light brown and scurfy-pubescent during their first summer, becoming
reddish brown and glabrous or puberulous in the winter, and ultimately
brown or ashy gray. Winter-buds ovoid or oval, prominently angled, light
red-brown, coated with rusty brown hairs, about 1/4' long. Bark
1'--1-1/2' thick, and deeply divided into nearly square plates 1'--3'
long and covered by small closely appressed dark brown or nearly black
scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, dark rich brown, with thick lighter
colored sapwood; largely used as fuel and in the manufacture of
charcoal.

Distribution. Dry sandy or clay barrens; Long Island and Staten Island,
New York, eastern and southern Pennsylvania, and southern New Jersey to
the shores of Matanzas Inlet and Tampa Bay, Florida, and westward
through the Gulf states to western Texas (Callahan County) and to
western Oklahoma (Dewey and Kiowa Counties), Arkansas, eastern Kansas,
southeastern Nebraska and through Missouri to northeastern Illinois,
southwestern and southern Indiana, and northeastern Kentucky (South
Portsmouth, Greenup County, _R. E. Horsey_); rare in the north, very
abundant southward; west of the Mississippi River often forming on
sterile soils a great part of the forest growth; of its largest size in
southern Arkansas and eastern Texas.

x _Quercus Rudkinii_ Britt., with characters intermediate between those
of _Quercus marilandica_ and _Q. Phellos_, and probably a hybrid of
these species, has been found near Tottenville, Staten Island, New York,
at Keyport, Monmouth County, New Jersey, and at the Falls of the Yadkin
River, Stanley County, North Carolina.

x _Quercus sterilis_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
marilandica_ and _Q. nigra_ has been found in Bladen County, North
Carolina.

x _Quercus Hastingsii_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
marilandica_ and _Q. texana_, occurs near Boerne, Kendall County, and at
Brownwood, Brown County, Texas.

x _Quercus Bushii_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
marilandica_ and _Q. velutina_, although not common, occurs in eastern
Oklahoma (Sapulpa, Creek County), Mississippi (Oxford, Lafayette
County), Alabama (Dothan, Houston County, near Berlin, Dallas County,
and Daphne, Baldwin County), Florida (Sumner, Levey County), and in
Georgia (Climax, Decatur County).


                      14. Quercus arkansana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 237]

Leaves broadly obovate, slightly 3-lobed or dentate at the wide apex,
cuneate at base, on sterile branches often oblong-ovate, acute or
rounded at apex, rounded at base, the lobes ending in long slender
mucros, when they unfold tinged with red, thickly covered with pale
fascicled hairs persistent until summer, the midrib and veins more
thickly clothed with long straight hairs, and at maturity glabrous, with
the exception of small axillary tufts of pubescence on the lower
surface, light yellow-green above, paler below, 2'--2-3/4' long and
broad, with a slender light yellow midrib, thin primary veins and
prominent veinlets; on sterile branches often 4-1/2'--5-1/2' long and
2-1/2'--2-3/4' wide; petioles slender, coated at first with clusters of
pale hairs, becoming glabrous or puberulous, 3/5'--4/5' in length.
Flowers: staminate in aments covered with clusters of long pale hairs,
2'--2-1/2' long; calyx usually 4 rarely 3-lobed, thinly covered with
long white hairs; stamens usually 4; anthers ovoid-oblong, apiculate,
dark red; pistillate on stout peduncles, hoary-tomentose like the scales
of the involucre; stigmas dark red. Fruit solitary or in pairs, on short
glabrous peduncles; nut broad-ovoid, rounded at apex, sparingly
pubescent especially below the middle with fascicled hairs, light brown,
obscurely striate, 1/4'--1/3' long, 1/2'--5/8' thick, inclosed only at
base in the flat saucer-shaped cup, pubescent on the inner surface,
covered with closely appressed scales obtuse at their narrow apex, red
on the margins, pale pubescent, those of the upper rank smaller, erect,
inserted on the top of the cup and forming a thin rim round its inner
surface.

A tree when crowded in the forest often 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a tall
trunk, stout ascending branches forming a long narrow head, and slender
branchlets thickly coated early in the season with pale fascicled hairs,
pubescent or nearly glabrous in their first autumn and darker and
glabrous in their second year, when not crowded by other trees rarely
40 deg. high with a short trunk occasionally 1 deg. in diameter. Winter-buds
ovoid, acute, with thin light chestnut-brown slightly pubescent or
nearly glabrous scales. Bark thick, nearly black, divided by deep
fissures into long narrow ridges covered with thick closely appressed
scales.

Distribution. Low woods and on rolling sand hills four miles north of
Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas; rare and local.


                    15. Quercus nigra L. Water Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 238]

Leaves oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base and
enlarged often abruptly at the broad rounded entire or occasionally
3-lobed apex, on vigorous young branchlets sometimes pinnatifid with
acute, acuminate or rounded lobes or broadly oblong-obovate and rounded
at apex with entire or undulate margins, on upper branches occasionally
linear-lanceolate, on occasional trees narrowed below to an elongated
cuneate base and gradually widened above into a more or less deeply
3-lobed apex, the lobes rounded or acute (var. _tridentifera_ Sarg.), or
often acute at the ends, and on upper branchlets sometimes
linear-lanceolate to linear-obovate, acute or rounded at apex, divided
above the middle by deep wide rounded sinuses into elongated lanceolate
acute entire lobes, or pinnatifid above the middle, when they unfold
thin, light green more or less tinged with red and covered by fine
caducous pubescence, with conspicuous tufts of pale hairs in the axils
of the veins below, at maturity thin, dull bluish green, paler below
than above, glabrous or with axillary tufts of rusty hairs, usually
about 2-1/2' long and 1-1/2' wide, or on fertile branches sometimes 6'
long and 2-1/2' wide; turning yellow and falling gradually during the
winter; petioles stout, flattened, 1/8'--1/2' in length; leaves of
seedling plants linear-lanceolate with entire or undulate margins, or
occasionally lobed with 1 or 2 pointed lobes, often deeply 3-lobed at a
wide apex, and occasionally furnished below the middle with a single
acuminate lobe, all the forms often occurring on a plant less than three
feet high. Flowers: staminate in red hairy-stemmed aments 2'--3' long;
calyx thin and scarious, covered on the outer surface with short hairs,
divided into 4 or 5 ovate rounded segments; pistillate on short
tomentose peduncles, their involucral scales a little shorter than the
acute calyx-lobes and coated with rusty hairs; stigmas deep red. Fruit
usually solitary, sessile or short-stalked; nut ovoid, broad and flat at
base, full and rounded at the pubescent apex, light yellow-brown, often
striate, 1/3'--2/3' long and nearly as thick, usually inclosed only at
the base in a thin saucer-shaped cup, or occasionally for one third its
length in a cup-shaped cup, coated on the inner surface with pale silky
tomentum and covered by ovate acute closely appressed light red-brown
scales clothed with pale pubescence except on their darker colored
margins.

A tree, occasionally 80 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3-1/2 deg. in diameter,
numerous slender branches spreading gradually from the stem and forming
a symmetrical round-topped head, and slender glabrous branchlets light
or dull red during their first winter, becoming grayish brown in their
second season. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, strongly angled, covered by
loosely imbricated dark red-brown puberulous scales slightly ciliate on
the thin margins. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, with a smooth light brown
surface slightly tinged with red and covered by smooth closely appressed
scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, light brown, with thick
lighter colored sapwood; little valued except as fuel.

Distribution. High sandy borders of swamps and streams and the rich
bottom-lands of rivers, or northward sometimes in dry woods; southern
Delaware, southward to the shores of the Indian River and Tampa Bay,
Florida, ranging inland in the south Atlantic states through the
Piedmont region, and westward through the Gulf states to the valley of
the Colorado River, Texas, and through eastern Oklahoma and Arkansas to
southeastern Missouri and to central Tennessee and Kentucky. The var.
_tridentifera_ Sarg. rare and local; southwest Virginia to Alabama (near
Selma, Dallas County), central and western Mississippi, eastern
Louisiana; valley of Navidad River, Lavaca County, Texas. A form (f.
_microcarya_ Sarg.--_Quercus microcarya_ Small) occurs in the dry soil
on slopes of Little Stone Mountain, Dekalb County, Georgia.

The Water Oak is commonly planted as a shade-tree in the streets and
squares of the cities and towns of the southern states.


                       16. Quercus rhombica Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 239]

Leaves rhombic, rarely oblong-obovate to lanceolate, acute or rounded
and apiculate at apex, cuneate at base, the margins entire or slightly
undulate, those on vigorous shoots occasionally furnished on each side
near the middle with a short lobe, when they unfold deeply tinged with
red, covered with short pale caducous pubescence and furnished below
with usually persistent tufts of axillary hairs, at maturity thin, dark
green and lustrous above, pale below, 3-1/2'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide,
with a stout conspicuous yellow midrib and slender forked primary veins;
turning yellow and falling gradually in early winter, rarely at the ends
of branches, obovate and rounded, slightly 3-lobed or undulate at the
broad apex (var. _obovatifolia_ Sarg.); petioles yellow, 1/5'--1/2' in
length. Flowers not seen. Fruit sessile or short-stalked; nut ovoid,
rounded at apex, thickly covered with pale pubescence, 2/5'--1/2' long,
3/5' thick; inclosed only at the base in a saucer-shaped cup, rounded on
the bottom, silky pubescent on the inner surface, and covered with
slightly pubescent reddish brown loosely appressed scales rounded at
apex, with free tips, those of the upper rank thin and ciliate on the
margins.

A tree often 120 deg.--150 deg. high, with a tall trunk 3 deg.--4-1/2 deg. in diameter,
stout, wide-spreading smooth branches forming a broad open head, and
slender glabrous branchlets red-brown during their first season and dark
gray the following year. Bark pale gray, slightly furrowed and covered
with closely appressed scales, 1/2'--3/4' thick.

Distribution. Borders of swamps and low wet woods of the coast region;
southeastern Virginia (Dismal Swamp) to northern Florida, and through
the Gulf states to the valley of the Neches River (Beaumont, Jefferson
County), eastern Texas; in Louisiana northward to the valley of the Red
River; most abundant in south central Alabama and in Louisiana.

x _Quercus beaumontiana_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
rhombica_ and _Q. rubra_ has been found growing by a street in Beaumont,
Jefferson County, Texas.

x _Quercus Cocksii_ Sarg., probably a hybrid of _Quercus rhombica_ and
_Q. velutina_, has been found at Pineville, Rapides Parish, Louisiana.


                   17. Quercus Phellos L. Willow Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 240]

Leaves ovate-lanceolate or rarely obovate-lanceolate, often somewhat
falcate, gradually narrowed and acute at the ends, and entire with
slightly undulate margins, when they fold light yellow-green and
lustrous on the upper surface, coated on the lower with pale caducous
pubescence, at maturity glabrous, light green and rather lustrous above,
dull and paler or rarely hoary-pubescent below, conspicuously
reticulate-venulose, 2-1/2'--5' long, 1/4'--1' wide, with a slender
yellow midrib and obscure primary veins forked and united about halfway
between the midrib and margins; turning pale yellow in the autumn;
petioles stout, about 1/8' in length. Flowers: staminate in
slender-stemmed aments 2'--3' long; calyx yellow, hirsute, with 4 or 5
acute segments; pistillate on slender glabrous peduncles, their
involucral scales brown covered by pale hairs, about as long as the
acute calyx-lobes; stigmas bright red. Fruit short-stalked or nearly
sessile, solitary or in pairs; nut hemispheric, light, yellow-brown,
coated with pale pubescence, inclosed only at the very base in the thin
pale reddish brown saucer-shaped cup silky-pubescent on the inner
surface, and covered by thin ovate hoary-pubescent closely appressed
scales rounded at apex.

A tree, often 70 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg. or rarely 4 deg. in diameter,
small branches spreading into a comparatively narrow open or conical
round-topped head, and slender glabrous reddish brown branchlets
roughened by dark lenticels, becoming in their second year dark brown
tinged with red or grayish brown; usually much smaller. Winter-buds
ovoid, acute, about 1/8' long, with dark chestnut-brown scales pale and
scarious on the margins. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, light red-brown slightly
tinged with red, generally smooth but on old trees broken by shallow
narrow fissures into irregular plates covered by small closely appressed
scales. Wood heavy, strong, not hard, rather coarse-grained, light brown
tinged with red, with thin lighter colored sapwood; occasionally used in
construction, for clapboards and the fellies of wheels.

Distribution. Low wet borders of swamps and streams and rich sandy
uplands; Staten Island, New York, southern New Jersey and southeastern
Pennsylvania and southward to northeastern Florida, through the Gulf
states to the valley of the Navasota River, Brazos County, Texas, and
through Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma and southeastern Missouri to central
Tennessee and northwestern Kentucky (Ballard County), and in
southwestern Illinois (Massac and Pope Counties); in the Atlantic states
usually confined to the maritime plain; less common in the middle
districts, rarely extending to the Appalachian foothills.

Occasionally planted as a shade-tree in the streets of southern towns,
and rarely in western Europe; hardy in eastern Massachusetts.


                     Quercus heterophylla Michx. f.

[Illustration: Fig. 241]

This has usually been considered a hybrid between _Quercus Phellos_ and
_Quercus velutina_ or _Quercus borealis_ var. _maxima_; first known in
the eighteenth century from an individual growing in a field belonging
to John Bartram on the Schuylkill River, Philadelphia. What appears to
be the same form has since been discovered in a number of stations from
New Jersey to Texas, and it is possible that _Quercus heterophylla_ may,
as many botanists have believed, best be considered a species.

x _Quercus subfalcata_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
Phellos_ and _Q. rubra_ has been found at Wickliffe, Ballard County,
Illinois, at Campbell, Lawrence County, Mississippi, Fulton, Hempstead
County, Arkansas, and Houston, Harris County, Texas; its var.
_microcarpa_ Sarg., probably of the same parentage, originated in a
Dutch nursery.

x _Quercus ludoviciana_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
Phellos_ and _Q. rubra_ var. _pagodaefolia_ grows in low wet woods ten
miles west of Opelousas, St. Landry Parish, Louisiana.


          18. Quercus laurifolia Michx. Laurel Oak. Water Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 242]

Leaves elliptic or rarely slightly broadest above the middle, acuminate
at the ends, apiculate at apex, occasionally lanceolate or
oblong-obovate and rounded at apex (var. _hybrida_ Michx.) sometimes
3-lobed at apex, the terminal lobe acuminate, much larger than the
others (var. _tridentata_ Sarg.), frequently unequally lobed on vigorous
branches of young trees, with small nearly triangular lobes, when they
unfold in spring yellow-green, or later in the season often pink or
bright red, and slightly puberulous, at maturity thin, green, and very
lustrous above, light green and less lustrous below, usually 3'--4' long
and 3/4' wide, with a conspicuous yellow midrib; falling abruptly in
early spring leaving the branches bare during only a few weeks; petioles
stout, yellow, rarely more than 1/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in
red-stemmed hairy aments 2'--3' long; calyx pubescent on the outer
surface, divided into 4 ovate rounded lobes; pistillate on stout
glabrous peduncles, their involucral scales brown and hairy, about as
long as the acute calyx-lobes; stigmas dark red. Fruit sessile or
subsessile, generally solitary; nut ovoid to hemispheric, broad and
slightly rounded at base, full and rounded at the puberulous apex, dark
brown, about 1/2' long, inclosed for about one fourth its length in a
thin saucer-shaped cup red-brown and silky-pubescent on the inner
surface, and covered by thin ovate light red-brown scales rounded at
apex and pale-pubescent except on their darker colored margins.

A tree, occasionally 100 deg. high, with a tall trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter,
and comparatively slender branches spreading gradually into a broad
dense round-topped shapely head, and slender glabrous branchlets dark
red when they first appear, dark red-brown during their first winter,
becoming reddish brown or dark gray in their second season. Winter-buds
broadly ovoid or oval, abruptly narrowed and acute at apex, 1/16'--1/8'
long with numerous thin closely imbricated bright red-brown scales
ciliate on the margins. Bark of young trees 1/2'--1' thick, dark brown
more or less tinged with red, roughened by small closely appressed
scales, becoming at the base of old trees 1'--2' thick, nearly black,
and divided by deep fissures into broad flat ridges. Wood heavy, very
strong and hard, coarse-grained, liable to check badly in drying, dark
brown tinged with red, with thick lighter colored sapwood; probably used
only as fuel.

Distribution. Sandy banks of streams and swamps and rich hummocks in the
neighborhood of the coast; North Carolina (near Newbern) southward to
the shores of Bay Biscayne and the valley of the Caloosahatchie River,
Florida, and in the interior of the peninsula to the neighborhood of
Lake Istokpaga, De Soto County, and westward to eastern Louisiana,
ranging inland to Darlington, Darlington County, South Carolina, to the
neighborhood of Augusta, Richmond County, Mayfield, Hancock County,
Albany, Dougherty County, Cuthbert, Randolph County, and Bainbridge,
Decatur County, Georgia, Georgiana, Butler County, and Berlin, Dallas
County, Alabama, Rockport, Copiah County, Mississippi, and to the
neighborhood of Bogalusa, Washington Parish, Louisiana (_R. S. Cocks_);
nowhere abundant, but most common and of its largest size in eastern
Florida.


        19. Quercus cinerea Michx. Blue Jack. Upland Willow Oak.

                       _Quercus brevifolia_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 243]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate to oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed and
cuneate or sometimes rounded at base, acute or rounded and apiculate at
apex, entire with slightly thickened undulate margins, or at the ends of
vigorous sterile branches occasionally 3-lobed at the apex and variously
lobed on the margins ({b} _dentato-lobata_ A. De Candolle), when they
unfold bright pink and pubescent on the upper surface, coated on the
lower with thick silvery white tomentum, at maturity firm in texture,
blue-green, lustrous, conspicuously reticulate venulose above,
pale-tomentose below, 2'--5' long, 1/2'--1-1/2' wide, with a stout
yellow midrib and remote obscure primary veins forked and united within
the margins; turning red and falling gradually late in the autumn or in
early winter; petioles stout, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate
in hoary-tomentose aments 2'--3' long; calyx pubescent, bright red and
furnished at apex with a thick tuft of silvery white hairs before
opening, divided into 4 or 5 ovate acute lobes, becoming yellow as it
opens; stamens 4 or 5; anthers apiculate, dark red in the bud, becoming
yellow; pistillate on short stout tomentose peduncles, their involucral
scales about as long as the acute calyx-lobes and coated with pale
tomentum; stigmas dark red. Fruit produced in great profusion, sessile
or raised on a short stalk rarely 1/4' long; nut ovoid, full and rounded
at the ends or subglobose, about 1/2' long, often striate,
hoary-pubescent at apex, inclosed only at the base or for one half its
length in a thin saucer-shaped or cup-shaped cup bright red-brown and
coated with lustrous pale pubescence on the inner surface, and covered
by thin closely imbricated ovate-oblong scales hoary-tomentose except on
the dark red-brown margins.

A tree on dry hills, usually 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in
diameter, stout branches forming a narrow irregular-head, and thick
rigid branchlets coated at first with a dense fulvous or hoary tomentum
of fascicled hairs, soon becoming glabrous or puberulous, dark brown
sometimes tinged with red during their first winter and darker in their
second year; or in low moist soil often 60 deg.--75 deg. high, with a trunk
18'--20' in diameter, and a broad round-topped shapely head of drooping
branches. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, with numerous rather loosely
imbricated bright chestnut-brown scales ciliate on the margins, often
1/4' long on vigorous branches, frequently obtuse and occasionally much
smaller. Bark 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, and divided into thick nearly square
plates 1'--2' long, and covered by small dark brown or nearly black
scales slightly tinged with red. Wood hard, strong, close-grained, light
brown tinged with red, with thick darker colored sapwood; probably only
used as fuel.

Distribution. Sandy barrens and dry upland ridges, and in the rich moist
soil of the pine-covered flats of the Florida peninsula; North Carolina
southward to the shores of the Indian River and Peace Creek, Florida,
and along the Gulf coast to the valley of the Brazos River, Texas; in
the Atlantic and middle Gulf states mostly confined to a maritime belt
40 deg.--60 deg. wide, extending across the Florida peninsula as far south as
the sand hills in the neighborhood of Lake Istokpoga, De Soto County,
and west of the Mississippi River, ranging inland to the neighborhood of
Dallas, Dallas County, Texas and to southeastern Oklahoma (near Antlers,
Pushmataha County).

x _Quercus dubia_ Ashe, believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus cinerea_ and
_Q. laurifolia_ occurs at Abbottsburg, Bladen County, North Carolina, on
the coast of South Carolina, in southern Georgia and northern and
central Florida, and at Mississippi City, Lincoln County, Mississippi.

x _Quercus subintegra_ Trel., a supposed hybrid of _Quercus cinerea_ and
_Q. rubra_ occurs at Lumber City, Telfair County, Georgia, Lake City,
Columbia County, Florida, and at Berlin, Dallas County, Alabama.

x _Quercus sublaurifolia_ Trel., a supposed hybrid of _Quercus cinerea_
and _Q. laurifolia_ occurs at Folkston, Charlton County, Georgia, and at
Biloxi, Harrison County, Mississippi.

x _Quercus carolinensis_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
cinerea_ and _Q. marilandica_ occurs at Newbern, Craven County, North
Carolina, Lumber City, Telfair County and Climax, Decatur County,
Georgia, and near Fletcher, Hardin County, Texas.

x _Quercus caduca_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus cinerea_
and _Q. nigra_, occurs at Folkston, Charlton County and Lumber City,
Telfair County, Georgia, Jacksonville, Duval County, and Gainsville,
Alachua County, Florida, Mississippi City, Harrison County, Mississippi,
and at Milano, Milano County and Bryan, Brazos County, Texas.

x _Quercus oviedoensis_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
cinerea_ and _Q. myrtifolia_, has been found near Oviedo, Orange County,
Florida.


         20. Quercus imbricaria Michx. Shingle Oak. Laurel Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 244]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate to oblong-obovate, apiculate and acute or
rounded at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate or rounded at base,
entire with slightly thickened, revolute often undulate margins, or
sometimes more or less 3-lobed, or on sterile branches occasionally
repand-lobulate, when they unfold bright red, soon becoming
yellow-green, covered with scurfy rusty pubescence on the upper surface
and hoary-tomentose on the lower, at maturity thin, glabrous, dark
green, and very lustrous above, pale green or light brown and pubescent
below, 4'--6' long, 3/4'--2' wide, with a stout yellow midrib, numerous
slender yellow veins arcuate and united at some distance from the
margins, and reticulate veinlets; late in the autumn turning dark red on
the upper surface; petioles stout, pubescent, rarely more than 1/2' in
length. Flowers: staminate in hoary-tomentose aments, 2'--3' long; calyx
light yellow, pubescent, and divided into 4 acute segments; pistillate
on slender tomentose peduncles, their involucral scales covered with
pale pubescence and about as long as the acute calyx-lobes; stigmas
greenish yellow. Fruit solitary or in pairs, on stout peduncles often
nearly 1/2' in length; nut nearly as broad as long, full and rounded at
the ends, dark chestnut-brown, often obscurely striate, 1/2'--2/3' long,
inclosed for one third to one half its length in a thin cup-shaped or
turbinate cup bright red-brown and lustrous on the inner surface, and
covered by thin ovate light red-brown scales rounded or acute at the
apex and pubescent except on their darker colored margins.

A tree, usually 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 3 deg. in
diameter, or rarely 100 deg. high, with a long naked stem 3 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, slender tough horizontal or somewhat pendulous branches
forming a narrow round-topped picturesque head, and slender branchlets
dark green, lustrous, and often suffused with red when they first
appear, soon glabrous, light reddish brown or light brown during their
first winter and dark brown in their second year. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, about 1/8' long, obscurely angled, and covered by closely
imbricated light chestnut-brown lustrous scales erose and often ciliate
on the margins. Bark on young stems and branches thin, light brown,
smooth, and lustrous, becoming on old trunks 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, and
slightly divided by irregular shallow fissures into broad ridges covered
by close slightly appressed light brown scales somewhat tinged with red.
Wood heavy, hard, rather coarse-grained, light brown tinged with red,
with thin lighter colored sapwood; occasionally used in construction,
and for clapboards and shingles.

Distribution. Rich hillsides and the fertile bottom-lands of streams;
Lehigh County (Allentown to Dorney's Park), Bedford, Huntington,
Franklin and Union Counties, Pennsylvania, westward through Ohio to
southern Michigan, southern Wisconsin and southeastern and southern Iowa
(Muscatine to Taylor County), and southward to the District of Columbia,
along the Appalachian Mountains and their foothills, up to altitudes of
2200 deg., to the valley of the Little Tennessee River, North Carolina, and
to northern Georgia (Wilkes County), and middle Tennessee; through
Missouri to northeastern Kansas and southeastern Nebraska, and in
northern and southern Arkansas (Fulton, Hempstead County); comparatively
rare in the east; one of the most abundant Oaks of the lower Ohio basin;
probably growing to its largest size in southern Indiana and Illinois.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the northern states, and
hardy as far north as Massachusetts.

x _Quercus Leana_ Nutt., scattered usually in solitary individuals from
the District of Columbia and western North Carolina to southern
Michigan, central and northern Illinois and southeastern Missouri, is
believed to be a hybrid between this species and _Quercus velutina_.

x _Quercus tridentata_ Engelm., described as a hybrid of _Quercus
imbricaria_ and _Q. marilandica_ first found at Allenton, Saint Louis
County, Missouri, occurs also near Olney, Richland County, Illinois.

x _Quercus exacta_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
imbricaria_ and _Q. palustris_, occurs near Olney, Richland County,
Illinois, and at Crown Point, Lake County, Indiana.


                     21. Quercus hypoleuca Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 245]

Leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate to elliptic, occasionally
somewhat falcate, acute and often apiculate at apex, cuneate or rounded
or cordate at the narrow base, entire or repandly serrate above the
middle with occasionally small minute rigid spinose teeth, or on
vigorous shoots serrate-lobed with oblique acute lobes, when they unfold
light red, covered with close pale pubescence above and coated below
with thick hoary tomentum, at maturity thick and firm, dark yellow-green
and lustrous on the upper surface, covered on the lower with thick
silvery white or fulvous tomentum, 2'--4' long, 1/2'--1' wide, with
thickened revolute margins; turning yellow or brown and falling
gradually during the spring after the appearance of the new leaves;
petioles stout, flattened, pubescent or tomentose, 1/8'--1/4' in length.
Flowers: staminate in slender aments 4'--5' long; calyx slightly tinged
with red, covered with pale hairs and divided into 4 or 5 broadly ovate
rounded lobes; anthers acute, apiculate, bright red becoming yellow;
pistillate mostly solitary, sessile or short-stalked, their involucral
scales thin, scarious, and soft-pubescent; stigmas dark red. Fruit
sessile or borne on a stout peduncle up to 1/2' in length, usually
solitary; nut ovoid, acute or rounded at the narrow hoary-pubescent
apex, dark green and often striate when ripe, becoming light
chestnut-brown in drying, 1/2'--2/3' long, the shell lined with white
tomentum, inclosed for about one third its length in a turbinate thick
cup pubescent on the inner surface, and covered by thin broadly ovate
light chestnut-brown scales rounded at apex and clothed, especially
toward the base of the cup, with soft silvery pubescence.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--30 deg. or sometimes 60 deg. high, with a tall trunk
10'--15' in diameter, slender branches spreading into a narrow
round-topped inversely conic head, and stout rigid branchlets coated at
first with thick hoary tomentum disappearing during the first winter,
becoming light red-brown often covered with a glaucous bloom and
ultimately nearly black; frequently a shrub. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse,
about 1/8' long, with thin light chestnut-brown scales. Bark 3/4'--1'
thick, nearly black, deeply divided into broad ridges broken on the
surface into thick plate-like scales. Wood heavy, very strong, hard,
close-grained, dark brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Scattered but nowhere abundant through Pine-forests on the
slopes of canyons and on high ridges usually at altitudes between
6000 deg.--7000 deg. above the sea on the mountains of western Texas, and of
southern New Mexico and Arizona; in northern Chihuahua and Sonora.


              22. Quercus agrifolia Nee. Live Oak. Encina.

[Illustration: Fig. 246]

Leaves oval, orbicular or oblong, rounded or acute and apiculate at
apex, rounded or cordate at base, entire or sinuate-dentate with slender
rigid spinose teeth, when they unfold tinged with red and coated with
caducous hoary tomentum, at maturity subcoriaceous, convex, dark or pale
green, dull and obscurely reticulate above, paler, rather lustrous,
glabrous or pubescent below, with tufts of rusty hairs in the axils of
the principal veins, or sometimes covered above with fascicled hairs and
coated below with thick hoary pubescence, 3/4'--4' long and 1/2'--3'
wide, with thickened strongly revolute margins; falling gradually during
the winter and early spring; petioles stout or slender, pubescent or
glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers: staminate in slender hairy aments
3'--4' long; calyx bright purple-red in the bud, sometimes furnished
with a tuft of long pale hairs at the apex, glabrous or glabrate,
divided nearly to the base into 5--7 ovate acute segments reddish above
the middle; pistillate sessile or short-stalked, their involucral scales
bright red and covered with thick hoary tomentum, or glabrous or
puberulous; stigmas bright red. Fruit sessile or nearly so, solitary or
in few-fruited clusters; nut elongated, ovate, abruptly narrowed at
base, gradually narrowed to the acute puberulous apex, light
chestnut-brown, 3/4'--1-1/2' long, 1/4'--3/4' thick, the shell lined
with a thick coat of pale tomentum, inclosed for one third its length or
only at the base in a thin turbinate light brown cup coated on the inner
surface with soft pale silky pubescence, and covered by thin papery
scales rounded at the narrow apex, and slightly puberulous, especially
toward the base of the cup.

A tree, occasionally 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a short trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. or rarely
6 deg.--7 deg. in diameter, dividing a few feet above the base into numerous
great limbs often resting on the ground and forming a low round-topped
head frequently 150 deg. across, and slender dark gray or brown branchlets
tinged with red, coated at first with hoary tomentum persistent until
the second or third year; or with a trunk, rising to the height of 30 deg.
or 40 deg., and crowned by a narrow head of small branches; often much
smaller; frequently shrubby in habit, with slender stems only a few feet
high. Winter-buds globose and usually about 1/16' thick, or
ovoid-oblong, acute, and sometimes on vigorous shoots nearly 1/4' in
length, with thin broadly ovate closely imbricated light chestnut-brown
glabrous or pubescent scales. Bark of young stems and branches thin,
close, light brown or pale bluish gray, becoming on old trunks 2'--3'
thick, dark brown slightly tinged with red, and divided into broad
rounded ridges separating on the surface into small closely appressed
scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, very brittle, light brown or
reddish brown, with thick darker colored sapwood; valued and largely
used for fuel.

Distribution. Usually in open groves of great extent from Sonoma County,
California, southward over the coast ranges and islands to the San Pedro
Martir Mountains, Lower California; less common at the north; very
abundant and of its largest size in the valleys south of San Francisco
Bay and their commonest and characteristic tree; frequently covering
with semiprostrate and contorted stems the sand dunes on the coast in
the central part of the state; in southwestern California the largest
and most generally distributed Oak-tree between the mountains and the
sea, often covering low hills and ascending to altitudes of 4500 deg. in the
canyons of the San Jacinto Mountains.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in temperate western, and
in southern Europe.


                23. Quercus Wislizenii A. DC. Live Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 247]

Leaves narrowly lanceolate to broadly elliptic, generally
oblong-lanceolate, acute or rounded and generally apiculate at apex,
rounded or truncate or gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, entire,
serrulate or serrate or sinuate-dentate with spreading rigid spinescent
teeth, when they unfold thin, dark red, ciliate, and covered with pale
scattered fascicled hairs, at maturity thick and coriaceous, glabrous
and lustrous, dark green on the upper and paler and yellow-green on the
lower surface, usually 1'--1-1/2' long and about 2/3' wide, with obscure
primary veins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets, gradually deciduous
during their second summer and autumn; petioles coated at first with
hoary tomentum, usually pubescent or puberulous at maturity, 1/8' to
nearly 1' in length. Flowers: staminate in hairy aments 3'--4' long;
calyx tinged with red in the bud, divided into broadly ovate ciliate
glabrous light yellow lobes shorter than the 3--6 stamens; pistillate
sessile or short-stalked, their involucral scales and peduncle
hoary-tomentose. Fruit sessile, short-stalked or occasionally spicate;
nut slender, oblong, abruptly narrowed at base, pointed and pilose at
the apex, 3/4'--1-1/2' long, about 1/3' thick, light chestnut-brown,
often striate, the shell lined with a scanty coat of pale tomentum, more
or less inclosed in the thin turbinate sometimes tubular cup 1/2'--1'
deep, or rarely cup-shaped and shallow, light green and puberulous
within, and covered by oblong lanceolate light brown closely imbricated
thin scales, sometimes toward the base of the cup thickened and rounded
on the back, usually pubescent or puberulous, especially above the
middle, and frequently ciliate on the margins.

A tree, usually 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a short trunk 4 deg.--6 deg. in diameter,
stout spreading branches forming a round-topped head, and slender rigid
branchlets coated at first with hoary tomentum or covered with scattered
fascicled hairs, puberulous or glabrous and rather light brown during
their first season, gradually growing darker in their second year;
usually much smaller and sometimes reduced to an intricately branched
shrub, with numerous stems only a few feet tall. Winter-buds ovoid or
oval, acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with closely imbricated light
chestnut-brown ciliate scales. Bark on young trees and large branches
thin, generally smooth and light-colored, becoming on old trunks 2'--3'
thick, and divided into broad rounded often connected ridges separating
on the surface into small thick closely appressed dark brown scales
slightly tinged with red. Wood heavy, very hard, strong, close-grained,
light brown tinged with red, with thick lighter colored sapwood;
sometimes used for fuel.

Distribution. Lower slopes of Mt. Shasta southward through the coast
region of California to the Santa Lucia Mountains, and to Santa Rosa and
Santa Cruz Islands, and along the slopes of the Sierra Nevada to Kern
County, up to altitudes of 2000 deg. at the north and of 4500 deg. at the south;
as a shrub 4 deg.--6 deg. high with small thick leaves (var. _frutescens_
Engelm.) on the desert slopes of the San Bernardino, San Jacinto and
Cuyamaca mountains, at altitudes of 5000 deg.--7000 deg. above the sea, and on
San Pedro Martir in Lower California; nowhere common as a tree, but most
abundant and of its largest size in the valleys of the coast region of
central California at some distance from the sea, and on the foothills
of the Sierra Nevada; very common as a shrub in the canyons of the desert
slopes of the mountains of southern California; near the coast and on
the islands small and mostly shrubby.

x _Quercus morehus_ Kell., a supposed hybrid between _Quercus
Wislizenii_ and _Q. Kelloggii_ occurs in Lake County, California.


                     24. Quercus myrtifolia Willd.

[Illustration: Fig. 248]

Leaves oval to oblong-obovate, acute and apiculate or broad and rounded
at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate or broad and rounded or cordate
at base, entire, with much thickened revolute sometimes undulate
margins, or on vigorous shoots sinuate-dentate and lobed above the
middle, when they unfold, thin, dark red, coated below and on the
petioles with clammy rusty tomentum and densely pubescent above, at
maturity thick and coriaceous, lustrous, dark green, glabrous and
conspicuously reticulate-venulose above, paler, yellow-green, or light
orange-brown, glabrous or pubescent below, with tufts of rusty hairs in
the axils of the veins, 1/2'--2' long and 1/4'--1' wide; falling
gradually during their second year; petioles stout, pubescent, yellow,
rarely more than 1/8' in length. Flowers: staminate in hoary pubescent
aments 1'--1-1/2' long; calyx coated on the outer surface with rusty
hairs and divided into 5 ovate-acute, segments shorter than the 2 or 3
stamens; pistillate sessile or nearly sessile, solitary or in pairs,
their involucral scales tomentose and tinged with red. Fruit solitary or
in pairs, sessile or short-stalked; nut subglobose or ovoid, acute,
1/4'--1/2' long, dark brown, lustrous and often striate, puberulous at
apex, the shell lined with a thick coat of rusty tomentum, inclosed for
one fourth to one third its length in a saucer-shaped or turbinate cup
light brown and puberulous within, and covered by closely imbricated
broad-ovate light brown pubescent scales ciliate on the margins and
rounded at their broad apex.

A round-topped tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--5' or rarely up
to 15' in diameter, short or rarely long spreading branches and slender
branchlets coated at first with a thick pale fulvous tomentum of
articulate hairs usually persistent during the summer, light brown more
or less tinged with red or dark gray, and pubescent or puberulous during
their first winter, becoming darker and glabrous in their second season;
more often an intricately branched shrub, with slender rigid stems
3 deg.--4 deg. or rarely 15 deg.--20 deg. high and 1'--3' in diameter. Winter-buds ovoid
or oval, gradually narrowed to the acute apex, with closely imbricated
dark chestnut-brown slightly puberulous scales. Bark thin and smooth,
becoming near the ground dark and slightly furrowed.

Distribution. Dry sandy ridges on the coast and islands of South
Carolina to Bay Biscayne, Florida, crossing the central peninsula and
from the valley of the Caloosahatchee River, westward along the coast of
Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi; most abundant on the islands off the
coast of east Florida, and of Alabama and Mississippi; often covering
large areas with low impenetrable thickets; perhaps of its largest size
in Orange County, on Jupiter Island, and on the coast west of the
Apalachicola River, Florida.


           25. Quercus chrysolepis Liebm. Live Oak. Maul Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 249]

Leaves oblong-ovate to elliptic, acute or cuspidate at apex, cordate,
rounded or cuneate at base, mostly entire on old trees, often dentate or
sinuate-dentate on young trees with 1 or 2 or many spinescent teeth, the
two forms often appearing together on vigorous shoots, clothed when they
unfold with a thick tomentum of fulvous hairs soon deciduous from the
upper and more gradually from the lower surface, at maturity thick and
coriaceous, bright yellow-green and glabrous above, more or less
fulvous-tomentose below during their first year, ultimately becoming
glabrate and bluish white, 1'--4' long, 1/2'--2' wide, with thickened
revolute margins; deciduous during their third and fourth years;
petioles slender, yellow, rarely 1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate in
slender tomentose aments 2'--4' long; calyx light yellow, pubescent,
divided usually into 5--7 broadly ovate acute ciliate lobes often tinged
with red above the middle; pistillate sessile or subsessile or rarely in
short few-flowered spikes, their broadly ovate involucral scales coated
with fulvous tomentum; stigmas bright red. Fruit usually solitary,
sessile or short-stalked; nut ellipsoidal or ovoid, acute or rounded at
the full or narrow slightly puberulous apex, light chestnut-brown,
1/2'--2' long and about as thick, the shell lined with a thin coat of
loose tomentum, with abortive ovules scattered irregularly over the side
of the seed, inclosed only at the base in a thin hemispheric or in a
thick turbinate broad-rimmed cup pale green or dark reddish brown
within, and covered by small triangular closely appressed scales with a
short free tip, clothed with hoary pubescence, or often hidden in a
dense coat of fulvous tomentum.

A tree, usually not more than 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a short trunk 3 deg.--5 deg.
in diameter, dividing into great horizontal limbs sometimes forming a
head 150 deg. across, and slender rigid or flexible branchlets coated at
first with thick fulvous tomentum, becoming during their first winter
dark brown somewhat tinged with red, tomentose, pubescent, or glabrous,
and ultimately light brown or ashy gray; occasionally in sheltered
canyons producing trunks 8 deg.--9 deg. in diameter; on exposed mountain sides
forming dense thickets 15 deg.--20 deg. high. Winter-buds broadly ovoid or oval,
acute, about 1/8' long, with closely imbricated light chestnut-brown
usually puberulous scales. Bark 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, light or dark
gray-brown tinged with red, and covered by small closely appressed
scales. Wood heavy, very strong, hard, tough, close-grained, light
brown, with thick darker colored sapwood; used in the manufacture of
agricultural implements and wagons.

Distribution. Southern Oregon, along the California coast ranges and the
western slopes of the Sierra Nevada to the San Bernardino and San
Jacinto mountains; of its largest size in the canyons of the coast ranges
of central California and on the foothills of the Sierra Nevada;
ascending to altitudes of 8000 deg.--9000 deg. above the sea; near the southern
boundary of California, on the mountains of northern Lower California
and Sonora and in Arizona (Santa Rita and Huachuca Mountains, on Beaver
Creek and in Copper Canyon near Camp Verde, and in Sycamore Canyon south
of Flagstaff), usually shrubby, with rigid branches, rigid coriaceous
oblong or semiorbicular spinose-dentate leaves, subsessile or
pedunculate fruit, with ovoid acute nuts 1'--1-1/2' long, their shells
lined with thick or thin pale tomentum, and purple cotyledons (var.
_Palmeri_ Engelm.--_Quercus Wilcoxii_ Rydb.)


                     26. Quercus tomentella Engelm.

[Illustration: Fig. 250]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute, sometimes cuspidate or occasionally
rounded at apex, broad and rounded or gradually narrowed and abruptly
cuneate at base, remotely crenate-dentate with small remote spreading
callous tipped teeth, or entire, when they unfold light green tinged
with red, covered above with scattered pale fascicled hairs and below
and on the petioles with thick hoary tomentum, at maturity thick and
coriaceous, dark green, glabrous and lustrous on the upper surface, pale
and covered with fascicled hairs on the lower surface, 2'--4' long,
1'--2' wide, with thickened strongly revolute margins, and a pubescent
midrib; gradually deciduous during their third season; petioles stout,
pubescent, about 1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate in pubescent aments
2-1/2'--14' long, calyx light yellow, pubescent, divided into 5--7 ovate
acute lobes; pistillate subsessile or in few-flowered spikes on short or
elongated pubescent peduncles, their involucral scales like the calyx
coated with fascicled hairs; stigmas red. Fruit subsessile or
short-stalked; nut ovoid, broad at base, full and rounded at apex, about
1-1/2' long and 3/4' thick, inclosed only at the base in a cup-shaped
shallow cup thickened below, light brown and pubescent on the inner
surface, and covered by thin ovate acute scales, their free
chestnut-brown tips more or less hidden in a thick coat of hoary
tomentum.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg., or occasionally 60 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in
diameter, spreading branches forming a shapely round-topped head, and
slender branchlets coated at first with hoary tomentum, becoming light
brown tinged with red or orange color. Winter-buds ovoid, acute or
obtuse, nearly 1/4' long, with many loosely imbricated light
chestnut-brown scales more or less clothed with pale pubescence. Bark
thin, reddish brown, broken into large closely appressed scales. Wood
heavy, hard, close-grained, compact, pale yellow-brown, with lighter
colored sapwood.

Distribution. Deep narrow canyons and high wind-swept slopes of Santa
Rosa, Santa Cruz, and Santa Catalina islands, California; on Guadalupe
Island off the coast of Lower California.


                  27. Quercus Emoryi Torr. Black Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 251]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acute and mucronate at apex, cordate or
rounded at the slightly narrowed base, entire or remotely repand-serrate
with 1--5 pairs of acute rigid oblique teeth, when they unfold thin,
light green more or less tinged with red and covered with silvery white
tomentum, at maturity thick, rigid, coriaceous, dark green, very
lustrous and glabrous or coated above with minute fascicled hairs, pale
and glabrous or puberulous below, usually with 2 large tufts of white
hairs at the base of the slender midrib, obscurely reticulate-venulose,
1'--2-1/2' long, 1/2'--1' wide; falling gradually in April with the
appearance of the new leaves; petioles stout, pubescent, about 1/4' in
length. Flowers: staminate in hoary tomentose aments; calyx light
yellow, hairy on the outer surface, divided into 5--7 ovate acute lobes;
pistillate sessile or short-stalked, their involucral scales covered
with hoary tomentum. Fruit ripening irregularly from June to September,
sessile or short-stalked; nut oblong, oval, or ovate, narrowed at base,
rounded at the narrow pilose apex, 1/2'--3/4' long, about 1/3' thick,
dull light green when fully grown, dark chestnut-brown or nearly black
at maturity, with a thin shell lined with thick white tomentum, inclosed
for from one third to one half its length in the deeply cup-shaped or
nearly hemispheric cup light green and pubescent within, and covered by
closely imbricated broadly ovate acute thin and scarious light brown
scales clothed with short soft pale pubescence.

A tree, usually 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
stout rigid rather drooping branches forming a round-topped symmetrical
head, and slender rigid branchlets covered at first with close hoary
tomentum, bright red, pubescent or tomentose in their first winter,
ultimately glabrous and dark red-brown or black; sometimes 60 deg.--70 deg.
high, with a trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, with a head occasionally 100 deg.
across; or at high altitudes or on exposed mountain slopes a low shrub.
Winter-buds ellipsoidal, acute, about 1/4' long, pale pubescent toward
the apex, with thin closely imbricated light chestnut-brown ciliate
scales. Bark 1'--2' thick, dark brown or nearly black, deeply divided
into large oblong thick plates separating into small thin closely
appressed scales. Wood heavy, strong, brittle, close-grained, dark brown
or almost black, with thick bright brown sapwood tinged with red. The
sweet acorns are an important article of food for Mexicans and Indians,
and are sold in the towns of southern Arizona and northern Mexico.

Distribution. Mountain ranges of western Texas, southern New Mexico,
Arizona south of the Colorado plateau, and of northern Mexico; in Texas
common in the canyons and on the southern slopes of the Limpio and Chisos
mountains; the most abundant Oak of southern New Mexico and Arizona,
forming a large part of the forests covering the mountain slopes and
extending from the upper limits of the mesa nearly to the highest
ridges; attaining its largest size and beauty in the moist soil of
sheltered canyons.


                  28. Quercus dumosa Nutt. Scrub Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 252]

Leaves oblong, rounded and acute at apex, broad and abruptly cuneate or
rounded at base, usually about 3/4' long and 1/2' wide, spinescent with
a few minute teeth, or undulate and entire or coarsely spinescent, with
an obscure midrib and primary veins, conspicuous reticulate veinlets,
and stout petioles rarely 1/8' long; or sometimes oblong to
oblong-obovate and divided by deep sinuses into 5--9 oblong acute
rounded or emarginate bristle-tipped lobes, the terminal lobe 3-lobed,
rounded or acute, 2'--4' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with primary veins
running to the points of the lobes, obscure reticulate veinlets, and
petioles sometimes 1' long, thin when they unfold and clothed with
scattered fascicled hairs, or rarely tomentose above and coated below
and on the petioles with hoary tomentum, at maturity thick and firm,
dark green and glabrous on the upper surface, paler and more or less
pubescent on the lower surface; mostly deciduous during the winter.
Flowers: staminate in pubescent aments; calyx divided into 4--7 ovate
lanceolate hairy segments; pistillate sessile or stalked, in long
many-flowered tomentose spikes, their involucral scales and calyx
hoary-tomentose; stigmas red. Fruit sessile or short-stalked; nut ovoid,
broad at base, broad and rounded or acute at apex, 1/2'--1' long,
1/3'--2/3' thick, inclosed for one half to two thirds its length in a
deep cup-shaped or hemispheric cup light brown and pubescent within,
covered by ovate pointed scales coated with pale or rufous tomentum,
usually much thickened, united and tuberculate, those above with free
acute tips forming a fringe to the rim of the cup, or frequently with
basal scales but little thickened and furnished with long free tips; in
var. _Alvordiana_ Jeps., with a nut 1-1/2'--1-5/8' long, 1/4'--1/2'
thick, gradually narrowed and acute at apex, inclosed only at base in a
shallow cup-shaped cup.

A tree, rarely 20 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, small
branches forming a round-topped head, and slender branchlets coated at
first with hoary tomentum, becoming in their first winter ashy gray or
light or dark reddish brown and usually pubescent or tomentose; more
often an intricately branched rigid shrub, with stout stems covered by
pale gray bark and usually 6 deg.--8 deg. high, often forming dense thickets.
Winter-buds ellipsoidal, generally acute, 1/16'--1/8' long, with thin
pale red often pilose and ciliate scales. Bark of the trunk bright brown
and scaly.

Distribution. California; western slopes of the central Sierra Nevada;
common on the coast ranges south of San Francisco Bay and on the islands
off the coast of the southern part of the state, ranging inland to the
borders of the Mohave Desert and to the canyons of the desert slopes of
the San Bernardino and San Jacinto mountains, and southward into Lower
California; arborescent only in sheltered canyons of the islands; the
var. _Alvordiana_, in the San Emidio Canyon of the coast ranges of Kern
County and on the San Carlos Range, Fresno County; north of San
Francisco Bay replaced by the variety _bullata_ Engelm. ranging to
Mendocino County and to Napa valley.

x _Quercus MacDonaldii_ Greene, a shrub or small tree with characters
intermediate between those of _Quercus dumosa_ and _Q. Engelmannii_, is
usually considered a hybrid of these species. It occurs on Santa Cruz
and Santa Catalina Islands, and in Santa Barbara, and Los Angeles
Counties, California.


                 29. Quercus virginiana Mill. Live Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 253]

Leaves oblong, elliptic or obovate, rounded or acute at apex, gradually
narrowed and cuneate or rarely rounded or cordate at base, usually
entire with slightly revolute margins, or rarely spinose-dentate above
the middle, thin, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale and
pubescent on the lower surface, 2'--5' long, 1/2'--2-1/2' wide, and
inconspicuously reticulate-venulose, with a narrow yellow midrib, and
few slender obscure primary veins forked and united at some distance
from the margins; gradually turning yellow or brown at the end of the
winter and falling with the appearance of the new leaves in the spring;
petioles stout, rarely more than 1/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in
hairy aments 2'--3' long; calyx light yellow, hairy, divided into 5--7
ovate rounded segments; anthers hirsute; pistillate in spikes on slender
pubescent peduncles 1'--3' long, their involucral scales and ovate
calyx-lobes coated with hoary pubescence; stigmas bright red. Fruit
usually in 3--5 fruited spikes or rarely in pairs or single on stout
light brown puberulous peduncles 1'--5' long; nut ellipsoidal or
slightly obovoid, narrowed at base, rounded or acute at apex, dark
chestnut-brown and lustrous, about 1' long and 1/3' thick, inclosed for
about one fourth its length in a turbinate light reddish brown cup
puberulous within, its scales thin, ovate, acute, slightly keeled on the
back, covered by dense lustrous hoary tomentum and ending in small
closely appressed reddish tips; seed sweet, with light yellow connate
cotyledons.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter above its swollen
buttressed base, usually dividing a few feet from the ground into 3 or 4
horizontal wide-spreading limbs forming a low dense round-topped head
sometimes 130 deg. across, and slender rigid branchlets coated at first with
hoary tomentum, becoming ashy gray or light brown and pubescent or
puberulous during their first winter and darker and glabrous the
following season; occasionally 60 deg.--70 deg. tall, with a trunk 6 deg.--7 deg. in
diameter; often shrubby and occasionally not more than a foot high.
Winter-buds globose or slightly obovoid, about 1/6' long, with thin
light chestnut-brown scales white and scarious on the margins. Bark of
the trunk and large branches 1/2'--1' thick, dark brown tinged with red,
slightly furrowed, separating on the surface into small closely
appressed scales. Wood very heavy, hard, strong, tough, close-grained,
light brown or yellow, with thin nearly white sapwood; formerly largely
and still occasionally used in shipbuilding.

Distribution. Shores of Mobjack Bay, Virginia, southward along the coast
and islands to southern Florida, and along the shores of the Gulf of
Mexico to northeastern Mexico, spreading inland through Texas to the
valley of the Red River and to the mountains in the extreme western part
of the state; on the mountains of Cuba, southern Mexico, and Central
America; most abundant and of its largest size on the Atlantic and east
Gulf coasts on rich hummocks and ridges a few feet above the level of
the sea; abundant in Texas in the coast region, near the banks of
streams, and westward toward the valley of the Rio Grande often forming
the principal part of the shrubby growth on low moist soil; in sandy
barren soil in the immediate vicinity of the seacoast or on the shores
of salt water estuaries and bays often a shrub, sometimes bearing fruit
on stems not more than a foot high (var. _maritima_, Sarg., and var.
_dentata_ Sarg.).

Occasionally planted as a shade and ornamental tree in the southern
United States.

Variable in habit and in the size and thickness of the leaves the
different forms of _Quercus virginiana_ show little variation in their
fruit. The most important of these varieties is


                 Quercus virginiana var. geminata Sarg.

                       _Quercus geminata_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 254]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic, rounded or acute at apex, cuneate or
narrowed and rounded at base, occasionally slightly and irregularly
dentate above the middle on vigorous shoots, conspicuously
reticulate-venulose, hoary tomentose below, 1-1/2'--3' long, 1/3'--1'
wide, with thickened strongly revolute margins; persistent until after
the leaves of the typical _Q. virginiana_ in the same locality have all
fallen; occasionally in Florida with oblong-elliptic to slightly obovate
leaves 4-1/2'--5' long and 1'--2' wide (f. _grandifolia_ Sarg.). Flowers
and Fruit as in the species.

A tree often 75 deg. high with a trunk 3 deg. in diameter, with the habit,
branchlets, winter-buds and bark of the typical form; often much smaller
and occasionally a shrub.

Distribution. Sandy soil; coast region of North Carolina south of the
Cape Fear River, South Carolina and Georgia, and southward in Florida to
Jupiter Island on the east coast and the valley of the Caloosahatchee
River on the west coast; abundant and often the common Live Oak in the
central part of the peninsula, at least as far south as Orange County,
and westward through western Florida, southeastern and southern Alabama
to the Gulf coast and islands of Mississippi.

Other varieties of _Quercus virginiana_ are var. _macrophylla_ Sarg.,
differing from the type in its much larger ovate or slightly obovate
leaves rounded or acute at base, entire or occasionally repand-dentate,
pale tomentose below, 3-1/2'--4' long and 1-1/4'--2-1/2' wide. Large
trees forming groves; sandy bottoms of the Atascosa River and in flat
woods above them, Pleasanton, Atascosa County, Texas: var. _virescens_
Sarg., differing from the type in the green glabrous or rarely
puberulous lower surface of the leaves and in the glabrous branchlets. A
large tree in sandy soil; Gainesville, Alachua County, Sanford, Seminole
County, Sumner, Levey County, Simpson's Hummock, and near Long Key in
the Everglades, Dade County, Florida: var. _eximea_ Sarg., differing
from the type in its narrow elliptic to narrow oblong-obovate leaves and
pale bark; a tree rarely 20 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--12' in diameter;
rarely a shrub; dry sandy open woods, near Springfield, Livingston
Parish and near Hammond, Tangipahoa Parish, eastern Louisiana. The
following small shrubby small-leaved forms are recognized: var.
_fusiformis_ Sarg., with oblong-ovate leaves acute at apex, rounded or
cuneate at base, entire or occasionally dentate, and pale pubescent
below, and small fruit; dry limestone ridges and flat-topped hills of
the Edwards Plateau (Kerr and Comal Counties), western Texas: var.
_dentata_ Chapm., distinct in the oblong-obovate repand-dentate lower
leaves with large triangular teeth, acute at the broad apex, often 4'
long and 1-1/4' wide at the base of the stems, and much larger than the
oblong-lanceolate entire upper leaves; common in sterile pine-barrens
near the coast of Florida: var. _maritima_ Sarg., with oblong-obovate or
rarely lanceolate leaves, acute and apiculate or rounded at apex,
cuneate at base, and entire or slightly and irregularly toothed above
the middle; fruit solitary or in pairs, or rarely in elongated spikes
(_Quercus succulenta_ Small); sandy barrens near the coast, South
Carolina to Miami, Dade County, Florida: var. _pygmaea_ Sarg., with
oblong-obovate leaves, cuneate at base, 3--5 lobed at apex with small
acute lobes, or rarely elliptic and entire, and nearly sessile fruit,
the nut inclosed nearly to the apex; a shrub rarely 3 deg. high; Pine-woods
in sandy soil; widely distributed in Florida.


                    30. Quercus reticulata H. B. K.

[Illustration: Fig. 255]

Leaves broadly obovate, obtuse and rounded or rarely acute at apex,
usually cordate or occasionally rounded at the narrow base, repandly
spinose-dentate above the middle or only toward the apex with slender
teeth, and entire below, when they unfold coated with dense fulvous
tomentum, at maturity thick, firm, and rigid, dark blue and covered with
scattered fascicled hairs above, paler and coated with thick fulvous
pubescence below, 1'--5' long, 3/4'--4' broad, with a thick midrib, and
primary veins running to the points of the teeth or arcuate and united
within the slightly revolute margins, and very conspicuous reticulate
veinlets; petioles stout about 1/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in
short tomentose aments in the axils of leaves of the year; calyx light
yellow, hirsute, with pale hairs, divided into 5--7 ovate acute
segments; pistillate in spikes on elongated peduncles, clothed like
their involucral scales with hoary tomentum; stigmas dark red. Fruit
usually in many-fruited spikes or occasionally in pairs or rarely
solitary, on slender hirsute or glabrous peduncles 2'--5' long; nut
oblong, rounded or acute at the pilose apex, broad at base, about 1/2'
long, inclosed for about one fourth its length in a shallow cup-shaped
cup dark brown and pubescent within, hoary tomentose without and covered
by small ovate acute scales, with thin free scarious tips, slightly
thickened and rounded on the back at the bottom of the cup.

A tree, rarely more than 40 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg. in diameter, and
stout branchlets coated at first with thick fulvous tomentum, light
orange color and more or less thickly clothed with pubescence during
their first winter, becoming ashy gray or light brown; in the United
States usually shrubby in habit and sometimes only a few feet tall;
becoming on the Sierra Madre of Mexico a large tree. Winter-buds ovoid
to oval, often surrounded by the persistent stipules of the upper
leaves, about 1/8' long, with thin loosely imbricated light red scales
ciliate on the margins. Bark about 1/4' thick, dark or light brown, and
covered by small thin closely appressed scales. Wood very heavy, hard,
close-grained, dark brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Near the summits of the mountain ranges of southeastern
New Mexico (Mogollon Mountains) and southeastern Arizona, and southward
in Mexico.


                       31. Quercus Toumeyi Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 256]

Leaves ovate or ovate-oblong or oval, acute and apiculate at apex,
rounded or cordate at base, entire with thickened slightly revolute
margins, or remotely spinulose-dentate, often minutely 3-toothed at
apex, thin but firm in texture, light blue-green, glabrous and lustrous
above, pale and puberulous below, conspicuously reticulate-venulose;
1/2'--3/4' long, 1/4'--1/2' wide; falling early in spring with the
appearance of the new leaves; petioles stout, tomentose, about 1/16' in
length. Flowers unknown. Fruit sessile, solitary or in pairs, ripening
in June; nut oval or ovoid, 1/2'--2/3' long, 1/4' thick, light brown and
lustrous, furnished at the acute apex with a narrow ring of pale
pubescence, inclosed for about one half its length in a thin shallow
tomentose cup light green and pubescent within, and covered by thin
ovate regularly and closely imbricated light red-brown scales ending in
a short rounded tip and coated on the back with pale tomentum.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in diameter, dividing
not far from the ground into numerous stout wide-spreading branches
forming a broad irregular head, and slender branchlets bright red-brown
more or less thickly coated with pale tomentum at midsummer, covered
during their second and third years with thin dark brown nearly black
bark broken into small thin closely appressed scales. Wood light brown,
with thick pale sapwood.

Distribution. Forming an open forest on the Mule Mountains, Cochise
County, southeastern Arizona.


                 32. Quercus arizonica Sarg. White Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 257]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate to broadly obovate, generally acute or
sometimes rounded at apex, rounded or cordate at base, repandly
spinose-dentate usually, except on vigorous shoots, only above the
middle or toward the apex, or entire and sometimes undulate on the
margins, when they unfold light red clothed with bright fulvous tomentum
and furnished with dark dental glands, at maturity thick, firm and
rigid, dull dark blue-green and glabrate above, duller and covered with
thick fulvous or pale pubescence below, 1'--4' long, 1/2'--2' wide, with
a broad yellow midrib, slender primary veins, arcuate and united near
the thickened revolute margins, and coarsely reticulate veinlets;
falling in the early spring just before the appearance of the new
leaves; petioles stout, tomentose, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in tomentose aments 2'--3' long; calyx pale yellow, pubescent,
and divided into 4--7 broad acute ciliate lobes; anthers red or yellow;
pistillate on short stems tomentose like their involucral scales. Fruit
sessile or on hoary-tomentose stems rarely 1/2' long, usually solitary,
ripening irregularly from September to November; nut oblong, oval or
slightly obovoid, obtuse and rounded at the puberulous apex, 3/4'--1'
long, 1/2' thick, dark chestnut-brown, lustrous and often striate, soon
becoming light brown, inclosed for half its length in a cup-shaped or
hemispheric cup light brown and pubescent within, covered by regularly
and closely imbricated scales coated with pale tomentum and ending in
thin light red pointed tips, those below the middle of the cup much
thickened and rounded on the back; seed dark purple, very astringent.

A tree, occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. tall, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, and
thick contorted branches spreading nearly at right angles and forming a
handsome round-topped symmetrical head, and stout branchlets clothed at
first with thick fulvous tomentum persistent during their first winter,
reddish brown or light orange color and pubescent or puberulous in their
second season, ultimately glabrous and darker; usually not more than
30 deg.--40 deg. tall; at high elevations reduced to a low shrub. Winter-buds
subglobose, about 1/16' long, with loosely imbricated bright
chestnut-brown puberulous scales ciliate on the margins. Bark of young
stems and branches thin, pale, scaly with small appressed scales,
becoming on old trunks about 1' thick and deeply divided by narrow
fissures into broad ridges broken into long thick plate-like scales pale
or ashy gray on the surface. Wood heavy, strong, hard, close-grained,
dark brown or nearly black, with thick lighter colored sapwood; used
only for fuel.

Distribution. The most common and generally distributed White Oak of
southern New Mexico and Arizona, covering the slopes of canyons of
mountain ranges at altitudes of from 5000 deg.--10,000 deg. above the sea, often
ascending nearly to the summits of the high peaks; and in northern
Mexico.


               33. Quercus oblongifolia Torr. White Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 258]

Leaves ovate, elliptic, or slightly obovate, rounded and occasionally
emarginate or acute at apex, usually cordate or occasionally rounded at
base, entire and sometimes undulate with thickened revolute margins, or
remotely dentate with small callous teeth, on vigorous shoots and young
plants oblong, rounded or cuneate at the narrow base, coarsely sinuate
or undulate-toothed or 3-toothed at the broad apex and entire below,
when they unfold bright red and coated with deciduous hoary tomentum, at
maturity thin and firm, blue-green and lustrous above, paler below,
1'--2' long, 1/2'--3/4' wide, or on vigorous shoots sometimes 3'--4'
long, with a prominent pale midrib, slender primary veins, and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; persistent during the winter without
change of color, gradually turning yellow in the spring and falling at
the appearance of the new leaves; petioles stout, nearly terete, about
1/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in short hoary-tomentose aments;
calyx bright yellow, pilose, divided into 5 or 6 laciniately cut or
entire acute segments tinged with red above the middle; pistillate
usually sessile, or on peduncles tomentose like the involucral scales;
stigmas bright red. Fruit usually solitary and sessile, rarely
long-stalked; nut ovoid, ellipsoidal, or slightly obovoid, full and
rounded at apex surrounded by a narrow ring of white pubescence, dark
chestnut-brown, striate, and very lustrous, soon becoming light brown in
drying, 1/2'--3/4' long, about 1/3' thick, inclosed for about one third
its length in a cup-shaped or rarely turbinate thin cup yellow-green and
pubescent on the inner surface and covered by ovate-oblong scales
slightly thickened on the back, coated with hoary tomentum and ending in
thin acute bright red tips ciliate on the margins and sometimes forming
a minute fringe to the rim of the cup.

A tree, rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a short trunk 18'--20' in
diameter, many stout spreading often contorted branches forming a
handsome round-topped symmetrical head, and slender rigid branchlets
coated at first with pale or fulvous tomentum, light red-brown, dark
brown or dark orange color in their first winter, becoming ashy gray in
their second or third year. Winter-buds subglobose, 1/16'--1/8' long,
with thin light chestnut-brown scales. Bark 3/4'--1-1/4' thick, ashy
gray, and broken into small nearly square or oblong close plate-like
scales. Wood very heavy, hard, strong, brittle, dark brown or nearly
black, with thick brown sapwood; sometimes used as fuel.

Distribution. Chisos Mountains, western Texas, southeastern New Mexico,
southern Arizona, and southward into northern Mexico; comparatively rare
in Texas; abundant on the foothills of the mountain ranges of southern
New Mexico and Arizona at altitudes of about 5000 deg., and dotting the
upper slopes of the mesa where narrow canyons open to the plain.


             34. Quercus Engelmannii Greene. Evergreen Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 259]

Leaves oblong to obovate, usually obtuse and rounded or sometimes acute
at apex, gradually or abruptly cuneate or rounded or cordate at base,
entire, often undulate, or sinuate-toothed with occasionally rigid
teeth, or at the ends of sterile branches frequently coarsely crenately
serrate with incurved teeth, or rarely lobed with acute oblique rounded
lobes, when they unfold bright red and coated with thick pale rufous
tomentum, at maturity thick, dark blue-green and glabrous or covered
with fascicled hairs above, pale, usually yellow-green and clothed with
light brown pubescence, or puberulous or often glabrous below, 1'--3'
long, 1/2'--2' wide; deciduous in the spring with the appearance of the
new leaves; petioles slender, tomentose, becoming pubescent, 1/4'--1/2'
in length. Flowers: staminate in slender hairy aments 2'--3' long; calyx
light yellow, pilose, with lanceolate acute segments; pistillate on
slender peduncles, clothed like their involucral scales with dense pale
tomentum. Fruit sessile or on slender pubescent peduncles sometimes 3/4'
long; nut oblong, gradually narrowed and acute or broad rounded and
obtuse at apex, broad or narrow at base, dark chestnut-brown more or
less conspicuously marked by darker longitudinal stripes, turning light
chestnut-brown in drying, 3/4'--1' long, about 1/2' thick, inclosed for
about half its length in a deep saucer-shaped, cup-shaped or turbinate
cup light brown and puberulous within, and covered by ovate light brown
scales coated with pale tomentum, usually thickened, united and
tuberculate at the base of the cup, and near its rim produced into small
acute ciliate tips.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, thick branches
spreading nearly at right angles and forming a broad rather irregular
head, and stout rigid branchlets coated at first with hoary tomentum,
light or dark brown tinged with red and pubescent during their first
winter, becoming glabrous and light brown or gray in their second or
third year. Winter-buds oval or ovoid, about 1/8' long, with thin light
red pubescent scales. Bark 1-1/2--2' thick, light gray tinged with
brown, deeply divided by narrow fissures and separating on the surface
into small thin appressed scales. Wood very heavy, hard, strong,
close-grained, brittle, dark brown or nearly black, with thick lighter
brown sapwood; used only for fuel.

Distribution. Low hills of southwestern California west of the coast
range, occupying with _Quercus agrifolia_ Nee, a belt about fifty miles
wide, and extending to within fifteen or twenty miles of the coast, from
the neighborhood of Sierra Madre and San Gabriel, Los Angeles County, to
the mesa east of San Diego; in northern Lower California.


    35. Quercus Douglasii Hook. & Arn. Blue Oak. Mountain White Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 260]

Leaves oblong, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate
or broad and rounded or subcordate at base, divided by deep or shallow,
wide or narrow sinuses acute or rounded in the bottom into 4 or 5 broad
or narrow acute or rounded often mucronate lobes, 2'--5' long,
1'--1-3/4' wide, or oval, oblong or obovate, rounded or acute at apex,
equally or unequally cuneate or rounded at base, regularly or
irregularly sinuate-toothed with rounded acute rigid spinescent teeth,
or denticulate toward the apex, 1'--2' long, 1/4'--1' wide, when they
unfold covered by soft pale pubescence, at maturity thin, firm and
rather rigid, pale blue, with scattered fascicled hairs above, often
yellow-green and covered by short pubescence below, with a hirsute or
puberulous prominent midrib and more or less conspicuous reticulate
veinlets; petioles stout, tomentose, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in hairy aments 1-1/2'--2' long; calyx yellow-green, coated on
the outer surface with pale hairs, deeply divided into broad acute
laciniately cut segments; pistillate in short few-flowered spikes coated
like the involucral scales with hoary tomentum. Fruit sessile or
short-stalked, solitary or in pairs; nut ellipsoidal, sometimes
ventricose, with a narrow base, gradually narrowed and acute at apex,
3/4'--1' long, 1/2'--1' thick, or often ovoid and acute, green and
lustrous, turning dark chestnut-brown in drying, with a narrow ring of
hoary pubescence at apex, inclosed only at base in a thin shallow
cup-shaped cup light green and pubescent on the inner surface, covered
on the outer by small acute and usually thin or sometimes, especially in
the south, thicker tumid scales coated with pale pubescence or tomentum
and ending in thin reddish brown tips.

A tree, usually 50 deg.--60 deg., rarely 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, short stout branches spreading nearly at right angles and
forming a dense round-topped symmetrical head, stout branchlets brittle
at the joints, coated at first with short dense hoary tomentum, dark
gray or reddish brown and tomentose, pubescent, or puberulous during
their first winter, becoming ultimately ashy gray or dark brown;
frequently not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. high, and sometimes, especially
southward shrubby, in habit. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, 1/8'--1/4' long,
with light rather bright red pubescent scales. Bark 1/2'--1' thick,
generally pale, and covered by small scales sometimes tinged with brown
or light red. Wood hard, heavy, strong, brittle, dark brown, becoming
nearly black with exposure, with thick light brown sapwood; largely used
as fuel.

Distribution. Scattered over low hills, dry mountain slopes and valleys;
California, Mendocino County, and the upper valley of the Sacramento
River, southward along the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada up to
elevations of 4000 deg., and through valleys of the coast ranges to the
Tehachapi Pass, the borders of the Mohave Desert (Sierra de la Liebre)
and the neighborhood of San Fernando, Los Angeles County; most abundant
and of its largest size in the valleys between the coast mountains and
the interior ridges of the coast ranges south of the Bay of San
Francisco.

x _Quercus jolonensis_ Sarg. with characters intermediate between those
of _Quercus Douglasii_ and _Quercus lobata_ and believed to be a hybrid
of those species occurs, with a number of large trees, at Jolon and
between Jolon and King City, Monterey County, California.


                 36. Quercus Vaseyana Buckl. Shin Oak.

                _Quercus undulata_ var. _Vaseyana_ Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 261]

Leaves oblong, rarely oblong-obovate, acute or rounded at apex, cuneate
at base, undulately lobed with small acute lobes pointing forward,
rarely nearly entire, when they unfold covered above with short
fascicled hairs sometimes persistent until midsummer, and tomentose
below, and at maturity thin, pale gray-green, glabrous and lustrous
above, pale pubescent below, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/2'--3/4' wide;
deciduous late in winter or in early spring; petioles covered with
fascicled hairs when they first appear, becoming glabrous, 1/4' in
length. Flowers: staminate in villose aments 1'--1-1/4' long; calyx
deeply divided into 4 or 5 ovate scarious lobes rounded at apex and
shorter than the stamens; pistillate on short tomentose peduncles, their
involucral scales ovate, acute, pubescent, shorter than the calyx-lobes;
stigmas red. Fruit solitary or in pairs, sessile or short-stalked; nut
ellipsoidal and only slightly narrowed at the rounded ends to oblong and
slightly ovoid or obovoid, 1/2'--3/4' in length, 1/4'--1/2' in diameter,
pale chestnut-brown and lustrous, the base only inclosed in the thin,
saucer-shaped to cup-shaped cup, puberulous on the inner surface,
covered with closely appressed ovate acute hoary tomentose scales, on
some individuals abruptly contracted into short acute red-brown nearly
glabrous tips.

A tree, rarely 15 deg.--20 deg. high, usually a shrub only 1 deg.--3 deg. tall,
spreading into great thickets, with slender branchlets thickly covered
with matted fascicled hairs during their first season, and light gray
and glabrous or puberulous in their second year. Winter-buds ovoid or
obovoid, about 1/8' long, with red-brown scales ciliate on the margins.
Bark rough, deeply furrowed and scaly.

Distribution. Limestone slopes and ridges or in sheltered canyons;
western Texas; Kimble, Real, Kendall, Kerr, Uvalde, Edwards, Menard and
Valverde Counties.


                  37. Quercus Mohriana Rydb. Shin Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 262]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic or lanceolate, acute, acuminate or
rounded at apex, rounded or cuneate and often unsymmetrical at base,
entire, undulate, sinuately toothed with triangular apiculate teeth, or
occasionally irregularly lobed above the middle with rounded lobes,
thick, gray-green, lustrous and covered above with short fascicled
hairs, and densely hoary tomentose below, 2 deg.--4 deg. long, 1/2'--1' wide,
with a stout midrib thickly covered with fascicled hairs, sometimes
becoming glabrous, slender primary veins and reticulate veinlets;
petioles stout, hoary tomentose, 1/8'--1/4' in length. Flowers:
staminate in short hoary tomentose aments; calyx densely villose, deeply
divided into broad ovate lobes rounded at apex; anthers red; pistillate
on hoary tomentose peduncles, with hairy bracts and calyx-lobes. Fruit
solitary or in pairs, nearly sessile or raised on a pubescent peduncle
1/2'--3/4' in length; nut ellipsoidal or ovoid, broad and rounded at the
ends, light chestnut-brown, lustrous, 1/3'--1/2' long, 1/4'--1/3' thick,
inclosed for from half to two thirds its length in the hemispheric to
cup-shaped cup, hoary tomentose on the inner surface, and covered with
small closely appressed acute hoary tomentose scales much thickened
below the middle of the cup, thin and much smaller toward its rim.

A tree, rarely 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 1 deg. in diameter, small
spreading and ascending branches forming a round-topped head, and
slender branchlets thickly coated during their first season with
fascicled hairs, dark gray-brown and pubescent in their second season
and ultimately gray and glabrous; usually a low shrub spreading into
thickets. Winter-buds broad-ovoid, obtuse, pale pubescent. Bark thin,
pale, rough, deeply furrowed.

Distribution. On dry limestone hills, usually not more than 18 deg. high
with spreading branches; on deep sand, often not more than 3 deg. high with
more erect stems, often covering thousands of acres; only a tree in the
protection of ledges in deep ravines and on steep hillsides;
northwestern Texas (Tom Green, Coke, Nolan, Howard, Armstrong, and
Wheeler Counties); central Texas (Bryan, Brazos County); southwestern
Oklahoma (Beckham County).


                       38. Quercus Laceyi Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 263]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, usually with two pairs of small rounded
lateral lobes, occasionally 3-lobed toward the apex, rarely nearly
entire, narrowed and rounded at apex, rounded, cuneate or rarely cordate
at the gradually narrowed base, coated below when they unfold with loose
white tomentum, soon glabrous, at maturity thin, blue-green above,
yellow-green below, 2'--3' long, 3/4'--2' wide, with a slender midrib
and primary veins, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; deciduous late
in the autumn; on vigorous shoots sometimes 6'--7' long and 3'--4' wide;
petioles glabrous or sparingly villose, 1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers:
staminate in slightly villose aments 2'--2-1/2' long; calyx deeply
divided into 4 or 5 ovate acuminate lobes shorter than the stamens;
pistillate flowers not seen. Fruit solitary or in pairs, sessile or
raised on a stem up to 1/2' in length; nut ellipsoidal or oblong-ovoid,
rounded at apex, slightly narrowed and nearly truncate at base, light
chestnut-brown and lustrous, 3/4'--1' long, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, the
base inclosed in the thick, cup-shaped to rarely saucer-shaped cup,
tomentose on the inner surface, covered with acute much thickened pale
tomentose scales.

A tree, 30 deg.--45 deg. high, with a trunk 20'--30' in diameter, heavy erect
and spreading branches and slender branchlets villose when they first
appear, soon becoming glabrous and red-brown or gray during their second
season; often a tall shrub with numerous stems. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, 1/6' long, with chestnut-brown scales ciliate on the margins.
Bark gray, thick, deeply ridged or checkered.

Distribution. Rocky banks of streams, the steep sides of canyons and on
limestone bluffs; common in the southern and southwestern parts of the
Edwards Plateau, western Texas (Kendall, Kerr, Bandera, Uvalde, Menard,
Kemble, Real and Edwards Counties); easily distinguished in the field by
the peculiar smoky or waxy appearance of the foliage.


                      39. Quercus annulata Buckl.

                       _Quercus breviloba_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 264]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate or elliptic, rounded or acute at apex,
cuneate or rounded at base, entire, undulate, slightly lobed with
rounded or acute lobes, or 3-lobed, when they unfold covered above with
fascicled hairs and tomentose below, and at maturity green, glabrous and
lustrous above, green and pubescent below on lower branches, often pale
or hoary tomentose on upper branches, 1-1/4'--2-1/2' long, 1/2'--1-1/4'
wide; petioles covered when they first appear with fascicled hairs, soon
glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' in length; on vigorous branchlets sometimes
thinner, glabrous, divided into broad rounded lateral lobes, gradually
narrowed and cuneate at the long base, 4' long and 2-1/2' wide. Flowers:
staminate in pubescent aments 1'--2' long; calyx deeply divided in
villose rounded lobes, shorter than the stamens; anthers red; pistillate
on tomentose peduncles, their scales rounded, tomentose; stigmas red.
Fruit solitary or in 2 or 3-fruited clusters, sessile or short-stalked,
oblong-ovoid to ellipsoidal, slightly narrowed and rounded at apex,
light yellow-brown and lustrous, 3/4'--1' long, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter;
inclosed for about a quarter of its length in the cup-shaped cup,
tomentose on the inner surface, covered with acute tomentose scales
somewhat thickened and closely appressed below the middle of the cup,
their tips chestnut-brown, free and often glabrous.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. tall with a trunk rarely more than 1 deg. in diameter,
small spreading often slightly pendulous branches forming a round-topped
head, and slender branches covered when they first appear with fascicled
hairs, soon becoming glabrous and gray or grayish brown; the large stems
often surrounded by a ring of smaller stems produced from its roots;
more often a shrub than a tree spreading into broad thickets.
Winter-buds ovoid to ellipsoidal, acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with closely
imbricated chestnut-brown puberulous scales ciliate on the margins. Bark
thick, rough, deeply ridged.

Distribution. Dry limestone hills and bluffs; central and western Texas,
from the neighborhood of Dallas, Dallas County, and Palo Pinto County to
Kendall, Kerr, Brown, Bandera, Real and Menard Counties.


                      40. Quercus Durandii Buckl.

                   _Quercus breviloba_ Sarg. in part.

[Illustration: Fig. 265]

Leaves thin, obovate to elliptic, entire, 3-lobed toward the rounded or
acute apex or irregularly laterally lobed, the three forms appearing on
different branches of the same tree, on lower branches usually lobed,
dark green and lustrous above, often green and glabrous below, sometimes
6' or 7' long and 3' or 3-1/2' wide, on upper branches mostly entire,
white and pubescent or tomentose below, 2-1/2'--3' long, 1/2'--1-1/2'
wide; falling late in the autumn; petioles glabrous, 1/3'--1/4' in
length. Flowers: staminate in slender villose aments 3'--4' in length;
calyx deeply divided into acute villose lobes shorter than the stamens;
pistillate on a short tomentose peduncle, the linear acuminate bract and
involucral scales hoary-tomentose; stigmas red. Fruit solitary or in
pairs, short-stalked or nearly sessile; nut ovoid, or slightly obovoid,
rounded or rarely acute at apex, nearly truncate at base, pale
chestnut-brown, lustrous, 1/2'--2/3' long, 1/3'--1/2' thick, barely
inclosed at base in the thin, shallow saucer-shaped cup, pale tomentose
on the inner surface, and covered with small acuminate closely appressed
tomentose scales slightly thickened on the back.

A tree, often 60 deg.--90 deg. high with a tall trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
comparatively small branches, the lower horizontal, the upper ascending,
forming a dense round-topped handsome head, and slender pale gray-brown
branchlets covered when they first appear with fascicled hairs, soon
glabrous, or puberulous during their first season, and darker in their
second season. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/4'--1/3' long with dark
chestnut-brown rounded scales ciliate on the margins. Bark thin, light
gray or nearly white and broken into thin loosely appressed scales.

Distribution. East of the Mississippi River scattered on rich limestone
prairies; westward on the well drained soil of river bottoms, and often
on low hummocks; near Augusta, Richmond County, and De Soto, Sampson
County, Georgia; West Point, Clay County, Columbus, Muscogee County,
Brookville, Noxubesco County, and near Natchez, Adams County,
Mississippi; McNab, Hempstead County, Arkansas; Natchitoches,
Natchitoches Parish, western Louisiana; coast region of eastern Texas to
the bottoms of the Guadalupe River (Victoria, Victoria County), ranging
inland to San Saba County and to the neighborhood of Dallas, Dallas
County; on the mountains near Monterey, Nuovo Leon; rare and local.


                      41. Quercus Chapmanii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 266]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, rounded at the narrow apex, narrowed
and cuneate or rounded or broad and rounded at base, entire with
slightly undulate margins, or obscurely sinuate-lobed above the middle,
when they unfold coated below with thick bright yellow pubescence and
covered above with pale fascicled deciduous hairs, at maturity thick and
firm or subcoriaceous, dark green, glabrous and lustrous above, light
green or silvery white and glabrous below except on the slender often
pubescent midrib, usually 2'--3' long and 1' wide, but varying from
1'--3' in length and 3/4'--1' in width; falling gradually during the
winter or sometimes persistent until the appearance of the new leaves in
the spring; petioles tomentose, rarely 1/8' in length. Flowers:
staminate in short hirsute aments; calyx hirsute, divided into 5 acute
laciniately cut segments; anthers hirsute; pistillate sessile or
short-stalked, their involucral scales coated with dense pale tomentum.
Fruit usually sessile, solitary or in pairs; nut oval, about 5/8' long
and 3/8' thick, pubescent from the obtuse rounded apex nearly to the
middle, inclosed for nearly half its length in the deep cup-shaped light
brown cup slightly pubescent on the inner surface, and covered by
ovate-oblong pointed scales thickened on the back, especially toward the
base of the cup, and coated with pale tomentum except on their thin
reddish brown margins.

Occasionally a tree, 50 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg. in diameter, stout
branches forming a round-topped head, and slender branchlets coated at
first with dense bright yellow pubescence, becoming light or dark
red-brown and puberulous during their first winter and ultimately ashy
gray; more often a rigid shrub sometimes only 1 deg.--2 deg. tall. Winter-buds
ovoid, acute, obtuse, about 1/8' long, with glabrous or puberulous light
chestnut-brown scales. Bark dark or pale, separating freely into large
irregular plate-like scales.

Distribution. Sandy barrens usually in the neighborhood of the coast;
Bluffton, Beaufort County, South Carolina, Colonels Islands, Liberty
County, Georgia, southward along the east coast of Florida to the shores
of Indian River; on the west coast from the valley of the Caloosahatchee
River to the shores of Pensacola Bay, and in the interior of the
peninsular from Lake County to De Soto County (neighborhood of Sebring);
rare and local on the Atlantic coast; comparatively rare in the interior
of the Florida peninsular; abundant in western Florida from the shores
of Tampa Bay to those of Saint Andrews Bay.


         42. Quercus macrocarpa Michx. Burr Oak. Mossy Cup Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 267]

Leaves obovate or oblong, cuneate or occasionally narrow and rounded at
base, divided by wide sinuses sometimes penetrating nearly to the midrib
into 5--7 lobes, the terminal lobe large, oval or obovate, regularly
crenately lobed, or smaller and 3-lobed at the rounded or acute apex,
when they unfold yellow-green and pilose above and silvery white and
coated below with long pale hairs, at maturity thick and firm, dark
green, lustrous and glabrous, or occasionally pilose on the upper
surface, pale green or silvery white and covered on the lower surface
with soft pale or rarely rufous pubescence, 6'--12' long, 3'--6' wide,
with a stout pale midrib sometimes pilose on the upper side and
pubescent on the lower, large primary veins running to the points of the
lobes, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning dull yellow or
yellowish brown in the autumn; petioles stout, 1/3'--1' in length.
Flowers: staminate in slender aments 4'--6' long, their yellow-green
peduncles coated with loosely matted pale hairs; calyx yellow-green,
pubescent, deeply divided into 4--6 acute segments ending in tufts of
long pale hairs; pistillate sessile or stalked, their involucral scales
broadly ovate, often somewhat tinged with red toward the margins and
coated, like the peduncles, with thick pale tomentum; stigmas bright
red. Fruit usually solitary, sessile or long-stalked, exceedingly
variable in size and shape; nut ellipsoidal or broad-ovoid, broad at the
base and rounded at the obtuse or depressed apex covered by soft pale
pubescence, 3/5' long and 1/3' thick at the north, sometimes 2' long and
1-1/2' thick in the south, its cup thick or thin, light brown and
pubescent on the inner surface, hoary-tomentose and covered on the outer
surface by large irregularly imbricated ovate pointed scales, at the
base of the cup thin and free or sometimes much thickened and
tuberculate, and near its rim generally developed into long slender pale
awns forming on northern trees a short inconspicuous and at the south a
long conspicuous matted fringe-like border, inclosing only the base or
nearly the entire nut.

A tree, sometimes 170 deg. high, with a trunk 6 deg.--7 deg. in diameter, clear of
limbs for 70 deg.--80 deg. above the ground, a broad head of great spreading
branches, and stout branchlets coated at first with thick soft pale
deciduous pubescence, light orange color, usually glabrous or
occasionally puberulous during their first winter, becoming ashy gray or
light brown and ultimately dark brown, sometimes developing corky wings
often 1'--1-1/2' wide; usually not more than 80 deg. high, with a trunk
3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter; toward the northwestern limits of its range
sometimes a low shrub. Winter-buds broadly ovoid, acute or obtuse,
1/8'--1/4' long, with light red-brown scales coated with soft pale
pubescence. Bark 1'--2' thick, deeply furrowed and broken on the surface
into irregular plate-like brown scales often slightly tinged with red.
Wood heavy, strong, hard, tough, close-grained, very durable, dark or
rich light brown, with thin much lighter colored sapwood; used in ship
and boat-building, for construction of all sorts, cabinet-making,
cooperage, the manufacture of carriages, agricultural implements,
baskets, railway-ties, fencing, and fuel.

Distribution. Low rich bottom-lands and intervales, or rarely in the
northwest on low dry hills; Nova Scotia and New Brunswick southward to
the valley of the Penobscot River, Maine, the shore of Lake Champlain,
Vermont, western Massachusetts, central, southern and western
Pennsylvania, northern Delaware, northern West Virginia (Hardy and Grant
Counties), prairies of Caswell County, North Carolina, and middle
Tennessee, and westward through the valley of the Saint Lawrence River
and along the northern shores of Lake Huron to southern Manitoba,
through western New York and Ohio, northern Michigan, to Minnesota
(except in the northeastern counties), eastern and northwestern
Nebraska, the Black Hills of South Dakota, the Turtle Mountains of North
Dakota, and northeastern Wyoming, and to central Kansas, the valley of
the north Fork of the Canadian River (Canton, Blaine County, and
Seiling, Dewey County), Oklahoma, and the valley of the San Saba River,
(Menard County and Callahan County), Texas; attaining its largest size
in southern Indiana and Illinois; the common Oak of the "oak openings"
of western Minnesota, and in all the basin of the Red River of the
North, ranging farther to the northwest than the other Oaks of eastern
America; common and generally distributed in eastern Nebraska, and of a
large size in canyons or on river bottoms in the extreme northwestern
part of the state; the most generally distributed Oak in southern
Wisconsin, and in Kansas growing to a large size in all the eastern part
of the state.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental tree in the eastern United States
and in South Africa.

x _Quercus Andrewsii_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
macrocarpa_ and _Q. undulata_ Torr., in habit and characters
intermediate between those of its supposed parents with which it grows,
occurs at Seiling, Dewey County, western Oklahoma.

x _Quercus guadalupensis_ Sarg., with characters intermediate between
those of _Quercus macrocarpa_ and _Q. stellata_ and evidently a hybrid
of these species, occurs at Fredericksburg Junction in the valley of the
Guadalupe River, Kendall County, Texas.

x _Quercus Hillii_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
macrocarpa_ and _Q. Muehlenbergii_, has been found at Roby, Lake County,
Indiana, and near Independence, Jackson County, Missouri.


         43. Quercus lyrata Walt. Overcup Oak. Swamp White Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 268]

Leaves oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, divided
into spreading or ascending lobes by deep or shallow sinuses rounded,
straight, or oblique on the bottom, the terminal lobe oblong-ovate,
usually broad, acute or acuminate at the elongated apex, and furnished
with 2 small entire nearly triangular lateral lobes, the upper lateral
lobes broad, more or less emarginate, or acuminate and entire or
slightly lobed and much longer than the acute or rounded lower lobes,
when they unfold bronze-green and pilose above with caducous hairs, and
coated below with thick pale tomentum, at maturity thin and firm, dark
green and glabrous above, silvery white and thickly coated with pale
pubescence, or green and often nearly glabrous below, 7'--10' long,
1'--4' wide; turning yellow or scarlet and orange in the autumn;
petioles glabrous or pubescent, 1/3'--1' in length. Flowers: staminate
in slender hairy aments 4'--6' long; calyx light yellow, coated on the
outer surface with pale hairs and divided into acute segments;
pistillate sessile or stalked, their involucral scales covered, like the
peduncles, with thick pale tomentum. Fruit sessile or borne on slender
pubescent peduncles sometimes 1-1/2' in length; nut subglobose to ovoid
or rarely to ovoid-oblong, 1/2'--1' long, usually broader at base than
long, light chestnut-brown, more or less covered above the middle with
short pale pubescence, entirely or for two thirds of its length inclosed
in the ovoid, nearly spherical or deep cup-shaped thin cup, bright
red-brown and pubescent on the inner surface, hoary-tomentose and
covered on the outer by ovate united scales produced into acute tips,
much thickened and contorted at its base, gradually growing thinner and
forming a ragged edge to the thin often irregularly split rim of the
cup.

A tree, rarely 100 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, generally
divided 15 deg.--20 deg. above the ground into comparatively small often
pendulous branches forming a handsome symmetrical round-topped head, and
slender branchlets green more or less tinged with red and pilose or
pubescent when they first appear, light or dark orange-color or grayish
brown and usually glabrous during their first winter, ultimately
becoming ashy gray or light brown. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, about 1/8'
long, with light chestnut-brown scales covered, especially near their
margins, with loose pale tomentum. Bark 3/4'--1' thick, light gray
tinged with red and broken into thick plates separating on the surface
into thin irregular appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, tough,
very durable in contact with the ground, rich dark brown, with thick
lighter colored sapwood; confounded commercially with the wood of
_Quercus alba_, and used for the same purpose.

Distribution. River swamps and small deep depressions on rich
bottom-lands, usually wet throughout the year; southern New Jersey
(Riddleton, Salem County), and valley of the Patuxent River, Maryland,
southward near the coast to western Florida, through the Gulf states to
the valley of the Navasota River, Brazos County, Texas, and through
Arkansas to the valley of the Meramec River (Allenton, St. Louis
County), Missouri, and to central Tennessee and Kentucky, southern
Illinois, and southwestern Indiana to Spencer County; comparatively rare
in the Atlantic and east Gulf states; most common and of its largest
size in the valley of the Red River, Louisiana, and the adjacent parts
of Texas and Arkansas.

Occasionally cultivated in the northeastern states and hardy in eastern
Massachusetts.

x _Quercus Comptonae_ Sarg., a hybrid of _Quercus lyrata_ and _Q.
virginiana_, with characters intermediate between those of its parents,
discovered many years ago on the banks of Peyton's Creek, Matagorda
County, Texas (now gone), occurs with several individuals near dwellings
in Natchez, Adams County, Mississippi, near Selma, Dallas County,
Alabama, and in Audubon Park and streets, New Orleans, Louisiana. A
tree, sometimes 100 deg. high and one of the handsomest of North American
Oaks; also produced artificially by _Professor H. Ness_ by crossing
_Quercus lyrata_ and _Q. virginiana_.


                  44. Quercus stellata Wang. Post Oak.

                         _Quercus minor_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 269]

Leaves oblong-obovate, usually deeply 5-lobed, with broad sinuses
oblique in the bottom, and short wide lobes, broad and truncate or
obtusely pointed at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate, or
occasionally abruptly narrowed and cuneate or rounded at base, when they
unfold dark red above and densely pubescent, at maturity thick and firm,
deep dark green and roughened by scattered fascicled pale hairs above,
covered below with gray, light yellow, or rarely silvery white
pubescence, usually 4'--5' long and 3'--4' across the lateral lobes,
with a broad light-colored midrib pubescent on the upper side and
tomentose or pubescent on the lower, stout lateral veins arcuate and
united near the margins and connected by conspicuous coarsely
reticulated veinlets; turning dull yellow or brown in the autumn;
petioles stout, pubescent, 1/2' to nearly 1' in length. Flowers:
staminate in aments 3'--4' long; calyx hirsute, yellow, usually divided
into 5 ovate acute laciniately cut segments; anthers covered by short
scattered pale hairs; pistillate sessile or stalked, their involucral
scales broadly ovate, hirsute; stigmas bright red. Fruit sessile or
short-stalked; nut oval to ovoid or ovoid-oblong, broad at base, obtuse
and naked or covered with pale persistent pubescence at apex, 1/2'--1'
long, 1/4'--3/4' thick, sometimes striate with dark longitudinal
stripes, inclosed for one third to one half its length in the
cup-shaped, turbinate, or rarely saucer-shaped cup pale and pubescent on
the inner surface, hoary-tomentose on the outer surface, and covered by
thin ovate scales rounded and acute at apex, reddish brown, and
sometimes toward the rim of the cup ciliate on the margins with long
pale hairs.

A tree, rarely 100 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, and stout
spreading branches forming a broad dense round-topped head, and stout
branchlets coated at first, like the young leaves and petioles, the
stalks of the aments of staminate flowers and the peduncles of the
pistillate flowers, with thick orange-brown tomentum, light orange color
to reddish brown, and covered by short soft pubescence during their
first winter, ultimately gray, dark brown, nearly black or bright brown
tinged with orange color; usually not more than 50 deg.--60 deg. tall, with a
trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in diameter, and at the northeastern limits of its range
generally reduced to a shrub. Winter-buds broadly ovoid, obtuse or
rarely acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with bright chestnut-brown pubescent
scales coated toward the margins with scattered pale hairs. Bark
1/2'--1' thick, red more or less deeply tinged with brown, and divided
by deep fissures into broad ridges covered on the surface with narrow
closely appressed or rarely loose scales. Wood very heavy, hard,
close-grained, durable in contact with the soil, difficult to season,
light or dark brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood; largely used
for fuel, fencing, railway-ties, and sometimes in the manufacture of
carriages, for cooperage, and in construction.

Distribution. Dry gravelly or sandy uplands; Cape Cod and islands of
southern Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Long Island, New York, to western
Florida and southern Alabama and Mississippi, and from New York westward
to southern Iowa, Missouri, eastern Kansas, western (Dewey County)
Oklahoma, Louisiana and Texas; most abundant and of its largest size in
the Mississippi basin; ascending on the southern Appalachian Mountains
to altitudes of 2500 deg.; the common Oak of central Texas on limestone
hills and sandy plains forming the Texas "Cross Timbers"; usually
shrubby and rare and local in southern Massachusetts; more abundant
southward from the coast of the south Atlantic and the eastern Gulf
states to the lower slopes of the Appalachian Mountains; in western
Louisiana rarely in the moist soil of low lands.

Showing little variation in the shape of the fruit and in the character
of the cup scales _Quercus stellata_ is one of the most variable of
North American Oaks in habit, in the nature of the bark, and in the
presence or absence of pubescence. Some of the best marked varieties are
var. _araniosa_ Sarg., a large tree differing from the type in the
usually smooth upper surface of the leaves, in the floccose persistent
tomentum on their lower surface, in the less stout usually glabrous
yellow or reddish branchlets, and in its scaly bark; dry sandy soil,
southern Alabama, western Louisiana, southern Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma
and eastern Texas. Var. _paludosa_ Sarg., a tree up to 75 deg. in height,
differing from the type in its oblong-obovate leaves 3-lobed above the
middle, slightly pubescent branchlets becoming nearly glabrous, and in
its scaly bark; in rich deep soil on the often inundated bottoms of
Kenison Bayou, near Washington, St. Landry Parish, Louisiana. Var.
_attenuata_ Sarg., a large tree differing from the type in the oblong to
oblong-obovate narrow leaves 3-lobed at apex and gradually narrowed to
the long cuneate base; near Arkansas Post on the White River, Arkansas
County, Arkansas. Var. _parviloba_ Sarg., a round-topped tree 25 deg.--30 deg.
high, differing from the type in the smaller lobes of the leaves with
more prominent reticulate veinlets; dry sandstone hills near Brownwood,
Brown County, Texas. Var. _anomala_ Sarg., a tree 15 deg.--18 deg. high,
differing from the type in its broadly obovate subcoriaceous leaves
slightly 3-lobed and rounded at apex; dry sandstone hills near
Brownwood, Brown County, Texas; possibly a hybrid. Var. _Palmeri_ Sarg.,
a shrub 6 deg.--15 deg. high, forming clumps, differing from the type in its
narrow oblong or slightly obovate 5--7-lobed leaves with narrow lobes,
densely tomentose below, and in the thicker and more tomentose scales of
the cup; sandy uplands, Elk City, Beckham County, Oklahoma. Var.
_rufescens_ Sarg., a shrub 12 deg.--15 deg. high, forming large clumps,
differing from the type in the rusty brown pubescence on the lower
surface of the polymorphous leaves, in the deeper cups of the fruit with
thicker basal scales; sandy uplands, Big Spring, Howard County, Texas,
and Elk City, Beckham County, Oklahoma. Var. _Boyntonii_ Sarg., a shrub
or small tree spreading into thickets, rarely more than 15 deg. in height,
differing from the type in its obovate leaves, mostly 3--5-lobed toward
the apex, with small rounded lobes, and in their yellow-brown pubescence
also found on the branchlets; in glades on the summit of Lookout
Mountain, above Gadsden and Attala, Etowah County, Alabama.

The common and most widely distributed of the varieties of the Post Oak
is


                 Quercus stellata var. Margaretta Sarg.

                       _Quercus Margaretta_ Ashe

[Illustration: Fig. 270]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded at apex, cuneate or rounded at base,
3--5-lobed with usually narrow rounded, but often broad and truncate
lobes, the two forms frequently occurring on the same branch, usually
becoming glabrous on the upper surface early in the season, slightly
pubescent, sometimes becoming nearly glabrous below, 2-1/2'--5' long and
2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles glabrous or pubescent. Flowers and Fruit as in
the species.

A small tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with slender glabrous reddish or reddish
brown branchlets. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/4' long with closely
imbricated chestnut-brown scales glabrous, or ciliate on the margins.
Bark thick, rough and furrowed, light gray.

Distribution. Usually on dry sandy slopes, hills and ridges, and
southward on Pine-barren lands; coast of Virginia (Capron, Southampton
County) southward in the coast and middle districts to central (Lake and
Orange Counties) and western Florida, through central and southern
Alabama, and eastern and southern Mississippi; in Western Louisiana
(Natchitoches and Caddo Parishes); southern Arkansas (McNab, Hempstead
County), and southwestern Missouri (Prosperity, Jasper County). The
common Post Oak of the south Atlantic and Gulf states; occasionally a
shrub (f. _stonolifera_ Sarg.) 4 deg.--6 deg. high, with smaller leaves,
spreading into broad thickets by stoloniferous shoots; common near
Selma, Dallas County, Alabama, and on the dry sand hills of central
Oklahoma.

x _Quercus Harbisonii_ Sarg., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
stellata_ var. _Margaretta_ and _Q. virginiana_ var. _geminata_, has
been found in the neighborhood of Jacksonville, Duval County, Florida.


                 45. Quercus Garryana Hook. White Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 271]

Leaves obovate to oblong, pointed at apex, cuneate or rounded at base,
coarsely pinnatifid-lobed, with slightly thickened revolute margins,
coated at first with soft pale lustrous pubescence, at maturity thick
and firm or subcoriaceous, dark green, lustrous and glabrous above,
light green or orange-brown and pubescent or glabrate below, 4'--6'
long, 2'--5' wide, with a stout yellow midrib, and conspicuous primary
veins spreading at right angles, or gradually diverging from the midrib
and running to the points of the lobes; sometimes turning bright scarlet
in the autumn; petioles stout, pubescent, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers:
staminate in hirsute aments; calyx glabrous, laciniately cut into ovate
acute slightly ciliate or linear-lanceolate much elongated segments;
pistillate sessile and coated with pale tomentum. Fruit sessile or
short-stalked; nut oval to slightly obovoid and obtuse, 1'--1-1/4' long
and 1/2'--1' thick, inclosed at the base in a shallow cup-shaped or
slightly turbinate cup puberulous and light brown on the inner surface,
pubescent or tomentose on the outer, and covered by ovate acute scales
with pointed and often elongated tips, thin, free, or sometimes
thickened and more or less united toward the base of the cup, decreasing
from below upward.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg. or sometimes nearly 100 deg. high, with a trunk
2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, stout ascending or spreading branches forming a
broad compact head, and stout branchlets coated at first with thick pale
rufous pubescence, pubescent or tomentose and light or dark orange color
during their first winter, becoming glabrous and rather bright reddish
brown in their second year and ultimately gray; frequently at high
altitudes, or when exposed to the winds from the ocean, reduced to a low
shrub. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/3'--1/2' long, densely clothed with
light ferrugineous tomentum. Bark 1/8'--1' thick, divided by shallow
fissures into broad ridges separating on the surface into light brown or
gray scales sometimes slightly tinged with orange color. Wood strong,
hard, close-grained, frequently exceedingly tough, light brown or
yellow, with thin nearly white sapwood; in Oregon and Washington used in
the manufacture of carriages and wagons, in cabinet-making,
shipbuilding, and cooperage, and largely as fuel.

Distribution. Valleys and the dry gravelly slopes of low hills;
Vancouver Island and the valley of the lower Fraser River southward
through western Washington and Oregon and the California coast-valleys
to Marin County; rare and local and the only Oak-tree in British
Columbia; abundant and of its largest size in the valleys of western
Washington and Oregon; on the islands in the northern part of Puget
Sound reduced to a low shrub (Vine Oak); ascending in its shrubby forms
to considerable altitudes on the western slopes of the Cascade
Mountains; abundant in northwestern California; less common and of
smaller size southward.


                      46. Quercus utahensis Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 272]

Leaves oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed and rounded or cuneate at
base, divided often nearly to the midrib by broad or narrow sinuses into
four or five pairs of lateral lobes rounded or acute at apex, the upper
lobes usually again lobed or undulate, the terminal lobe rounded at
apex, entire or three-lobed, thick, dark green, glabrous or nearly
glabrous above, pale and soft pubescent below, 2-1/2'--7' long,
1-1/2'--3-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary veins, and
conspicuous veinlets; petioles stout, hoary-tomentose early in the
season, pubescent or glabrous before maturity, 2/5'--1' in length.
Flowers: staminate in aments covered with fascicled hairs, 2'--2-1/2'
long; calyx scarious, divided to the middle by wide sinuses into narrow
acuminate lobes; anthers yellow; pistillate usually solitary or in
pairs, the scales of the involucre thickly coated with hoary tomentum.
Fruit usually solitary, sessile or raised on a stout pubescent peduncle
1/4'--1/2' in length; nut ovoid, broad and rounded at the ends,
3/5'--3/4' long, 1/2'--2-1/2' thick, usually inclosed for about half its
length in the thick hemispheric cup covered with broad ovate pale
pubescent scales much thickened on the back and closely appressed below
the middle of the cup, gradually reduced in size upward, thin and less
closely appressed toward its rim bordered by the free projecting tips of
the upper row of scales.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--8' in diameter, thick
erect branches forming a narrow open head, and stout branchlets
red-brown and covered with fascicled hairs when they first appear,
becoming light orange-brown and puberulous. Bark dark gray-brown, rough
and scaly.

Distribution. Dry foothill slopes and the sides of canyons; borders of
southwestern Wyoming to the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains of
Colorado, and to Utah, northern New Mexico and Arizona, passing into
var. _mollis_ Sarg. with thinner scales on the lower part of the cup of
the fruit; with the species over its whole range, but most abundant on
the Colorado Plateau of northern Arizona; here rarely 40 deg. high, with a
trunk 18'--20' in diameter.


             47. Quercus lobata Nee. White Oak. Valley Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 273]

Leaves oblong to obovate, deeply 7--11 obliquely lobed, rounded at the
narrow apex, narrow and cuneate or broad and rounded or cordate at base,
the lateral lobes obovate, obtuse or retuse, or ovate and rounded, thin,
2-1/2'--3' or rarely 4' long, 1'--2' wide, dark green and pubescent
above, pale and pubescent below, with a stout pale midrib, and
conspicuous yellow veins running to the slightly thickened and revolute
margins; petioles stout, hirsute, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in hirsute aments 2'--3' long; calyx light yellow and divided
into 6 or 8 acute pubescent ciliate lobes; pistillate solitary, sessile
or rarely in elongated few-flowered spikes, their involucral scales
broadly ovate, acute, coated with dense pale tomentum, about as long as
the narrow calyx-lobes. Fruit solitary or in pairs, nearly sessile; nut
conic, elongated, rounded or pointed at apex, 1-1/4'--2-1/4' long,
bright green and lustrous when fully grown, becoming bright
chestnut-brown, usually inclosed for about one third its length in the
cup-shaped cup coated with pale tomentum on the outer surface, usually
irregularly tuberculate below, all but the much-thickened basal scales
elongated into acute ciliate chestnut-brown free tips longest on the
upper scales and forming a short fringe-like border to the rim of the
cup.

A tree, often 100 deg. feet high, with a trunk generally 3 deg.--4 deg., but
sometimes 10 deg. in diameter, divided near the ground or usually 20 deg.--30 deg.
above it into great limbs spreading at wide angles and forming a broad
head of slender branches hanging gracefully in long sprays and sometimes
sweeping the ground; less frequently with upper limbs growing almost at
right angles with the trunk and forming a narrow rigid head of variously
contorted erect or pendant branches, and slender branchlets coated at
first with short silky canescent pubescence, ashy gray, light reddish
brown, or pale orange-brown and slightly pubescent in their first
winter, becoming glabrous and lighter colored during their second year.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, usually about 1/4' long, with orange-brown
pubescent scales scarious and frequently ciliate on the margins. Bark
3/4'--1-1/2' thick and covered by small loosely appressed light gray
scales slightly tinged with orange or brown, becoming at the base of old
trees frequently 5'--6' thick and divided by longitudinal fissures into
broad flat ridges broken horizontally into short plates. Wood hard,
fine-grained, brittle, light brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood;
used only for fuel.

Distribution. Valleys of western California between the Sierra Nevada
and the ocean from the valley of the Trinity River to Kern and Los
Angeles (rare) Counties; most abundant and forming open groves in the
central valleys of the state.


                     48. Quercus leptophylla Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 274]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, cuneate or rarely rounded at base,
divided about halfway to the midrib into two to four acute or rounded
lateral lobes entire or occasionally furnished on the lower side with a
small nearly triangular lobe, the terminal lobe short, entire, rounded
at apex or three-lobed, when they unfold thickly coated with hoary
tomentum, about one-third grown when the flowers open and then covered
above with fascicled hairs and tomentose below, at maturity thin, dark
green, lustrous and glabrous or nearly glabrous on the upper surface,
yellow-green and covered below by short white hairs most abundant on the
midrib and veins, 3-1/2'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles slender,
pubescent 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate in slender villose
aments; calyx scarious, divided into five or six narrow acute lobes;
anthers dark red-brown as the flowers open; pistillate not seen. Fruit
solitary or racemose, sessile or raised on a stout tomentose peduncle
2/5'--3/5' in length; nut oblong-ovoid, abruptly narrowed and rounded at
base, gradually narrowed and rounded at apex, 1/2'--3/4' long; inclosed
for half its length in the thin, hemispheric cup, 2/5'--1/2' in
diameter, and covered with acuminate only slightly thickened appressed
scales densely covered with hoary tomentum.

A tree, 30 deg.--45 deg. high, with a trunk 16'--24' in diameter, heavy
spreading ashy gray branches forming a round-topped head, and stout
branchlets, light red-brown or purple and covered with long fascicled
hairs when they first appear, becoming light brown and glabrous before
autumn. Bark thick, deeply furrowed, covered with small appressed pale
gray scales.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands of the Cucharas River above La Veta,
Huerfano County, Colorado; on the Mogollon Mountains, Socorro County,
New Mexico.


                      49. Quercus austrina Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 275]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed to
the long cuneate base or rarely rounded at base, usually 5-lobed with
rounded lobes, the terminal lobe often 3-lobed, the upper lateral lobes
pointing forward and much larger than those of the lower pair, or
occasionally 3-lobed at the broad apex, or rarely nearly entire with
undulate margins, when they unfold sparsely covered below with caducous
fascicled hairs, at maturity glabrous, dark green and lustrous above,
paler below, 3'--8' long, 1'--4' wide, with a prominent midrib and
slender primary veins; petioles slender, at first pubescent, soon
glabrous, 1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers not seen. Fruit solitary or in
pairs, sessile or raised on a stout stalk up to 1/2' in length; nut
ovoid, slightly narrowed toward the base, narrowed at the rounded
pubescent apex, 1/2'--3/4' long, 1/2' thick, inclosed for a third to a
half its length in the thin hemispheric or deep cup-shaped cup, pale
tomentose on the inner surface and covered with thin narrow loosely
appressed blunt-pointed tomentose scales.

A tree, 70 deg.--80 deg. and rarely 100 deg. high, with a tall trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, spreading and ascending branches forming a broad rather open
head, and slender glabrous red-brown or gray-brown brittle-jointed
branchlets. Winter-buds ovoid to ellipsoid, acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with
closely imbricated acute puberulous chestnut-brown scales ciliate on the
margins. Bark pale, scaly, and on old trunks divided into broad ridges.

Distribution. Banks of streams and river bluffs in deep rich soil; coast
of South Carolina (Bluffton, Clay County, and near Charleston); Dover,
Scriven County, McIntosh County, De Soto Co., Sumter County, and near
Bainbridge, Decatur County, Georgia, to central and western Florida
(Gainesville, Alachua County, near Santos, Marion County, Lake City,
Columbia County, River Junction, Gadsden County, Marianna, Jackson
County); western Alabama (Gallion, Hale County, and the neighborhood of
Selma [common] and Pleasant Hill, Dallas County); and southern
Mississippi (Meridian, Lauderdale County, Laurel, Jones County, Byram
and near Jackson, Hinds County, near Natchez, Adams County).


                     50. Quercus alba L. White Oak.

[Illustration: Fig. 276]

Leaves oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, divided
often nearly to the midrib by narrow or broad sinuses usually oblique in
the bottom into 7 or 9 lobes, the lateral, narrow, lanceolate or
obovate, pointing forward, rounded or acute and often lobed at apex, the
terminal usually obovate and 3-lobed, when they unfold bright red above,
pale below and coated with soft pubescence, soon becoming silvery white
and very lustrous, at maturity thin, firm, glabrous, bright green and
lustrous or dull above, pale or glaucous below, 5'--9' long, 2'--4'
wide, with a stout bright yellow midrib and conspicuous primary veins;
turning late in the autumn deep rich vinous red, gradually withering and
sometimes remaining on the branches nearly through the winter; petioles
stout, glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers: staminate in hirsute or
nearly glabrous aments 2-1/2'--3' long; calyx bright yellow and
pubescent, with acute lobes; pistillate bright red, their involucral
scales broadly ovate, hirsute, about as long as the ovate acute
calyx-lobes. Fruit sessile or raised on a slender peduncle 1'--2' long,
the two forms sometimes appearing on the same branch; nut ovoid to
oblong, rounded at apex, lustrous, 3/4' long, green when fully grown,
becoming light chestnut-brown, inclosed for about one fourth its length
in the cup-shaped cup coated with pale or light brown tomentum, its
scales at the base much thickened, united and produced into short obtuse
membranaceous tips, and thinner toward the rim of the cup.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, tall and naked
in the forest, short in the open, and surmounted by a broad round-topped
head of stout limbs spreading irregularly, small rigid branches, and
slender branchlets at first bright green, often tinged with red, and
coated with a loose mass of long pale or ferrugineous deciduous hairs,
reddish brown during the summer, bright red and lustrous or covered with
a glaucous bloom during their first winter, becoming ultimately ashy
gray. Winter-buds broadly ovoid, rather obtuse, dark red-brown, about
1/8' long. Bark light gray slightly tinged with red or brown, or
occasionally nearly white, broken into thin appressed scales, becoming
on old trunks sometimes 2' thick and divided into broad flat ridges.
Wood strong, very heavy, hard, tough, close-grained, durable, light
brown, with thin light brown sapwood; used in shipbuilding, for
construction and in cooperage, the manufacture of carriages,
agricultural implements, baskets, the interior finish of houses,
cabinet-making, for railway-ties and fences, and largely as fuel.

Distribution. Sandy plains and gravelly ridges, rich uplands,
intervales, and moist bottom-lands, sometimes forming nearly pure
forests; southern Maine to southwestern Quebec, westward through
southern Ontario, the southern peninsula of Michigan, southeastern
Minnesota, eastern Iowa, and southeastern Nebraska, and southward to
western Florida, through the Gulf states to the valley of the Brazos
River, Texas and through Arkansas to eastern Oklahoma, eastern Kansas,
Missouri, Tennessee, and Kentucky; ascending the southern Appalachian
Mountains as a low bush to altitudes of 4500 deg.; most abundant and of its
largest size on the lower western slopes of the Alleghany Mountains and
on the bottom-lands of the lower Ohio Basin. Passing into


                    Quercus alba var. latiloba Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 277]

Leaves obovate-oblong, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, divided usually less than half way to the midrib into
broad rounded lobes; rarely obovate, with undulate margins, or slightly
lobed, with broad rounded lobes (var. _repanda_ Michx.). Flowers as in
the type. Fruit rarely more than 1-1/2' in length, with usually thinner
cup scales.

Distribution. More abundant than the species and the common northern
White Oak.

x _Quercus Beadlei_ Trel., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus alba_ and
_Q. Prinus_, has been found in a swamp near Clarkton, Bladen County,
North Carolina.

x _Quercus Bebbiana_ Schn., probably a hybrid of _Quercus alba_ and _Q.
macrocarpa_, occurs at Charlotte, Chittenden County, Vermont, and near
Kenton, Hardin County, Ohio.

x _Quercus Deamii_ Trel., with characters intermediate between those of
_Quercus alba_ and _Q. Muehlenbergii_ and evidently a hybrid of these
species, is growing near Bluffton, Wells County, Indiana.

x _Quercus Faxonii_ Trel., with characters intermediate between those of
_Quercus alba_ and _Q. prinoides_ and evidently a hybrid of these
species, has been found in East Walpole, Norfolk County, and Concord,
Middlesex County, Massachusetts, and at Greenville, Montcalm County,
Michigan.

x _Quercus Fernowii_ Trel., evidently a hybrid of _Quercus alba_ and _Q.
stellata_, has been found near Allenton, St. Louis County, Missouri, and
on Red Clay Creek, Virginia.

x _Quercus Jackiana_ Schn., evidently a hybrid of _Quercus alba_ and _Q.
bicolor_, is growing in Franklin Park, Boston.

x _Quercus Saulei_ Schn., with characters intermediate between those of
_Q. alba_ and _Q. montana_ and evidently a hybrid of these species,
occurs with widely distributed individuals in Vermont (Monkton, Addison
County), eastern Massachusetts, near Providence, Rhode Island, New
Jersey, eastern Pennsylvania, and the District of Columbia, on the
Appalachian Mountains near Biltmore, Buncombe County, and Highlands,
Macon County, North Carolina, at Valleyhead, Gadsden County, Alabama,
and in Richland County, Illinois.


              51. Quercus bicolor Willd. Swamp White Oak.

                      _Quercus platanoides_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 278]

Leaves obovate to oblong-obovate, rounded at the narrowed apex, acute or
rounded at the gradually narrowed and cuneate entire base, coarsely
sinuate-dentate, or sometimes pinnatifid, with oblique rounded or acute
entire lobes, when they unfold light bronze-green and pilose above,
covered below with silvery white tomentum, with conspicuous glands on
the teeth, at maturity thick and firm, dark green and lustrous on the
upper surface, pale or often silvery white or tawny on the lower
surface, 5'--6' long, 2'--4' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, primary
veins running to the points of the lobes, and conspicuous reticulate
veinlets; turning in the autumn dull yellow-brown or occasionally
orange-color or rarely scarlet before falling; petioles stout, pilose at
first, becoming glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers: staminate in
hairy aments 3'--4' long; calyx light yellow-green, hirsute with pale
hairs, and deeply divided into 5--9 lanceolate acute segments rather
shorter than the stamens; pistillate in few-flowered spikes on elongated
peduncles covered like the involucral scales with thick white or tawny
tomentum; stigmas bright red. Fruit usually in pairs on slender dark
brown glabrous puberulous or pubescent stalks 1-1/2'--4' in length; nut
ovoid, with a broad base, rounded, acute and pubescent at apex, light
chestnut-brown, 3/4'--1-1/4' long, 1/2'--3/4' thick, inclosed for about
one third its length in the thick cup-shaped light brown cup pubescent
on the inner surface, hoary-tomentose, and sometimes tuberculate or
roughened toward the base on the outer surface by the thickened
contorted tips of the ovate acute scales, thin, free, acute and
chestnut-brown higher on the cup, and often forming a short fringe-like
border on its margin, or sometimes entirely covered by thin scales with
free acute tips.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg. or exceptionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg.
or occasionally 8 deg.--9 deg. in diameter, rather small branches generally
pendulous below and rising above into a narrow round-topped open head
and often furnished with short pendulous laterals, and stout branchlets,
green, lustrous, and slightly scurfy-pubescent when they first appear,
light orange color or reddish brown and glabrous or puberulous during
their first winter, becoming darker and often purplish and clothed with
a glaucous bloom. Winter-buds broadly ovoid and obtuse, or subglobose to
ovoid and acute, 1/8' long, with light chestnut-brown scales usually
pilose above the middle. Bark of young stems and small branches smooth,
reddish or purplish brown, separating freely into large papery
persistent scales curling back and displaying the bright green inner
bark; becoming on old trunks 1'--2' thick, and deeply and irregularly
divided by continuous or interrupted fissures into broad flat ridges
covered by small appressed gray-brown scales often slightly tinged with
red. Wood heavy, hard, strong, tough, light brown, with thin hardly
distinguishable sapwood; used in construction, the interior finish of
houses, cabinet-making, carriage and boat-building, cooperage, and
railway-ties, and for fencing and fuel.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps in moist fertile soil;
southern Maine to northern Vermont and southwestern Quebec, through
Ontario and the southern peninsula of Michigan to southeastern
Minnesota, eastern and southern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska and western
Missouri, and to the District of Columbia, northern Kentucky and
northeastern Oklahoma, and along the Appalachian Mountains to West
Virginia; widely scattered, usually in small groves but nowhere very
abundant; most common and of its largest size in western New York and
northern Ohio.

x _Quercus Schuettii_ Trel., with characters intermediate between those
of _Quercus bicolor_ and _Q. macrocarpa_, and probably a hybrid of these
species, occurs at Fort Howard, Brown County, Wisconsin, near Rockfield
and Chateaugay, Quebec, and near Rochester and Golah, Munroe County, New
York.


               52. Quercus Prinus L. Basket Oak. Cow Oak.

                       _Quercus Michauxii_ Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 279]

Leaves broadly obovate to oblong-obovate, acute or acuminate at apex
with a short broad point, cuneate or rounded at the broad or narrow
entire base, regularly crenately lobed with oblique rounded entire lobes
sometimes furnished with glandular tips, or rarely entire with undulate
margins, when they unfold bright yellow-green, lustrous and pubescent
above, coated below with thick silvery white or ferrugineous tomentum,
at maturity thick and firm or sometimes membranaceous, especially on
young and vigorous branches, dark green, lustrous, glabrous or
occasionally roughened by scattered fascicled hairs on the upper
surface, more or less densely pubescent on the pale green or silvery
white lower surface, 6'--8' long, 3'--5' wide; turning in the autumn
dark rich crimson; petioles stout, 1/2'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers:
staminate in slender hairy aments, 3'--4' long; calyx light
yellow-green, pilose with long pale hairs, and divided into 4--7 acute
lobes; pistillate in few-flowered spikes on short peduncles coated like
the involucral scales with dense pale rufous tomentum; stigmas dark red.
Fruit solitary or in pairs, sessile or subsessile, or borne on short
stout puberulous stalks rarely 1/2' in length; nut ovoid to ellipsoidal,
with a broad base, and acute, rounded, or occasionally truncate at apex
surrounded by a narrow ring of rusty pubescence, or sometimes pilose
nearly to the middle, bright brown, rather lustrous, 1'--1-1/2' long,
3/4'--1-1/4' thick, inclosed for about one third its length in the thick
cup-shaped cup often broad and flat on the bottom, reddish brown and
pubescent within, hoary-tomentose and covered on the outer surface by
regularly imbricated ovate acute scales rounded and much thickened on
the back, their short tips sometimes forming a rigid fringe-like border
to the rim of the cup; seed sweet and edible.

A tree, often 100 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes free of branches for
40 deg.--50 deg., and 3 deg.--7 deg. in diameter, stout branches ascending at narrow
angles and forming a round-topped rather compact head, and stout
branchlets at first dark green and covered by pale caducous hairs,
becoming bright red-brown or light orange-brown during their first
winter and ultimately ashy gray. Winter-buds broadly ovoid or oval,
acute, 1/4' long, with thin closely and regularly imbricated dark red
puberulous scales with pale margins, those of the inner ranks coated on
the outer surface with loose pale tomentum. Bark 1/2'--1' thick,
separating into thin closely appressed silvery white or ashy gray scales
more or less deeply tinged with red. Wood heavy, hard, very strong,
tough, close-grained, durable, easy to split, light-brown, with thin
darker colored sapwood; largely used in all kinds of construction, for
agricultural implements, wheels, in cooperage, for fences and fuel, and
in baskets.

Distribution. Borders of streams, swamps, and bottom-lands often covered
with water; New Jersey (Morristown, Morris County and Pittsgrove, Salem
County), near Wilmington, Delaware, southward through the coast and
middle districts to Putnam (San Mateo) and Citrus Counties, Florida,
through the Gulf states to the valley of the Trinity River, Texas, and
through Arkansas and southeastern Missouri to central Tennessee and
Kentucky, the valley of the lower Wabash River, Illinois, and southern
Indiana eastward to Jefferson County (_C. C. Deam_); conspicuous from
the silvery white bark, the massive trunk, and the broad crown of large
bright-colored foliage.


        53. Quercus montana L. Chestnut Oak. Rock Chestnut Oak.

                    _Quercus Prinus_ Engelm., not L.

[Illustration: Fig. 280]

Leaves obovate or oblong to lanceolate, acute or acuminate or rounded at
apex, gradually or abruptly cuneate or rounded or subcordate at the
narrow entire base, irregularly and coarsely crenulate-toothed with
rounded, acute, or sometimes nearly triangular oblique teeth, when they
unfold orange-green or bronze-red, very lustrous, and glabrous above
with the exception of the slightly pilose midrib, green and coated below
with soft pale pubescence, at maturity thick and firm or subcoriaceous,
yellow-green and rather lustrous on the upper surface, paler and covered
by fine pubescence on the lower surface, 4-1/2'--9' long, 1-1/2'--3'
wide, with a stout yellow midrib and conspicuous primary veins, often
much broader near the bottom of the tree than on fertile upper branches;
turning dull orange color or rusty brown in the autumn; petioles stout
or slender, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers: staminate in elongated hirsute
aments; calyx light yellow, pilose and deeply divided into 7--9 acute
segments tipped with clusters of pale hairs; pistillate in short spikes
on stout puberulous dark green peduncles, their involucral scales
covered with pale hairs; stigmas dark red. Fruit on short stout stems
singly or in pairs; nut ovoid or ellipsoidal, rounded and rather obtuse
or pointed at apex, bright chestnut-brown, very lustrous, 1'--1-1/2'
long, 5/8'--1' thick, inclosed for about half its length or sometimes
only at the base in a turbinate or cup-shaped thin cup light brown and
pubescent on the inner surface, reddish brown and hoary-pubescent on the
outer surface roughened or tuberculate, especially toward the base, by
small scales thickened and knob-like with nearly triangular free light
brown tips.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg. or occasionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg.
or rarely 6 deg.--7 deg. in diameter, divided generally 15 deg. or 20 deg. above the
ground into large limbs spreading into a broad open rather irregular
head, and stout branchlets green tinged with purple or bronze color and
glabrous or pilose when they first appear, light orange color or reddish
brown during their first winter, becoming dark gray or brown; on dry
exposed mountain slopes often not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. tall, with a trunk
8'--12' in diameter. Winter-buds ovoid, acute or acuminate, 1/4'--1/2'
long, with bright chestnut-brown scales pilose toward the apex and
ciliate on the margins. Bark of young stems and small branches thin,
smooth, purplish brown, often lustrous, becoming on old trunks and large
limbs 3/4'--1-1/2' thick, dark reddish brown or nearly black, and
divided into broad rounded ridges covered with small closely appressed
scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, rather tough, close-grained, durable
in contact with the soil, largely used for fencing, railway-ties, and
fuel. The bark, which is rich in tannin, is consumed in large quantities
in tanning leather.

Distribution. Hillsides and the high rocky banks of streams in rich and
deep or sometimes in sterile soil; coast of southern Maine, southern New
Hampshire and eastern Massachusetts, southward to Delaware and the
District of Columbia, and along the Appalachian Mountains and their
foothills to northern Georgia (Wilkes County); ascending to altitudes of
4000 deg.--4500 deg.; in northern Alabama; westward to the shores of Lake
Champlain, western New York; southeastern and southern Ohio, and
southern Indiana westward to Orange County (_C. C. Deam_); and to
central Kentucky and Tennessee, and northeastern Mississippi (Alcorn,
Prentiss and Tishomingo Counties); rare and local in New England and
Ontario; abundant on the banks of the lower Hudson River and on the
Appalachian hills from southern New York to Alabama; most common and of
its largest size on the lower slopes of the mountains of the Carolinas
and Tennessee, here often forming a large part of the forest.

x _Quercus Sargentii_ Rehd., believed to be a hybrid of _Quercus
montana_ and the European _Q. Robur_ L., has been growing for nearly a
hundred years at what is now Holm Lea, Brookline, Norfolk County,
Massachusetts.


      54. Quercus Muehlenbergii Engelm. Yellow Oak. Chestnut Oak.

                       _Quercus acuminata_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 281]

Leaves usually crowded at the ends of the branches, oblong-lanceolate to
broadly obovate, acute or acuminate with a long narrow or with a short
broad point, abruptly or gradually narrowed and cuneate or slightly
narrowed and rounded or cordate at base, equally serrate with acute and
often incurved or broad and rounded teeth tipped with small glandular
mucros, or rarely slightly undulate, when they unfold bright bronzy
green and puberulous above, tinged with purple and coated below with
pale tomentum, at maturity thick and firm, light yellow-green on the
upper surface, pale often silvery white and covered with short fine
pubescence on the lower surface, 4'--7' long, 1'--5' wide, with a stout
yellow midrib and conspicuous primary veins running to the points of the
teeth; turning in the autumn orange color and scarlet; petioles slender
3/4'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers: staminate in pilose aments 3'--4' long;
calyx light yellow, hairy, deeply divided into 5 or 6 lanceolate ciliate
segments; pistillate sessile or in short spikes coated like their
involucral scales with thick white tomentum; stigmas bright red. Fruit
sessile or raised on a short stout peduncle, solitary or often in pairs;
nut broadly ovoid, narrowed and rounded at apex, 1/2' to nearly 1' long,
light chestnut-brown, inclosed for about half its length in a thin
cup-shaped light brown cup pubescent on the inner, hoary-tomentose on
the outer surface, and covered by small obtuse scales more or less
thickened and rounded on the back toward the base of the cup, the small
free red-brown tips of the upper ranks forming a minute fringe-like
border to its rim; seed sweet and sometimes edible.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg., occasionally 160 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk
3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter above the broad and often buttressed base,
comparatively small branches forming a narrow shapely round-topped head,
and slender branchlets, green more or less tinged with red or purple,
pilose when they first appear, light orange color or reddish brown
during their first winter, and ultimately gray or brown; east of the
Alleghany Mountains and on dry hills often not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. tall.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with chestnut-brown scales
white and scarious on the margins. Bark rarely 1/2' thick, broken on the
surface into thin loose silvery white scales sometimes slightly tinged
with brown. Wood heavy, very hard, strong, close-grained, durable, with
thin light-colored sapwood; largely used in cooperage, for wheels,
fencing, and railway-ties.

Distribution. Gardner's Island, Lake Champlain, Vermont, western
Massachusetts and Connecticut, near Newberg, Orange County, New York,
westward through New York, southern Ontario and southern Michigan to
northern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska, eastern Kansas, and Oklahoma to
the valley of the Washita River (Garvin County) and to the Devil's Canyon
near Hinton (Caddo County), and southward in the Atlantic states to the
District of Columbia, eastern Virginia; sparingly on the eastern
foothills of the Blue Ridge in North and South Carolina at altitudes
between 1000 deg. and 2000 deg.; in central Tennessee and Kentucky, central and
northeastern Georgia, western Florida, and through the Gulf states to
the valley of the Guadalupe River, Texas; on the Guadalupe Mountains,
Texas, and on the Capitan Mountains, New Mexico (Lincoln County); rare
and comparatively local in the Atlantic states, usually on limestone
soil; very abundant in the Mississippi basin, growing on ridges, dry
flinty hills, deep rich bottom-lands and the rocky banks of streams;
probably of its largest size on the lower Wabash River and its
tributaries in southern Indiana and Illinois; on the Edwards Plateau
(Kemble, Kerr, Uvalde, Bandera and Real Counties), Texas, a form occurs
with nuts sometimes 1-1/4' long with deeper cups up to 1' in diameter
(var. _Brayi_ Sarg.).

Section 2. Flowers unisexual (_usually perfect in Ulmus_); calyx
regular; stamens as many as its lobes and opposite them; ovary superior,
1-celled (_rarely 2-celled in Ulmus_); seed 1.




                              XI. ULMACEAE.


Trees, with watery juice, scaly buds, terete branchlets prolonged by an
upper lateral bud, and alternate simple serrate pinnately veined
deciduous stalked 2-ranked leaves unequal and often oblique at base,
conduplicate in the bud, their stipules usually fugaceous. Flowers
perfect or monoeciously polygamous, clustered, or the pistillate
sometimes solitary; calyx 4--9-parted or lobed; stamens 4--6; filaments
straight; anthers introrse, 2-celled, opening longitudinally; ovary
usually 1-celled; ovule solitary, suspended from the apex of the cell,
anatropous or amphitropous; styles 2. Fruit a samara, nut, or drupe;
albumen little or none; embryo straight or curved; cotyledons usually
flat or conduplicate. Five of the thirteen genera of the Elm family
occur in North America. Of these four are represented by trees.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Fruit a dry samara, or nut-like.
    Flowers perfect; fruit a samara.
                                                               1. Ulmus.
    Flowers polygamo-monoecious; fruit nut-like, tuberculate.
                                                             2. Planera.
  Fruit drupaceous.
    Pistillate flowers usually solitary.
                                                              3. Celtis.
    Pistillate flowers in dichotomous cymes.
                                                               4. Trema.




                            1. ULMUS L. Elm.


Trees, or rarely shrubs, with deeply furrowed bark, branchlets often
furnished with corky wings, and buds with numerous ovate rounded
chestnut-brown scales closely imbricated in two ranks, increasing in
size from without inward, the inner accrescent, replacing the stipules
of the first leaves, deciduous, marking the base of the branchlet with
persistent ring-like scars. Leaves simply or doubly serrate; stipules
linear, lanceolate to obovate, entire, free or connate at base,
scarious, inclosing the leaf in the bud, caducous. Flowers from axillary
buds near the ends of the branches similar to but larger than the
leaf-buds, the outer scales sterile, the inner bearing flowers and
rarely leaves. Flowers perfect, jointed on slender bibracteolate
pedicels from the axils of linear acute scarious bracts, in pedunculate
or subsessile fascicles or cymes sometimes becoming racemose, appearing
in early spring before the leaves in the axils of those of the previous
year, or autumnal in the axils of leaves of the year; calyx campanulate,
5--9-lobed, membranaceous, marcescent; stamens 5 or 6 inserted under the
ovary; filaments filiform or slightly flattened, erect in the bud,
becoming exserted; anthers oblong, emarginate, and subcordate; ovary
sessile or stipitate, compressed, crowned by a simple deeply 2-lobed
style, the spreading lobes papillo-stigmatic on the inner face, usually
1-celled by abortion, rarely 2-celled; ovule amphitropous; micropyle
extrorse, superior. Fruit an ovoid or oblong, often oblique, sessile or
stipitate samara surrounded at base by the remnants of the calyx, the
seminal cavity compressed, slightly thickened on the margin,
chartaceous, produced into a thin reticulate-venulose membranaceous
light brown broad or rarely narrow wing naked or ciliate on the margin,
tipped with the remnants of the persistent style, or more or less deeply
notched at apex, and often marked by the thickened line of the union of
the two carpels. Seed ovoid, compressed, without albumen, marked on the
ventral edge by the thin raphe; testa membranaceous, light or dark
chestnut-brown, of two coats, rarely produced into a narrow wing; embryo
erect; cotyledons flat or slightly convex, much longer than the superior
radicle turned toward the oblong linear pale hilum.

Ulmus, with eighteen or twenty species, is widely distributed through
the boreal and temperate regions of the northern hemisphere with the
exception of western North America, reaching in the New World the
mountains of southern Mexico and in the Old World the Sikkim Himalaya,
western China, and Japan. Of the exotic species, _Ulmus procera_
Salisb., the so-called English Elm, and _Ulmus glabra_, Huds., the
Scotch Elm, and several of its varieties, have been largely planted for
shade and ornament in the north Atlantic states, where old and large
specimens of the former can be seen, especially in the neighborhood of
Boston.

Ulmus produces heavy, hard, tough, light-colored wood, often difficult
to split. The tough inner bark of some of the species is made into ropes
or woven into coarse cloth, and in northern China nourishing
mucilaginous food is prepared from the inner bark.

_Ulmus_ is the classical name of the Elm-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers vernal, appearing before the leaves.
    Flowers on slender drooping pedicels; fruit ciliate on the margins.
      Wing of the fruit broad.
        Bud-scales and fruit glabrous; branchlets destitute of corky
              wings; leaves obovate-oblong to elliptic, usually smooth
              on the upper, soft-pubescent on the lower surface.
                                                 1. U. americana (A, C).
        Bud-scales puberulous; branches often furnished with corky
              wings; fruit hirsute; leaves obovate to oblong, smooth on
              the upper, soft-pubescent on the lower surface.
                                                     2. U. racemosa (A).
      Wing of the fruit narrow; bud-scales glabrous or slightly
            puberulous; branchlets usually furnished with broad corky
            wings; fruit hirsute, leaves ovate-oblong to
            oblong-lanceolate, smooth on the upper, soft-pubescent on
            the lower surface.
                                                     3. U. alata (A, C).
    Flowers on short pedicels; fruit naked on the margins; bud-scales
          coated with rusty hairs; fruit pubescent; leaves ovate-oblong,
          scabrous on the upper, pubescent on the lower surface.
                                                     4. U. fulva (A, C).
  Flowers autumnal, appearing in the axils of leaves of the year;
        branchlets furnished with corky wings; fruit hirsute.
    Bud-scales puberulous; flowers on short pedicels; leaves ovate,
          scabrous on the upper, soft-pubescent on the lower surface.
                                                  5. U. crassifolia (C).
    Bud-scales glabrous; flowers on long pedicels; leaves oblong to
          oblong-obovate, acuminate, glabrous on the upper, pale and
          puberulous on the lower surface.
                                                     6. U. serotina (C).


                    1. Ulmus americana L. White Elm.

[Illustration: Fig. 282]

Leaves obovate-oblong to elliptic, abruptly narrowed at apex into a long
point, full and rounded at base on one side and shorter and cuneate on
the other, coarsely doubly serrate with slightly incurved teeth, when
they unfold coated below with pale pubescence and pilose above with long
scattered white hairs, at maturity 4'--6' long, 1'--3' wide, dark green
and glabrous or scabrate above, pale and soft-pubescent or sometimes
glabrous below, with a narrow pale midrib and numerous slender straight
primary veins running to the points of the teeth and connected by fine
cross veinlets; turning bright clear yellow in the autumn before
falling; petioles stout, 1/4' in length; stipules linear-lanceolate,
1/2'--2' long. Flowers on long slender drooping pedicels sometimes 1' in
length, in 3 or 4-flowered short-stalked fascicles; calyx irregularly
divided into 7--9 rounded lobes ciliate on the margins, often somewhat
oblique, puberulous on the outer surface, green tinged with red above
the middle; anthers bright red; ovary light green, ciliate on the
margins with long white hairs; styles light green. Fruit on long
pedicels in crowded clusters, ripening as the leaves unfold, ovoid to
obovoid-oblong, slightly stipitate, conspicuously reticulate-venulose,
1/2' long, ciliate on the margins, the sharp points of the wings
incurved and inclosing the deep notch.

A tree, sometimes 100 deg.--120 deg. high, with a tall trunk 6 deg.--11 deg. in
diameter, frequently enlarged at the base by great buttresses,
occasionally rising with a straight undivided shaft to the height of
60 deg.--80 deg. and separating into short spreading branches, more commonly
divided 30 deg.--40 deg. from the ground into numerous upright limbs gradually
spreading and forming an inversely conic round-topped head of long
graceful branches, often 100 deg. or rarely 150 deg. in diameter, and slender
branchlets frequently fringing the trunk and its principal divisions,
light green and coated at first with soft pale pubescence, becoming in
their first winter light reddish brown, glabrous or sometimes puberulous
and marked by scattered pale lenticels, and by large elevated
semiorbicular leaf-scars showing the ends of three large equidistant
fibro-vascular bundles, later becoming dark reddish brown and finally
ashy gray. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, slightly flattened, about 1/8'
long, with broadly ovate rounded light chestnut-brown glabrous scales,
the inner bright green, ovate, acute, becoming on vigorous shoots often
nearly 1' in length. Bark 1'--1-1/2' thick, ashy gray, divided by deep
fissures into broad ridges separating on the surface into thin appressed
scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, tough, difficult to split,
coarse-grained, light brown, with thick somewhat lighter colored
sapwood; largely used for the hubs of wheels, saddle-trees, in flooring
and cooperage, and in boat and shipbuilding.

Distribution. River-bottom lands, intervales, low rich hills, and the
banks of streams; southern Newfoundland to the northern shores of Lake
Superior and the headwaters of the Saskatchewan, southward to the
neighborhood of Lake Istokpoga, De Soto County, Florida, westward in the
United States to the Turtle Mountains of North Dakota, the Black Hills
of South Dakota, western Nebraska, central Kansas and Oklahoma, and the
valley of the upper Colorado River (Fort Chadbourne, Coke County),
Texas; very common northward, less abundant and of smaller size
southward; abundant on the banks of streams flowing through the
midcontinental plateau.

Largely planted as an ornamental and shade tree in the northern states,
and rarely in western and northern Europe.


             2. Ulmus racemosa Thomas. Rock Elm. Cork Elm.

                         _Ulmus Thomasii_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 283]

Leaves obovate to oblong-oval, rather abruptly narrowed at apex into a
short broad point, equally or somewhat unequally rounded, cuneate or
subcordate at base, and coarsely doubly serrate, when they unfold pilose
on the upper surface and covered on the lower with soft white hairs, at
maturity 2'--2-1/2' long, 3/4'--1' wide, thick and firm, smooth, dark
green and lustrous above, paler and soft-pubescent below, especially on
the stout midrib and the numerous straight veins running to the point of
the teeth and connected by obscure cross veinlets; turning in the autumn
bright clear yellow; petioles pubescent, about 1/4' in length; stipules
ovate-lanceolate, conspicuously veined, light green, marked with dark
red on the margins above the middle, 2/3' long, clasping the stem by
their abruptly enlarged cordate base conspicuously dentate with 1--3
prominent teeth on each side, falling when the leaves are half grown.
Flowers on elongated slender drooping pedicels often 1/2' long, in 2--4,
usually in 3-flowered, puberulous cymes becoming more or less racemose
by the lengthening of the axis of the inflorescence, and when fully
grown sometimes 2' in length; calyx green, divided nearly to the middle
into 7 or 8 rounded dark red scarious lobes; anthers dark purple; ovary
coated with long pale hairs most abundant on the margins; styles light
green. Fruit ripening when the leaves are about half grown, ovoid or
obovoid-oblong, 1/2' long, with a shallow open notch at the apex,
obscurely veined, pale pubescent, ciliate on the slightly thickened
border of the broad wing, the margin of the seminal cavity scarcely
thickened.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 3 deg. in diameter, and
often free of branches for 60 deg., short stout spreading branches forming a
narrow round-topped head, and slender rigid branchlets, light brown when
they first appear, and coated with soft pale pubescence often persistent
until their second season, becoming light reddish brown, puberulous or
glabrous and lustrous in their first winter, and marked by scattered
oblong lenticels and large orbicular or semiorbicular leaf-scars
displaying an irregular row of 4--6 fibro-vascular bundle-scars,
ultimately dark brown or ashy gray, and usually furnished with 3 or 4
thick corky irregular wings often 1/2' broad, and beginning to appear in
their first or more often during their second year. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, 1/4' long, with broadly ovate rounded chestnut-brown scales
pilose on the outer surface, ciliate on the margins, the inner scales
becoming ovate-oblong to lanceolate, and 1/2' long, often dentate at the
base, with 1 or 2 minute teeth on each side, bright green below the
middle, marked with a red blotch above, and white and scarious at the
apex. Bark 3/4'--1' thick, gray tinged with red, and deeply divided by
wide irregular interrupted fissures into broad flat ridges broken on the
surface into large irregularly shaped scales. Wood heavy, hard, very
strong and tough, close-grained, light clear brown often tinged with
red, with thick lighter colored sapwood; largely employed in the
manufacture of many agricultural implements, for the framework of
chairs, hubs of wheels, railway-ties, the sills of buildings, and other
purposes demanding toughness, solidity and flexibility.

Distribution. Dry gravelly uplands, low heavy clay soils, rocky slopes
and river cliffs; Province of Quebec westward through Ontario, the
southern peninsula of Michigan and central Wisconsin to northeastern
Nebraska, western Missouri and eastern Kansas, and southward to northern
New Hampshire, southern Vermont, western New York, (valley of the
Genesee River), northern New Jersey, southern Ohio (near Columbus,
Franklin County), and central Indiana; rare in the east and toward the
extreme western and southern limits of its range.

Occasionally planted as a shade and ornamental tree in the northern
states.


                3. Ulmus alata Michx. Wahoo. Winged Elm.

[Illustration: Fig. 284]

Leaves ovate-oblong to oblong-lanceolate, often somewhat falcate, acute
or acuminate, unequally cuneate or rounded or subcordate at base, and
coarsely doubly serrate with incurved teeth, when they unfold pale green
often tinged with red, coated on the lower surface with soft white
pubescence and glabrous or nearly so on the upper surface, at maturity
thick and firm or subcoriaceous, dark green and smooth above, pale and
soft-pubescent below, especially on the stout yellow midrib and numerous
straight prominent veins often forked near the margins of the leaf and
connected by rather conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning yellow in
the autumn; their petioles stout, pubescent, 1/3' in length; stipules
linear-obovate, thin and scarious, tinged with red above the middle,
often nearly 1' long. Flowers on drooping pedicels, in short
few-flowered fascicles; calyx glabrous and divided nearly to the middle
into 5 broad ovate rounded lobes as long as the hoary-tomentose ovary
raised on a short slender stipe. Fruit ripening before or with the
unfolding of the leaves, oblong, 1/3' in length, contracted at base into
a long slender stalk, gradually narrowed and tipped at apex with long
incurved awns, and covered with long white hairs most numerous on the
thickened margin of the narrow wing; seed ovoid, pointed, 1/8' long,
pale, chestnut-brown, slightly thickened into a narrow wing-like margin.

A tree, occasionally 80 deg.--100 deg. but usually not more than 40 deg.--50 deg. high,
with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, short stout straight or erect branches
forming a narrow oblong rather open round-topped head, and slender
branchlets glabrous or puberulous and light green tinged with red when
they first appear, becoming light reddish brown or ashy gray and
glabrous, or on vigorous individuals frequently pilose in their first
winter, marked by occasional small orange-colored lenticels and by small
elevated horizontal semiorbicular leaf-scars, sometimes naked, more
often furnished with usually 2 thin corky wings beginning to grow during
their first or more often during their second season, abruptly arrested
at the nodes, often 1/2' wide, and persistent for many years.
Winter-buds slender, acute, 1/8' long, dark chestnut-brown, with
glabrous or puberulous scales, those of the inner ranks becoming oblong
or obovate, rounded and tipped with a minute mucro, thin and scarious,
light red, especially above the middle, and 1/2' long. Bark rarely
exceeding 1/4' in thickness, light brown tinged with red, and divided by
irregular shallow fissures into flat ridges covered by small closely
appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, not strong, close-grained, difficult
to split, light brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood; sometimes
employed for the hubs of wheels and the handles of tools. Ropes used for
fastening the covers of cotton bales are sometimes made from the inner
bark.

Distribution. Usually on dry gravelly uplands, less commonly in alluvial
soil on the borders of swamps and the banks of streams, and occasionally
in inundated swamps; southeastern Virginia, southwestern Indiana,
southern Illinois (Richland and Johnson Counties) and southern Missouri,
and southward to central Florida (Lake County), and the valley of the
Guadalupe River, Texas; ranging westward in Oklahoma to Garfield County
(near Kingfisher, _G. W. Stevens_).

Often planted as a shade-tree in the streets of towns and villages of
the southern states.


              4. Ulmus fulva Michx. Slippery Elm. Red Elm.

[Illustration: Fig. 285]

Leaves ovate-oblong, abruptly contracted into a long slender point,
rounded at base on one side and short-oblique on the other, and coarsely
doubly serrate with incurved callous-tipped teeth, when they unfold
thin, coated below with pale pubescence, pilose above with scattered
white hairs, at maturity thick and firm, dark green and rugose with
crowded sharp-pointed tubercles pointing toward the apex of the leaf
above, soft, smooth, and coated below, especially on the thin midrib and
in the axils of the slender straight veins with white hairs, 5'--7'
long, 2'--3' wide; turning a dull yellow color in the autumn; petioles
stout, pubescent, 1/3' in length; stipules obovate-oblong to
oblong-lanceolate, thin and scarious, pale-pubescent, and tipped with
clusters of rusty brown hairs. Flowers on short pedicels, in crowded
fascicles; calyx green, covered with pale hairs, divided into 5--9 short
rounded thin equal lobes; stamens with slender light yellow slightly
flattened filaments and dark red anthers; stigmas slightly exserted,
reddish purple, papillose with soft white hairs. Fruit ripening when the
leaves are about half grown, semiorbicular, rounded and bearing the
remnants of the styles or slightly emarginate at apex, rounded or
cuneate at base, 1/2' broad, the seminal cavity coated with thick rusty
brown tomentum, the broad thin wing obscurely reticulate-veined, naked
on the thickened margin, and marked by the dark conspicuous horizontal
line of union of the two carpels; seed ovoid, with a large oblique pale
hilum, a light chestnut-brown coat produced into a thin border wider
below than above the middle of the seed.

A tree, 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 2 deg. in diameter,
spreading branches forming a broad open flat-topped head, and stout
branchlets bright green, scabrate, and coated with soft pale pubescence
when they first appear, becoming light brown by midsummer, often
roughened by small pale lenticels, and in their first winter ashy gray,
orange color or light red-brown, and marked by large elevated
semiorbicular leaf-scars showing the ends of 3 conspicuous equidistant
fibro-vascular bundles, ultimately dark gray or brown. Winter-buds
ovoid, obtuse, 1/4' long, with about 12 scales, the outer broadly ovate,
rounded, dark chestnut-brown, and covered by long scattered rusty hairs,
the inner when fully grown 1/2' long, 1/8'--1/4' wide, light green,
strap-shaped, rounded and tipped at the apex with tufts of rusty hairs,
puberulous on the outer surface, slightly ciliate on the margins,
gradually growing narrower and passing into the stipules of the upper
leaves. Bark frequently 1' thick, dark brown tinged with red, divided by
shallow fissures and covered by large thick appressed scales. Wood
heavy, hard, strong, very close-grained, durable, easy to split, dark
brown or red, with thin lighter colored sapwood; largely used for
fence-posts, railway-ties, the sills of buildings, the hubs of wheels,
and in agricultural implements. The thick fragrant inner bark is
mucilaginous and demulcent, and is employed in the treatment of acute
febrile and inflammatory affections.

Distribution. Banks of streams and low rocky hillsides in deep rich
soil; comparatively common in the valley of the St. Lawrence River,
Province of Quebec, and through Ontario to northern and eastern South
Dakota, northeastern and eastern Nebraska, southeastern Kansas, and
Oklahoma to the valley of the Canadian River (McClain County), and
southward to western Florida, central Alabama and Mississippi, western
Louisiana and the valley of the upper Guadalupe (Kerr County) and Leon
Rivers (Comal County), Texas; in the South Atlantic states not common
and mostly confined to the middle districts, ascending to altitudes of
2000 deg. on the southern Appalachian foothills.


                 5. Ulmus crassifolia Nutt. Cedar Elm.

[Illustration: Fig. 286]

Leaves elliptic to ovate, acute or rounded at apex, unequally rounded or
cuneate and often oblique at base, coarsely and unequally doubly serrate
with callous-tipped teeth, when they unfold thin, light green tinged
with red, pilose above and covered below with soft pale pubescence, at
maturity thick and subcoriaceous, dark green, lustrous and roughened by
crowded minute sharp-pointed tubercles on the upper surface and soft
pubescent on the lower surface, 1'--2' long, 1/2'--1' wide, with a stout
yellow midrib, and prominent straight veins connected by conspicuous
more or less reticulate cross veinlets; usually turning bright yellow
late in the autumn; petioles stout, tomentose, 1/4'--1/2' in length;
stipules 1/2' long, linear-lanceolate, red and scarious above, clasping
the stem by their green and hairy bases, deciduous when the leaves are
about half grown. Flowers usually opening in August and sometimes also
in October, on slender pedicels 1/3'--1/2' long and covered with white
hairs, in 3--5-flowered pedunculate fascicles; calyx divided to below
the middle into oblong pointed lobes hairy at base; ovary hirsute,
crowned with two short slightly exserted stigmas. Fruit ripening in
September and rarely also in November, oblong, gradually and often
irregularly narrowed from the middle to the ends, short-stalked, deeply
notched at apex, 1/3' to nearly 1/2' long, covered with soft white
hairs, most abundant on the slightly thickened margin of the broad wing;
seed oblique, pointed, and covered by a dark chestnut-brown coat.

A tree, often 80 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
sometimes free of branches for 30 deg. or 40 deg., divided into numerous stout
spreading limbs forming a broad inversely conic round-topped head of
long pendulous branches, or while young or on dry uplands a compact
round head of drooping branches, and slender branchlets, tinged with red
and coated with soft pale pubescence when they first appear, becoming
light reddish brown, puberulous and marked by scattered minute lenticels
and by small elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars showing the ends of 3
small fibro-vascular bundles, and furnished with 2 corky wings covered
with lustrous brown bark, about 1/4' broad and continuous except when
abruptly interrupted by lateral branchlets, or often irregularly
developed. Winter-buds broadly ovoid, acute, 1/8' long, with closely
imbricated chestnut-brown scales slightly puberulous on the outer
surface, those of the inner ranks at maturity oblong, concave, rounded
at apex, thin, bright red, sometimes 3/4' long. Bark sometimes nearly 1'
thick, light brown slightly tinged with red, and deeply divided by
interrupted fissures into broad flat ridges broken on the surface into
thick scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, brittle, light brown tinged with
red, with thick lighter colored sapwood; in central Texas used in the
manufacture of the hubs of wheels, for furniture, and largely for
fencing.

Distribution. Valley of the Sunflower River, Mississippi (Morehead,
Sunflower County), through southern Arkansas, and Texas to Nuevo Leon,
ranging in western Texas from the coast to the valley of the Pecos
River; in Arkansas usually on river cliffs and low hillsides, and in
Texas near streams in deep alluvial soil and on dry limestone hills; the
common Elm-tree of Texas and of its largest size on the bottom-lands of
the Guadalupe and Trinity Rivers.

Occasionally planted as a shade-tree in the streets of the cities and
towns of Texas.


                    6. Ulmus serotina Sarg. Red Elm.

[Illustration: Fig. 287]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate, acuminate, very oblique at base,
coarsely and doubly crenulate-serrate, when they unfold coated below
with shining white hairs and puberulous above, at maturity thin and firm
in texture, yellow-green, glabrous and lustrous on the upper surface,
pale and puberulous on the midrib and principal veins below, 2'--4'
long, 1'--1-3/4' wide, with a prominent yellow midrib, about 20 pairs of
primary veins extending obliquely to the points of the teeth and often
forked near the margins of the leaf, and numerous reticular veinlets;
turning clear orange-yellow in the autumn; petioles stout, about 1/4' in
length; stipules abruptly narrowed from broad clasping bases,
linear-lanceolate, usually about 1/4' long, persistent until the leaves
are nearly fully grown. Flowers opening in September on slender
conspicuously jointed pedicels often 1/8' long, in many-flowered
glabrous racemes from 1'--1-1/2' in length; calyx 6-parted to the base,
with oblong-obovate red-brown divisions rounded at apex; ovary sessile,
narrowed below, villose. Fruit ripening early in November, stipitate,
oblong-elliptic, deeply divided at apex, fringed on the margins with
long silvery white hairs, about 1/2' long.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, comparatively
small spreading or pendulous branches often forming a broad handsome
head, and slender pendulous branchlets glabrous or occasionally
puberulous when they first appear, brown, lustrous, and marked by
occasional oblong white lenticels during their first year, becoming
darker the following season and ultimately dark gray-brown, and often
furnished with 2 or 3 thick corky wings developed during their second or
third years. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/4' long, their outer scales
oblong-obovate, dark chestnut-brown, glabrous, the inner often scarious
on the margins, pale yellow-green, lustrous and sometimes 3/4' long when
fully grown. Bark 1/4'--3/8' thick, light brown slightly tinged with
red, and divided by shallow fissures into broad flat ridges broken on
the surface into large thin closely appressed scales. Wood hard,
close-grained, very strong and tough, light red-brown, with pale yellow
sapwood.

Distribution. Limestone hills and river banks; rare and local; eastern
(near Pikeville, Pike County) and southern Kentucky (Bowling Green,
Warren County); banks of the Cumberland River, near Clarksville and
Nashville, Tennessee; northeastern Georgia (cliffs of the Coosa River,
near Rome, Floyd County); northern Alabama (Madison, Jefferson and
Tuscaloosa Counties); valley of the Arkansas River (near Van Buren,
Crawford County, _G. M. Brown_) and northwestern Arkansas (Sulphur
Springs, Benton County, and Boston Mountains near Jasper, Newton County,
_E. J. Palmer_); eastern Oklahoma (near Muskogee, Muskogee County, _B.
H. Slavin_); southwestern (Grand Tower, Jackson County, _H. A. Gleason_)
and southern Illinois (Richland County, _R. Ridgway_).

Occasionally planted as a shade-tree in the streets of cities in
northern Georgia and northern Alabama; hardy in Eastern Massachusetts.




                            2. PLANERA Gmel.


A tree, with scaly puberulous branchlets roughened by scattered pale
lenticels, and at the end of their first season by small nearly
orbicular leaf-scars marked by a row of fibro-vascular bundle-scars,
minute subglobose winter-buds covered by numerous thin closely
imbricated chestnut-brown scales, the outer more or less scarious on the
margins, the inner accrescent, becoming at maturity ovate-oblong,
scarious, bright red, 1/3'--1/2' long, marking in falling the base of
the branchlet with pale ring-like scars. Leaves alternate, 2-ranked,
ovate-oblong, acute or rounded at the narrowed apex, unequally cuneate
or rounded at base, coarsely crenately serrate with unequal gland-tipped
teeth, with numerous straight conspicuous veins forked near the margin
and connected by cross reticulate veinlets more conspicuous below than
above, when they unfold puberulous on the lower and pilose on the upper
surface, at maturity thick or subcoriaceous and scabrate; petiolate with
slender terete puberulous petioles; stipules lateral, free, ovate,
scarious, bright red. Flowers polygamo-monoecious, the staminate
fascicled in the axils of the outer scales of leaf-bearing buds,
short-pedicellate, the pistillate or perfect on elongated puberulous
pedicels in the axils of the leaves of the year in 1--3-flowered
fascicles; pedicels without bracts; calyx campanulate, divided nearly to
the base into 4 or 5 lobes rounded at apex, greenish yellow often tinged
with red; stamens inserted under the ovary in the pistillate flower,
sometimes few or 0; filaments filiform, erect, exserted; anthers broadly
ovate, emarginate, cordate; ovary ovoid, stipitate,
glandular-tuberculate, narrowed into a short style divided into 2
elongated reflexed stigmas papillo-stigmatic on the inner face, 0 in the
staminate flower; ovule anatropous; micropyle extrorse, superior. Fruit
an oblong oblique drupe, narrowed below into a short stipe, inclosed at
the base by the withered calyx, crowned by the remnants of the style,
its pericarp crustaceous, prominently ribbed on the anterior and
posterior faces, irregularly tuberculate with elongated projections, and
light chestnut-brown; seed ovoid, oblique, pointed at apex, rounded
below, without albumen; testa thin, lustrous, dark brown or nearly
black, of two coats; raphe inconspicuous; embryo erect; cotyledons
thick, unequal, bright orange color, the apex of the larger hooded and
slightly infolding the smaller, much longer than the minute radicle
turned toward the linear pale hilum.

The genus is represented by a single species.

The generic name is in memory of Johann Jacob Planer, a German botanist
and physician of the eighteenth century.


                  1. Planera aquatica Gmel. Water Elm.

[Illustration: Fig. 288]

Leaves 2'--2-1/2' long, 3/4'--1' wide, on petioles varying from
1/8'--1/4' in length, dark dull green on the upper surface, paler on the
lower surface, with a yellow midrib and veins. Flowers appearing with
the leaves. Fruit ripening in April, 1/3' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely exceeding 20' in
diameter, rather slender spreading branches forming a low broad head,
and branchlets brown tinged with red when they first appear, dark red in
their first winter, and ultimately reddish brown or ashy gray. Bark
about 1/4' thick, light brown or gray, separating into large scales
disclosing in falling the red-brown inner bark. Wood light, soft, not
strong, close-grained, light brown, with thick nearly white sapwood of
20--30 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Swamps covered with water during several months of the
year, or low river banks; valley of the Cape Fear River, North Carolina,
southward to northern Florida (Bradford County) and westward usually not
far from the coast through the Gulf states to the valleys of the
Navasota (Brazos County) and of the Colorado (Matagorda County) Rivers,
Texas, and northward through western Louisiana, eastern Oklahoma, and
Arkansas to southeastern Missouri, northeastern Mississippi (near Iuka,
Tishomingo County, _T. G. Harbison_), northern Kentucky (Henderson
County), and the valley of the lower Wabash River, Illinois;
comparatively rare and confined to the coast plain in the Atlantic
states; abundant and of its largest size in western Louisiana and
southern Arkansas.




                              3. CELTIS L.


Trees or shrubs, with thin, smooth often more or less muricate bark,
unarmed or spinose branchlets, and scaly buds. Leaves serrate or entire,
3-nerved in one species, membranaceous or subcoriaceous, deciduous;
stipules lateral, free, usually scarious, inclosing their leaf in the
bud, caducous. Flowers polygamo-monoecious or rarely monoecious,
appearing soon after the unfolding of the leaves, minute, pedicellate,
on branches of the year, the staminate cymose or fascicled at their
base, the pistillate solitary or in few-flowered fascicles from the
axils of upper leaves; calyx divided nearly to the base into 4 or 5
lobes, greenish yellow, deciduous; stamens inserted on the margin of the
discoid torus; filaments subulate, incurved in the bud, those of the
sterile flower straightening themselves abruptly and becoming erect and
exserted, shorter and remaining incurved in the perfect flower; anthers
ovoid, attached on the back just above the emarginate base; ovary ovoid,
sessile, green and lustrous, crowned with a short sessile style divided
into diverging elongated reflexed acuminate entire lobes
papillo-stigmatic on the inner face and mature before the anthers of the
sterile flower, deciduous; minute and rudimentary in the staminate
flower; ovule anatropous. Fruit an ovoid or globose drupe tipped with
the remnants of the style, with thin flesh covered by a thick firm skin,
and a thick-walled bony nutlet, reticulate-pitted in the American
species. Seed filling the seminal cavity; albumen scanty, gelatinous,
nearly inclosed between the folds of the cotyledons, or 0; testa
membranaceous, of 2 confluent coats; chalaza colored, close to the
minute hilum; embryo curved; cotyledons broad, foliaceous, conduplicate
or rarely flat, variously folded, corrugate, incumbent, or inclosing the
short superior ascending radicle.

Celtis is widely distributed through the temperate and tropical regions
of the world, fifty or sixty species being distinguished.

Trees of the American species are often disfigured by gall-making
insects which distort the buds and cause the production of dark
broom-like clusters of short slender branchlets at the end of the
branches.

_Celtis_ was the classical name of a species of Lotus.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Fruit on pedicels much longer than the petioles.
    Leaves not covered below with conspicuous reticulate veinlets, green
          on both surfaces, smooth or rough above; fruit dark purple.
                                                     1. C. occidentalis.
    Leaves covered below with a network of prominent veinlets, usually
          rough above.
      Leaves pale on the lower surface.
        Leaves broadly ovate, obliquely rounded at base, coarsely
              serrate, glabrous or slightly pilose below along the
              midrib and veins; fruit light orange-brown, the pedicels
              often 3 or 4 times longer than the petioles.
                                                        2. C. Douglasii.
        Leaves oblong-ovate, mostly cordate or occasionally rounded at
              base, entire or slightly serrate toward the apex, covered
              below with pilose pubescence; fruit dark reddish brown,
              the pedicels usually not more than twice as long as the
              petioles.
                                                      3. C. Lindheimeri.
      Leaves green on the lower surface, broadly ovate, obliquely
            rounded at base, entire, pubescent along the midrib and
            veins below, rarely smooth on the upper surface; fruit dark
            orange-red, the pedicels usually not more than twice as long
            as the petioles.
                                                       4. C. reticulata.
  Fruit on pedicels shorter or only slightly longer than the petioles.
    Leaves oblong-lanceolate, long-acuminate, unsymmetrically cuneate at
          base, often falcate, entire or more or less serrate, smooth or
          rarely roughened on the upper surface; fruit orange color or
          yellow, the pedicels shorter or somewhat longer than the
          petioles.
                                                        5. C. laevigata.
    Leaves ovate-lanceolate, acute or acuminate, obliquely rounded at
          base, coarsely serrate or nearly entire, smooth or in var.
          _georgiana_ roughened on the upper surface; fruit dark orange
          red, the pedicels usually shorter than the petioles.
                                                           6. C. pumila.


            1. Celtis occidentalis L. Hackberry. Sugarberry.

[Illustration: Fig. 289]

Leaves ovate, short-acuminate or acute at apex, obliquely rounded at
base, sharply serrate often only above the middle, thin, slightly
pubescent below on the slender midrib and veins early in the season,
becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long, 1-1/2'--2'
wide; turning yellow late in the autumn; petioles slender, glabrous,
1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers on drooping pedicels; calyx divided
usually into 5 linear acute thin and scarious lobes rounded on the back,
more or less laciniately cut, and often furnished with a tuft of pale
hairs at apex; torus hoary-tomentose. Fruit on stems 1/2'--3/4' long,
ripening in September and October and often remaining on the branches
during the winter, subglobose, ovoid or obovoid, dark purple, 1/3' in
diameter, with a thick tough skin, dark orange-colored flesh and a
thick-walled oblong pointed light brown slightly rugose nutlet; seed
pale brown.

A tree, rarely more than 40 deg.--50 deg. high with a trunk usually not more
than 2 deg. in diameter, spreading often pendulous branches forming a
round-topped head, and slender ridged light brown glabrous branchlets
marked by oblong pale lenticels, and by horizontal semioval or oblong
leaf-scars showing the ends of three fibro-vascular bundles, becoming
darker and in their second or third year often dark red-brown.
Winter-buds ovoid, pointed, flattened, about 1/4' long, with three pairs
of chestnut-brown ovate acute pubescent caducous scales closely
imbricated in two ranks, increasing in size from without inward. Bark
1'--1-1/2' thick, smooth, dark brown, and more or less thickly covered
and roughened by irregular, wart-like excrescences or by long ridges
also found on the large branches. Wood heavy, rather soft, not strong,
coarse-grained, clear light yellow, with thick lighter-colored sapwood;
used for fencing and in the manufacture of cheap furniture.

Distribution. Rocky hills and ridges; New England (rare) to Virginia and
westward to Iowa, eastern North Dakota, southwestern Missouri and
northwestern Kansas.

Often planted in some of its forms as a shade and ornamental tree in the
towns of the Mississippi valley and occasionally in the eastern states
and in Europe.

Well distinguished by its large dark fruit, _Celtis occidentalis_ is so
variable in the shape of its leaves that two principal varieties are
described as follows:


            Celtis occidentalis var. canina Sarg. Hackberry.

                          _Celtis canina_ Raf.

[Illustration: Fig. 290]

Leaves oblong-ovate, gradually narrowed into a long acuminate point,
obliquely rounded or unsymmetrically cuneate at base, finely serrate,
glabrous or rarely pilose along the midrib and veins below, 2-1/2'--6'
long and 3/4'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender, glabrous or rarely
pubescent, 1/2'--3/4' long.

A tree, often 80 deg.--100 deg. high; more common than the other forms of
_Celtis occidentalis_.

Distribution. Rich wooded slopes and bottoms, or eastward on rocky
ridges; Province of Quebec to eastern Nebraska, and southward to the
coast of Massachusetts, western New York, southern Ohio, southern
Indiana and Illinois, southwestern Missouri, southwestern Oklahoma
(Snyder, Kiowa County), and in northwestern Georgia.


        Celtis occidentalis var. crassifolia A. Gray. Hackberry.

                       _Celtis crassifolia_ Lam.

[Illustration: Fig. 291]

Leaves thicker, long-acuminate, obliquely rounded at base, usually more
coarsely serrate, rarely nearly entire, rough on the upper surface,
pilose below along the prominent midrib and veins, 3-1/2'--5' long,
2'--2-1/2' wide, much smaller in the Rocky Mountain region; petioles
villose-pubescent, rarely glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' in length, much shorter
than the pubescent pedicels of the fruit.

A tree, 100 deg.--120 deg. high; with pubescent or glabrous branchlets; rarely
shrubby. The most widely distributed form of _Celtis occidentalis_.

Distribution. Wooded slopes and rich bottoms; Virginia and along the
Appalachian Mountains to North Carolina and westward to southern
Minnesota, Missouri, central Kansas, eastern and northwestern Oklahoma,
central Nebraska, North and South Dakota, canyons of the Big Horn
Mountains, Wyoming, and northwestern Idaho, and southward to Dallas
County, Alabama, and eastern Texas.

Often cultivated in towns of the Mississippi Valley and in western
Europe, and occasionally in the eastern states.


                  2. Celtis Douglasii Plan. Hackberry.

                        _Celtis rugulosa_ Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 292]

Leaves broadly ovate to oblong-ovate, acuminate, obliquely rounded or
unsymmetrically subcordate at base, coarsely serrate, rough on the upper
surface, pale and covered below with a network of reticulate veinlets
inconspicuous early in the season, later becoming prominent, glabrous or
sparingly pilose along the under side of the stout midrib and primary
veins, 2'--2-1/2' long, 1'--2' wide; petioles stout, slightly pubescent,
1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers on slender pubescent pedicels; calyx
divided into five linear acute scarious lobes laciniately cut at apex;
torus hoary-tomentose. Fruit on slender drooping slightly pubescent or
glabrous pedicels, 1/3'--1/2' in length, subglobose to ellipsoid, light
orange-brown, lustrous, 1/3' in diameter.

A small tree or shrub rarely more than 20' high, with slender slightly
pubescent or glabrous red-brown branchlets marked by small pale
lenticels, becoming ashy gray in their second or third year. Bark rough,
red-brown or gray.

Distribution. Dry hillsides and rocky river banks; eastern Oregon from
the valley of the Deschutes and Columbia Rivers to the canyon of Snake
River, Whitman County, Washington, and to Big Willow Creek, Canyon
County, western Idaho; on the western foothills of the Wasatch
Mountains, in the canyon of Grand River, and in Diamond Valley, Utah;
southern California, near Independence, Inyo County, Hackberry Canyon,
Kern County, and Things Valley at base of Laguna Mountain, near Campo,
southern San Diego County; on Cedros Island, and in northern Lower
California; rim of the Grand Canyon, Arizona, and on the eastern
foothills of the Rocky Mountains of Colorado.

Occasionally planted in the towns of western Washington, and when
cultivated said to grow in good soil into a larger and more shapely tree
with thinner leaves.


              3. Celtis Lindheimeri K. Koch. Palo Blanco.

                        _Celtis Helleri_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 293]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate or acute, cordate or obliquely cordate or
rounded at base, entire, or crenately serrate on vigorous shoots, rough
above, pale and clothed below with white hairs, becoming by midsummer
thick and covered below with a conspicuous network of reticulate
veinlets, 1-1/2'--3' long, 3/4'--2' wide; petioles densely
villose-pubescent, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers opening toward the end
of March on pubescent pedicels; calyx divided into five oblong scarious
lobes narrowed and rounded at apex; torus tomentose. Fruit on slender
tomentose stems 1/4'--2/3' long, ripening in September and persistent on
the branches until spring, subglobose to ellipsoid, dark reddish brown,
lustrous, 1/4' in diameter.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely more than 12'--18' in
diameter, stout spreading branches forming a broad open irregular head,
and slender pubescent branchlets roughened by numerous small lenticels,
becoming darker and glabrous in their second season. Bark of the trunk
and large branches dark and covered with high thick wart-like
excrescences and ridges. Wood not strong nor durable, of little value
even for fuel.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands and on low adjacent hills of streams
flowing southward from the Edward's Plateau (Goliad, San Antonio, New
Braunfels, San Marcos) and near Austin, Travis County, Texas.


                 4. Celtis reticulata Torr. Hackberry.

[Illustration: Fig. 294]

Leaves broadly ovate, acute or acuminate, obliquely rounded at base,
entire, thick, dark green and rough or rarely smooth on the upper
surface, yellow-green and conspicuously reticulate-venulose and
sparingly pilose along the prominent midrib and veins on the lower
surface, 1-1/4'--3' long, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide; petioles stout, 1/8'--1/4'
in length, more or less densely pubescent. Flowers not seen. Fruit on
pubescent pedicels 1/3'--1/2' in length, ripening in September,
subglobose to ellipsoid, orange-red or yellow, lustrous, 1/4' in
diameter.

A tree, rarely 30 deg. high with stout ascending branches forming an open
irregular head, and slender red-brown branchlets tomentose or pubescent
early in their first season and pubescent or glabrous in their second
year; or often a shrub. Bark thick and rough.

Distribution. Dry limestone hillsides, rocky ridges and canyon slopes,
western Texas, from the valley of the upper Rio Frio, Uvalde County, to
Oklahoma (Ozark region, near Page, Le Flore County to the southwestern
borders of the state); in mountain ravines through southern New Mexico,
and in southern central and northeastern Arizona.

A variety with more pubescent serrate leaves, those on vigorous shoots
mostly cordate at base and covered above with short white hairs, is
distinguished as var. _vestita_ Sarg. A small tree with slender
pubescent branchlets and a trunk 12'--15' in diameter. In low ground,
along the North Fork of the Canadian River, near Canton, Blaine County,
Oklahoma.


          5. Celtis laevigata K. Koch. Sugarberry. Hackberry.

                    _Celtis mississippiensis_ Spach.

[Illustration: Fig. 295]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, long-pointed and acuminate at apex,
unsymmetrically rounded or cuneate or obliquely cuneate at base, often
falcate, entire or furnished with a few teeth near the apex or serrate
(var. _Smallii_ Sarg.), thin, smooth, glabrous or rarely rough above,
light green on both surfaces, 2-1/2'--5' long and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide,
with a narrow yellow midrib, slender veins arcuate and united near the
margins, and inconspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles slender,
glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers on slender glabrous pedicels;
calyx divided into five ovate-lanceolate glabrous or puberulous scarious
lobes furnished at apex with tufts of long white hairs. Fruit on
glabrous pedicels shorter or slightly longer than the petioles, ripening
in September, short-oblong to ellipsoid or obovoid, orange-red or
yellow, 1/4' in diameter; nutlet slightly rugose.

A tree, 60 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, spreading or
pendulous branches forming a broad head, and slender branchlets light
green, glabrous or pubescent when they first appear, and during their
first winter bright reddish brown, rather lustrous and marked by oblong
pale lenticels and narrow elevated horizontal leaf-scars showing the
ends of three fibro-vascular bundles; often much smaller. Winter-buds
ovoid, pointed, 1/16'--1/8' long, with chestnut-brown puberulous scales.
Bark 1/2'--2/3' thick, pale gray and covered with prominent
excrescences. Wood soft, not strong, close-grained, light yellow, with
thick lighter-colored sapwood; commercially confounded with the wood of
_Celtis occidentalis_ and its varieties, and used for the same purposes.

Distribution. Coast of Virginia to the Everglades Keys of southern
Florida, through the Gulf states to the valley of the lower Rio Grande
in Nuevo Leon, and through eastern Texas, Arkansas and Missouri to
eastern Oklahoma to the valley of the Washita River (Zarvin County) and
to Kiowa County, eastern Kansas, central Tennessee and Kentucky, and to
southern Illinois and Indiana; in Bermuda.

Often planted as a shade and street tree in the valley of the
Mississippi River and in Texas.

An arborescent form from the rocky banks of the Nueces River, western
Texas, with shorter and thicker leaves is distinguished as var.
_brachyphylla_ Sarg.; and a small shrubby form with oblong-ovate cordate
leaves and dark purplish fruit covered with a glaucous bloom, growing in
deep sand in Callihan County, Texas, has been described as var.
_anomala_ Sarg. An Arizona form is


                  Celtis laevigata var. brevipes Sarg.

                       _Celtis brevipes_ S. Wats.

[Illustration: Fig. 296]

Leaves ovate, acuminate, unsymmetrically rounded or cuneate at base,
entire or rarely furnished with occasional teeth, glabrous, dark green
and smooth on the upper surface, yellow-green on the lower surface, with
small clusters of pale hairs in the axils of the slender veins, and
inconspicuous reticulate veinlets, 1-1/2'--2' long, 3/4'--1' wide;
petioles slender, puberulous, 1/4'--1/3' in length. Fruit on glabrous
pedicels shorter or slightly longer than the petioles, short-oblong,
canary yellow, about 1/4' long.

A small tree with slender glabrous red-brown branchlets.

Distribution. Central and southern Arizona.

More distinct is the common Celtis of western Texas which has been
described as


                   Celtis laevigata var. texana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 297]

Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, unsymmetrically rounded or
cordate at base, entire or sparingly and irregularly serrate, often
subcoriaceous, dark green, smooth and granulate or rarely rough above,
green below, with a slender midrib and primary veins glabrous or
sparingly villose-pubescent and furnished with small tufts of axillary
hairs, and only slightly raised reticulate veinlets, 1-1/2'--3' long and
3/4'--1-1/2' wide; petioles slender, pale pubescent, 1/5'--1/4' in
length. Fruit on glabrous or puberulous pedicels slightly longer than
the petioles, subglobose but rather longer than broad, dark orange-red,
about 1/4' long.

An arborescent shrub or small tree rarely more than 25 deg. high, with
slender reddish glabrous or gray-brown pubescent branchlets; often
growing in clusters. Bark rough, pale or grayish and not often covered
with wart-like excrescences.

Distribution. Rocky bluffs near Dallas to New Braunfels, Texas, and
westward to western Oklahoma, and southern New Mexico; in southwestern
Missouri; in Tamaulipas and Coahuila, Mexico. The common Celtis of the
Texas Panhandle.

A shrubby form from Nolan County, Texas, with red-brown branchlets
densely pubescent in their first season, becoming puberulous during
their second year, and smaller leaves with more prominent reticulate
veinlets, on densely pubescent petioles, is distinguished as forma
_microphylla_ Sarg.


                        6. Celtis pumila Pursh.

This shrub of the eastern states is sometimes a small tree in its
southern variety,


                   Celtis pumila var. georgiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 298]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, obliquely rounded at base, entire or
sharply serrate, especially on vigorous leading shoots, thin, dark green
and rough on the upper surface, pale and more or less pubescent or
nearly glabrous along the midrib and veins below, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long
and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide; petioles slender, pubescent, 1/6'--1/4' in
length. Flowers on pubescent pedicels; calyx divided into usually five
lanceolate acuminate lobes; the disk pubescent. Fruit on pubescent
pedicels as long or slightly longer than the petioles, subglobose,
reddish purple, often covered with a glaucous bloom, 1/2' in diameter;
nutlet covered with conspicuous reticulate ridges.

A shrub or small tree occasionally 30 deg. high, with slender dark red-brown
pubescent branchlets, light red-brown and sometimes bright red-brown
before the end of their first year.

Distribution. Piedmont region of North and South Carolina, central
Georgia to western Florida; and Dallas County, Alabama; in southern
Missouri, and southern Illinois.




                             4. TREMA Lour.


Unarmed trees and shrubs with watery juices and terete branchlets.
Leaves alternate, often two-ranked, serrate, penniveined, three-nerved
from the base, short-petiolate, persistent; stipules lateral, free,
usually small, caducous. Flowers apetalous, small, monoecious, dioecious
or rarely perfect, in axillary cymes; calyx five or rarely four-parted,
the lobes induplicate, valvate or slightly imbricated in the bud, or in
perfect flowers more or less concave and induplicate; stamens five or
rarely four, opposite the calyx-lobes and inserted on their base,
occasionally present in the pistillate flower; filaments short, erect;
anthers oblong, attached on the back near the base, introrse,
two-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary sessile, rudimentary
or wanting in the staminate flower; style central, slightly or entirely
divided into two linear fleshy stigmatic branches; ovule solitary,
pendulous from the apex of the cell, anatropous; micropyle superior.
Fruit drupaceous, short-oblong to subglobose, crowned by the persistent
style; exocarp more or less fleshy; endocarp hard; seed filling the
cavity of the nutlet; testa membranaceous, albumen fleshy, often scanty;
embryo curved or slightly involute; cotyledons narrow; radicle incurved,
ascending.

Trema, with about twenty species, is widely distributed in tropical and
subtropical regions of the two hemispheres. Two species reach the coast
region and the keys of southern Florida. Of these _Trema mollis_ Lour.
is a small tree, and _Trema Lamarckiana_ Bl., which in Florida has been
noticed only on Key Largo, where it grows as a small shrub, is widely
distributed over the Bahamas and many of the West Indian islands.


                         1. Trema mollis Lour.

                        _Trema floridana_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 299]

Leaves 2-ranked, ovate, abruptly acuminate at apex, rounded, cordate and
often oblique at base, finely serrate with incurved or rounded apiculate
teeth, dark green and scabrate above, covered with pale tomentum below,
3'--4' long, 1'--2-1/2' wide; petioles stout, tomentose, about 2/5' in
length; stipules narrow, acuminate, covered with long white hairs, about
one third as long as the petioles. Flowers in early spring, subtended by
minute scarious deciduous bracts on short slender pedicels in bisexual
many-flowered pedunculate villose cymes about as long as the petioles;
calyx 5-lobed, the lobes oblong, acute and incurved at apex, villose on
the outer surface; staminate with glabrous filaments and slightly
exserted yellow anthers; pistillate with a style divided to the base.
Fruit short-oblong, pale yellowish brown, 1/6'--1/5' in diameter.

A fast-growing short-lived tree, in Florida occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high,
with a tall trunk 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in diameter, small crowded branches
ascending at narrow angles, and stout hoary-tomentose red-brown 2-ranked
branchlets. Bark thin, chocolate-brown, roughened by numerous small
wart-like excrescences, and separating into small appressed papery
scales.

Distribution. Rich hummocks; near the shores of Bay Biscayne, in the
Everglades, and on the southern keys, Florida; common; often springing
up where the ground has been burned over, or otherwise cleared of its
forests; on many of the West Indian islands and in Mexico.




                             XII. MORACEAE.


Tree or shrubs, with milky juice, scaly or naked buds, and stalked
alternate simple leaves with stipules. Flowers monoecious or dioecious,
in ament-like spikes, or in heads on the outside of a receptacle or on
the inside of a closed receptacle; calyx of the staminate flower
2--6-lobed or parted; stamens 1--4, inserted on the base of the calyx;
calyx of the pistillate flower of 2--6 partly united sepals; ovary
1--2-celled; styles 1 or 2; ovule pendulous. Fruits drupaceous, inclosed
in the thickened calyx of the flower and united into a compound fruit
(_syncarp_). The Mulberry family is widely distributed with fifty-four
genera confined largely to the warmer parts of the world. Three genera
only, all arborescent, are indigenous in North America, although
_Broussonetia papyrifera_ Vent., the Paper Mulberry, a tree related to
the Mulberry and a native of eastern Asia, and the Hop and the Hemp are
more or less generally naturalized in the eastern and southern states.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN GENERA.

  Flowers on the outside of the receptacle; buds scaly.
    Flowers in ament-like spikes; syncarp oblong and succulent.
                                                               1. Morus.
    Staminate flowers racemose, the pistillate capitate; syncarp dry and
          globose.
                                                             2. Maclura.
  Flowers on the inside of a closed receptacle; buds naked; syncarp
        subglobose to ovoid, succulent.
                                                               3. Ficus.




                         1. MORUS L. Mulberry.


Trees or shrubs, with slender terete unarmed branches prolonged by one
of the upper axillary buds, scaly bark, fibrous roots, and winter-buds
covered by ovate scales closely imbricated in 2 ranks, increasing in
size from without inward, the inner accrescent, marking in falling the
base of the branch with ring-like scars. Leaves conduplicate in the bud,
alternate, serrate, entire or 3-lobed, 3--5-nerved at base,
membranaceous or subcoriaceous, deciduous; stipules inclosing their leaf
in the bud, lateral, lanceolate, acute, caducous. Flowers monoecious or
dioecious, the staminate and pistillate on different branches of the
same plant or on different plants, minute, vernal, in pedunculate
clusters from the axils of caducous bud-scales or of the lower leaves of
the year; staminate in elongated cylindric spikes; calyx deeply divided
into 4 equal rounded lobes; stamens 4, inserted opposite the lobes of
the calyx under the minute rudimentary ovary, filaments filiform,
incurved in the bud, straightening elastically and becoming exserted,
anthers attached on the back below the middle, introrse, 2-celled, the
cells reniform, attached laterally to the orbicular connective, opening
longitudinally; pistillate sessile, in short-oblong densely flowered
spikes; calyx 4-parted, the lobes ovate or obovate, thickened, often
unequal, the 2 outer broader than the others, persistent; ovary ovoid,
flat, sessile, included in the calyx, crowned by a central style divided
nearly to the base into 2 equal spreading filiform villose white
stigmatic lobes; ovule suspended from the apex of the cell,
campylotropous; micropyle superior. Drupes ovoid or obovoid, crowned
with the remnants of the styles, inclosed in the succulent thickened and
colored perianth of the flower and more or less united into a more or
less juicy compound fruit; flesh subsucculent, thin; walls of the nutlet
thin or thick, crustaceous. Seed oblong, pendulous; testa, thin,
membranaceous; hilum minute, apical; embryo incurved in thick fleshy
albumen; cotyledons oblong, equal; radicle ascending, incumbent.

Morus with eight or nine species is confined to eastern temperate North
America, the elevated regions of Mexico, Central America and western
South America, southern and western Asia, Indo-China, China, Japan, the
Bonin Islands and the mountains of the Indian Archipelago. Two species
occur in North America. The most valuable species, _Morus alba_ L., a
native of China and Formosa, and largely cultivated in many countries
for its leaves, which are the best food of the silkworm, has been
planted in large quantities in the eastern United States; and _Morus
nigra_ L., probably a native of Persia, has been introduced into the
southern and Pacific states for its large dark-colored juicy fruit.
Morus produces straight-grained durable light brown or orange-colored
valuable wood, and sweet acidulous and refreshing fruits.

_Morus_ is the classical name of the Mulberry-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Leaves coated below with pale pubescence; lobes of the stigma long;
        syncarp oblong, dark purple.
                                                     1. M. rubra (A, C).
  Leaves glabrous or pubescent below; lobes of the stigma short; syncarp
        subglobose or short-ovoid, nearly black.
                                            2. M. microphylla (C, E, H).


                    1. Morus rubra L. Red Mulberry.

[Illustration: Fig. 300]

Leaves ovate, oblong-ovate or semiorbicular, abruptly contracted into a
long broad point or acute at apex, more or less deeply cordate or
occasionally truncate at base, coarsely and occasionally doubly serrate
with incurved callous-tipped teeth, often, especially on vigorous young
shoots, 3-lobed by broad deep oblique lateral rounded sinuses, when they
unfold yellow-green, slightly pilose on the upper surface and
hoary-tomentose on the lower surface, at maturity thin, dark bluish
green, glabrous, smooth or scabrate above, pale and more or less
pubescent below with short white hairs thickest on the orange-colored
midrib, and on the primary veins arcuate and united near the margins and
connected by reticulate veinlets, or sometimes hoary-tomentose below
(var. _tomentosa_ Bureau), 3'--5' long, 2-1/2'--4' wide; turning bright
yellow in the autumn; petioles stout, hoary-tomentose at first, becoming
glabrous, 3/4'--1-1/4' in length; stipules lanceolate, acute, abruptly
enlarged and thickened at base, sometimes tinged with red above the
middle, coated with long white hairs, and often 1' in length. Flowers
appearing with the unfolding of the leaves; staminate in narrow spikes
2'--2-1/2' long, on stout light green peduncles covered with pale hairs;
calyx divided nearly to the base into oblong concave lobes rounded at
apex and hirsute on the outer surface; stamens with slightly flattened
filaments narrowed from the base to the apex, and bright green anthers,
their connectives orbicular, conspicuous, bright green; pistillate in
oblong densely flowered spikes, 1' long, on short hairy peduncles, a few
male flowers being sometimes mixed with them; calyx divided nearly to
the base into 4 thick concave lobes rounded at apex, rounded or slightly
keeled on the back, the 2 outer lobes twice as wide as the others, as
long as and closely investing the glabrous light green ovary. Fruit:
syncarp at first bright red when fully grown, 1'--1-1/4' long, becoming
dark purple or nearly black and sweet and juicy when fully ripe; drupes
about 1/32' long, with a thin fleshy outer coat and a light brown
nutlet; seed ovoid, acute, with a thin membranaceous light brown coat.

A tree, 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely exceeding 3 deg.--4 deg. in
diameter, stout spreading smooth branches forming a dense broad
round-topped shapely head, and slender slightly zigzag branchlets dark
green often tinged with red, glabrous, more or less coated with pale
pubescence, and covered with oblong straw-colored spots when they first
appear, becoming in their first winter light red-brown to orange color
and marked by pale lenticels and by large elevated horizontal nearly
orbicular concave leaf-scars displaying a row of prominent
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and in their second and third years dark
brown slightly tinged with red. Winter-buds ovoid, rounded or pointed at
apex, 1/4' long, with 6 or 7 chestnut-brown scales, those of the outer
rows broadly ovate, rounded, and slightly thickened on the back,
puberulous, ciliate on the margins, and much shorter than those of the
next rows, the inner scales scarious, coated with pale hairs,
oblong-lanceolate, rounded or acute at apex, and 1/2'--2/3' long at
maturity. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, dark brown tinged with red and divided
into irregular elongated plates separating on the surface into thick
appressed scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, rather tough,
coarse-grained, very durable, light orange color, with thick lighter
colored sapwood; largely used for fencing, in cooperage, and in
boat-building.

Distribution. Intervales in rich soil and on low hills; western
Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Long Island to southern Ontario, central
Michigan, southeastern Minnesota, eastern Iowa, southeastern South
Dakota, eastern Nebraska, central Kansas and Oklahoma, and southward to
the shores of Bay Biscayne and Cape Romano, Florida, and to the canyon of
the Devil's River, Valverde County, Texas; most abundant and of its
largest size in the basin of the lower Ohio River and on the foothills
of the southern Appalachian Mountains; ascending to altitudes of 2000 deg.

Occasionally planted, especially in the southern states, for its fruit
valued for fattening hogs and as food for poultry. A few natural
varieties, distinguished for the large size and good quality of their
fruit, or for their productiveness, are occasionally propagated by
pomologists.


        2. Morus microphylla Buckl. Mulberry. Mexican Mulberry.

                _Morus celtidifolia_ Sarg., not H. B. K.

[Illustration: Fig. 301]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, rounded or rarely truncate, or often
on vigorous shoots cordate at the broad base, and 3-lobed with shallow
lateral sinuses and broad coarsely serrate lobes, when they unfold
coated below with pale tomentum, and puberulous above, at maturity thin
and firm in texture, dark green and often roughened on the upper surface
by minute pale tubercles, and paler, smooth or scabrate, and glabrous or
coated with soft pubescence on the lower surface, and often hirsute with
short stiff pale hairs on the broad orange-colored midrib, and on the
primary veins connected by conspicuous reticulate veinlets, rarely more
than 1-1/2' long and 3/4' wide; turning yellow in the autumn; petioles
slender, hoary-tomentose, becoming pubescent, 1/3' in length; stipules
linear-lanceolate, acute, sometimes falcate, white and scarious, coated
with soft pale tomentum, about 1/2' long. Flowers usually dioecious,
staminate short-pedicellate, in short many-flowered spikes, 1/2'--3/4'
long; calyx dark green, covered on the outer surface with soft pale
hairs, deeply divided into equal rounded lobes reddish toward the apex;
stamens with bright yellow anthers, their connectives conspicuous, dark
green; pistillate sessile in few-flowered spikes, rarely 1/3' in length;
calyx divided to the base into thick rounded lobes, the 2 outer lobes
much broader than the others, dark green, covered with pale scattered
hairs; ovary green and glabrous, with short stigmatic lobes. Fruit:
syncarp 1/2' long, red becoming dark purple or nearly black, sweet and
palatable; drupe 1/6' long, ovoid, rounded at the ends, with a thin
fleshy outer covering and a thick-walled light brown nutlet; seed ovoid,
pointed, pale yellow.

A tree, sometimes 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 12'--14' in
diameter, and slender branchlets covered when they first appear with
soft white hairs, soon becoming glabrous or nearly so, and in their
first winter light orange-red and marked by small lenticels and small
horizontal nearly orbicular elevated concave leaf-scars displaying a
ring of fibro-vascular bundle-scars; often a shrub. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, sharp-pointed, and covered by thin lustrous chestnut-brown ovate
rounded scales scarious on the margins, those of the inner rows
ovate-oblong, rounded at apex, pale-pubescent on the outer surface, and
nearly 1' long when fully grown. Bark smooth, sometimes nearly 1/2'
thick but usually thinner, light gray slightly tinged with red, deeply
furrowed and broken on the surface into slightly appressed scales. Wood
heavy, hard, close-grained, dark orange color or sometimes dark brown,
with thick light-colored sapwood.

Distribution. Dry limestone hills, or westward only in elevated mountain
canyons in the neighborhood of streams; valley of the Colorado River,
Texas, southward into Mexico and through the mountain regions of western
Texas and southern New Mexico to the Santa Rita Mountains and the canyons
of the Colorado Plateau, Arizona.




                            2. MACLURA Nutt.


                       _Toxylon (Ioxylon)_ Rafn.

A tree, with thick milky slightly acrid juice, thick deeply furrowed
dark orange-colored bark, stout tough terete pale branchlets, with thick
orange-colored pith, lengthening by an upper axillary bud, marked by
pale orange-colored lenticels and armed with stout straight axillary
spines, short stout spur-like lateral branchlets from buds at the base
of the spines, and thick fleshy roots covered by bright orange-colored
bark exfoliating freely in long thin persistent papery scales. Leaves
involute in the bud, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate and apiculate
at apex, rounded, cuneate or subcordate at base, entire, penniveined,
the veins arcuate near the margins and connected by conspicuous
reticulate veinlets; petioles elongated, slender, terete, pubescent;
stipules lateral, nearly triangular, minute, hoary-tomentose, caducous.
Flowers dioecious, light green, minute, appearing in early summer; calyx
4-lobed, the lobes imbricated in aestivation; the staminate long
pedicellate, in short or ultimately elongated racemes borne on long
slender drooping peduncles from the axils of crowded leaves on the
spur-like branchlets of the previous year; calyx ovoid, gradually
narrowed into the slender pubescent pedicel, coated on the outer surface
with pale hairs, divided to the middle into equal acute boat-shaped
lobes; stamens 4, inserted opposite the lobes of the calyx on the
margins of the minute thin pulvinate disk; filaments flattened, light
green, glabrous, infolded above the middle in the bud, with the anthers
inverted and back to back, straightening abruptly in anthesis and
becoming exserted; anthers oblong, attached on the back near the middle,
introrse, 2-celled, the cells attached laterally to a minute oblong or
semiorbicular connective, free and spreading above and below, opening by
longitudinal lateral slits; pistillate sessile in dense globose
many-flowered heads on short stout peduncles axillary on shoots of the
year; calyx ovoid, divided to the base into oblong thick concave lobes,
rounded, thickened, and covered with pale hairs at the apex, longer than
the ovary and closely investing it, the 2 outer lobes much broader than
the others, persistent and inclosing the fruit; ovary ovoid, compressed,
sessile, green, and glabrous; style covered by elongated slender
filiform white stigmatic hairs; ovule suspended from the apex of the
cell, anatropous. Drupes oblong, compressed, rounded and often notched
at apex, acute at base, with thin succulent flesh, and a thin
crustaceous light brown nutlet, joined by the union of the thickened and
much elongated perianths of the flowers into a globose compound fruit
saturated with milky juice, mammillate on the surface by their thickened
rounded summits, light yellow-green, usually of full size but seedless
on isolated pistillate individuals. Seed oblong, compressed, rounded at
base, oblique and marked at apex by the conspicuous oblong pale hilum,
without albumen; seed-coat membranaceous, light chestnut-brown; embryo
recurved; cotyledons oblong, nearly equal; radicle elongated, incumbent,
ascending.

The genus is represented by a single species of eastern North America.

The generic name is in compliment to William Maclure, distinguished
geologist.


           1. Maclura pomifera Schn. Osage Orange. Bow Wood.

                _Toxylon_ (_Ioxylon_) _pomiferum_ Rafn.

[Illustration: Fig. 302]

Leaves 3'--5' long, 2'--3' wide; turning bright clear yellow before
falling in the autumn; petioles 1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers: racemes
of the staminate flowers 1'--1-1/2' long; heads of the pistillate
flowers, 3/4'--1' in diameter. Fruit 4'--5' in diameter, ripening in the
autumn, and soon falling to the ground.

A tree, sometimes 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a short trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
and stout erect ultimately spreading branches forming a handsome open
irregular round-topped head, and branchlets light green often tinged
with red and coated with soft pale pubescence when they first appear,
soon becoming glabrous, light brown slightly tinged with orange color
during their first winter, and ultimately paler. Winter-buds
depressed-globose, partly immersed in the bark, covered by few closely
imbricated ovate rounded light chestnut-brown ciliate conspicuous
scales. Bark 2/3'--1' thick, and deeply and irregularly divided into
broad rounded ridges separating on the surface into thin appressed
scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, very strong, flexible,
coarse-grained, very durable, bright orange color turning brown on
exposure, with thin light yellow sapwood of 5--10 layers of annual
growth; largely used for fence-posts, railway-ties, wheel-stock, and
formerly by the Osage and other Indians west of the Mississippi River
for bows and war-clubs. The bark of the roots contains moric and
morintannic acid, and is used as a yellow dye. The bark of the trunk is
sometimes used in tanning leather.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands; southern Arkansas to southern Oklahoma
and southward in Texas to about latitude 35 deg. 36'; most abundant and of
its largest size in the valley of the Red River in Oklahoma.

Largely planted in the prairie regions of the Mississippi basin as a
hedge plant, and occasionally in the eastern states; hardy in New
England; occasionally naturalized beyond the limits of its natural
range.




                            3. FICUS L. Fig.


Trees, with milky juice, naked buds, stout branchlets, thick fleshy
roots frequently produced from the branches and developing into
supplementary stems. Leaves involute, entire and persistent in American
species; stipules inclosing the leaf in a slender sharp-pointed bud-like
cover, interpetiolar, embracing the leaf-bearing axis and inclosing the
young leaves, deciduous. Flower-bearing receptacle subglobose to ovoid,
sessile or stalked, solitary by abortion or in pairs in the axils of
existing or fallen leaves, surrounded at base by 3 anterior bracts
distinct or united into an involucral cup bearing on the interior at the
apex numerous rows of minute triangular viscid bracts closing the
orifice, those of the lower rows turned downward and infolding the upper
flowers, those immediately above these horizontal and forming a more or
less prominent umbilicus. Flowers sessile or pedicellate, the pedicels
thickening and becoming succulent with the ripening of the fruit,
unisexual, often separated by chaffy scales or hairs; calyx of the
staminate flower usually divided into 2--6 sepals; stamen 1; filament
short, erect; anther innate, ovoid, broad and subrotund, 2-celled, the
cells opening longitudinally, 0 in the pistillate flower; sepals or
lobes of the calyx of the pistillate flower usually narrower than those
of the staminate flower; ovary sessile, erect or oblique, surmounted by
the lateral elongated style crowned by a 2-lobed stigma; ovule suspended
from the apex or lateral below the apex of the cell, anatropous. Fruit
mostly immersed in the thickened succulent receptacle, obovoid or
reniform; flesh thin, mucilaginous; nutlet with a flat crustaceous
minutely tuberculate shell. Seed suspended; testa membranaceous; embryo
incurved, in thin fleshy albumen, cotyledons equal or unequal, longer
than the incumbent radicle.

Ficus, of which about six hundred species have been described, is
largely distributed through the topics of both hemispheres, the largest
number of species being found on the islands of the Indian Archipelago
and the Pacific Ocean. A few species extend beyond the tropics into
southern Florida, Mexico, Argentina, southern Japan and China, the
countries bordering the Mediterranean, the Canary Islands, and South
Africa. Two species of the section _Urostigma_ with monoecious flowers
occur in tropical Florida. _Ficus Carica_ L., probably a native of the
Mediterranean basin, is cultivated in the southern states and in
California for its large sweet succulent fruits, the figs of commerce.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Receptacles subglobose, sessile or short-stalked; leaves oblong,
        usually pointed at the ends.
                                                        1. F. aurea (D).
  Receptacles obovoid, long-stalked; leaves broadly ovate, cordate at
        base.
                                                   2. F. brevifolia (D).


                     1. Ficus aurea Nutt. Wild Fig.

[Illustration: Fig. 303]

Leaves oblong, usually narrowed at the ends, acute or acuminate, with a
short broad point at apex, cuneate or rarely broad and rounded at base,
2'--5' long, 1-1/2'--3' wide, thick and coriaceous, dark yellow-green
and lustrous above, paler and less lustrous below, with a broad light
yellow midrib slightly grooved on the upper side, and numerous obscure
primary veins arcuate and united near the margins and connected by fine
closely reticulated veinlets, continuing to unfold during a large part
of the year; usually falling during their second season; petioles stout,
slightly grooved, 1/2'--1' in length; stipules ovate-lanceolate, thick,
firm, tinged with red, about 1' long. Flowers: receptacles developing in
succession as the branch lengthens, subglobose, sessile or
short-stalked, solitary or in pairs, the orifice lateral closed and
marked by a small point formed by the union of the minute bracts,
becoming 1/3' in diameter and yellow when fully grown, ultimately
turning bright red; flowers reddish purple, separated by minute reddish
chaff-like scales more or less laciniate at apex, sessile or
long-pedicellate; calyx of the staminate flower divided to below the
middle into 2 or 3 broad lobes rather shorter than the stout flattened
filaments; lobes of the anther oblong, attached laterally to the broad
connective; calyx of the pistillate flower divided to the middle into 4
or 5 narrow lobes, closely investing the ovate sessile ovary. Fruit
ovoid, immersed in the thickened reddish purple walls of the receptacle;
seed ovoid, rounded at the ends, with a thin light brown coat and a
large lateral oblong pale hilum.

A broad round-topped epiphytal tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, germinating and
growing at first on the branches and trunks of other trees and sending
down to the ground stout aerial roots which gradually growing together
form a trunk often 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, the growth of additional roots
from the branches extending the tree over a large area, and terete pithy
light orange-colored branchlets marked by pale lenticels, conspicuous
stipular scars, large slightly elevated horizontal oval leaf-scars
displaying a marginal ring of large pale fibro-vascular bundle-scars,
and smaller elevated concave circular scars left by the receptacles in
falling. Bark smooth, ashy gray, light brown tinged with red, 1/2'
thick, and broken on the surface into minute appressed scales disclosing
in falling the nearly black inner bark. Wood exceedingly light, soft,
weak, coarse-grained, perishable in contact with the ground, light
brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Hummocks on the shores and islands of southern Florida;
from the Indian River on the east coast and Tampa Bay on the west coast,
to the southern keys; common and now rapidly spreading over the eastern
and southern borders of the Everglades; attaining its largest size in
the neighborhood of Bay Biscayne; on the Bahama Islands.


                2. Ficus brevifolia Nutt. Fig. Wild Fig.

                   _Ficus populnea_ Sarg., not Willd.

[Illustration: Fig. 304]

Leaves broadly ovate or rarely obovate, contracted into a short broad
point or occasionally rounded at apex, rounded, truncate or cordate at
base, 2-1/2'--5' long, 1-1/2'--5' wide, thin and firm, dark green and
lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower, with a light yellow
midrib, and slender remote primary veins arcuate and united near the
margins and connected by finely reticulate veinlets; petioles slender,
sometimes 1' in length; stipules ovate-lanceolate, 1/2' long, tinged
with red. Flowers: receptacles obovoid, solitary or in pairs, yellow
until fully grown, ultimately turning bright red and becoming 1/4'--1/2'
long, on stout drooping stalks 1/4'--1' in length; flowers sessile or
pedicellate, separated by minute chaff-like scales more or less
laciniate at apex; calyx of the staminate flower divided nearly to the
base into three or four broad acute lobes; calyx of the pistillate
flower with narrow lobes shorter than the ovoid pointed ovary. Fruit
ovoid; seed ovoid, with a membranaceous light brown coat and an oblong
lateral pale hilum.

An epiphytal tree, rarely 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, spreading branches occasionally developing aerial roots and
forming an open irregular head, and terete branchlets light red and
slightly puberulous when they first appear, becoming brown tinged with
orange and later with red, and marked by minute pale lenticels, narrow
stipular scars, large elevated horizontal oval or semiorbicular
leaf-scars showing a marginal row of conspicuous fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, and elevated concave receptacle scars. Wood light, soft,
close-grained, light orange-brown or yellow, with thick hardly
distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Usually on dry slightly elevated coral rocks; Florida from
the shores of Bay Biscayne to the Everglades Keys, and on several of the
southern keys to Key West; not common; on the Bahama Islands and in
Cuba.




                            XIII. OLACACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juices, their stems sometimes twining, and
alternate usually entire persistent leaves, without stipules. Flowers
perfect or polygamous, in axillary cymes or racemes, rarely solitary;
calyx 4 to 6-lobed; petals 4--6, inserted on a hypogynous disk, free or
united into a campanulate or tubular corolla; stamens 4--12, inserted on
the tube of the corolla; filaments free, rarely united; anthers oblong,
introrse, opening longitudinally; ovary superior or partly inferior,
free or immersed in the disk, 1--4-celled; styles mostly united; stigmas
entire or lobed; ovules 1--3 in each cell of the ovary. Fruit
drupaceous, naked or nearly inclosed in the enlarged disk, 1-celled,
1-seeded; seed pendulous; embryo minute, erect, in copious fleshly
albumen; radicle superior.

Olacaceae with twenty-five genera and a large number of species is
confined to the tropics, and is most abundant in those of the Old World.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Corolla-lobes short; stamens as many as its lobes; drupe almost
        inclosed in the enlarged disk of the flower; branches unarmed.
                                                           1. Schoepfia.
  Corolla-lobes elongated; stamens twice as many as its lobes; drupe
        nearly naked; branchlets armed.
                                                             2. Ximenia.




                          1. SCHOEPFIA Schreb.


Trees or shrubs with slender unarmed branchlets. Leaves entire,
subcoriaceous, petiolate. Flowers small, perfect in axillary cymes,
rarely solitary; calyx disciform, obscurely 4-toothed, or nearly entire,
petals 4, 5 or rarely 6, united, their tips free, valvate; stamens
opposite the petals, filaments free, anthers attached by the back; ovary
partly immersed in the disk, 3-celled; style elongated, stigma 3-lobed;
ovules 3 in each cell, pendulous from the free apex of the axile
placentas. Fruit nearly inclosed in the enlarged disk of the flower, the
stone crustaceous or chartaceous.

Schoepfia with twelve or fourteen species is distributed in the New
World from southern Florida and Lower California to Brazil and Peru, and
in the Old World from southern Japan and southern and western China to
the East Indies and the eastern Himalayas.

The generic name is in compliment to Johann David Schoepf, German
physician and botanist, and traveler in North America and the West
Indies.


                 1. Schoepfia chrysophylloides Planch.

                 _Schoepfia Schreberi_ Small, not Gmel.

[Illustration: Fig. 305]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-ovate, often slightly falcate, acuminate at
apex, cuneate and often unsymmetric at base, light green and lustrous
above, paler below, 1-1/2'--3' long, 3/4'--1-1/4' wide, and on vigorous
shoots sometimes 4' long and 1-3/4' wide; petioles stout, wing-margined,
1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers sessile, pink or red, in axillary 1--3-
usually 2-flowered clusters on peduncles 1/24'--1/6' in length; calyx
cup-shaped, the rim slightly dilated, almost filled by the fleshy disk;
corolla ovate-cylindric, 1/8'--1/6' long, 4-lobed, the lobes ovate,
acute, united, reflexed; stamens 4, adnate to the base of the lobes of
the corolla; anthers sessile; ovary mostly immersed in the disk; style
not more than 1/24' long; Fruit ovoid or ovoid-oval scarlet, 2/5'--1/2'
in length; stone crustaceous; seed not seen.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, small
erect branches and slender pale gray unarmed branchlets. Bark thin,
grayish brown, closely and regularly reticulated.

Distribution. In sandy or rocky soil; banks of the Caloosahatchee River,
Lee County, near Miami and at Cocoanut Grove, Dade County, and on the
southern keys, Florida; on the Bahama Islands, and in Cuba, Jamaica, and
Guatamala.




                             2. XIMENIA L.


Trees and shrubs, with terete armed or unarmed branchlets. Leaves
entire, subcoriaceous, often fascicled, short-petiolate. Flowers
perfect, white, on slender pedicels, in short axillary cymes or rarely
solitary; calyx small, 4-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud,
persistent; petals 4 or 5, hypogynous, narrow, bearded on their inner
face, valvate in the bud, reflexed above the middle; stamens twice as
many as the petals; filaments free, filiform; anthers linear, attached
on the back near the base, 2-celled, the cells opening laterally, their
connective apiculate at apex; ovary 4-celled below, only the apex
1-celled, externally 4-grooved, glandular at base, gradually narrowed
into the slender style; stigma entire, subcapitate; ovules linear,
solitary in each cell, pendulous from the apex of the axile placenta,
anatropous; raphe dorsal; micropyle superior. Fruit ovoid or globose;
exocarp thick and succulent, endocarp crustaceous or subligneous; seed
filling the cavity of the endocarp, pendulous, surrounded by a thin
spongy coat; testa membranaceous; cotyledons elliptic; embryo minute,
erect; raphe terete.

Ximenia with four or five species is widely distributed on tropical
shores of the two worlds.

_Ximenia_ commemorates the name of Francisco Ximenes, a Dominican priest
who published in Mexico in 1615 a work on the plants and animals of that
country.


                        1. Ximenia americana L.

[Illustration: Fig. 306]

Leaves oblong or elliptic, rounded and often emarginate and apiculate at
apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, glabrous, bright green and
lustrous above, pale below, 1-1/4'--2-1/2' long, 3/5'--1-1/4' wide, with
slightly thickened revolute margins, a prominent midrib and obscure
primary veins; petioles slender, narrow wing-margined at apex,
1/5'--2/5' in length. Flowers bell-shaped, fragrant, about 1/4' long, on
slender pedicels in the axils of minute acuminate caducous bractlets, in
3 or 4-flowered clusters on peduncles 1/5'--1/3' long; calyx-lobes
acute, petals elliptic and rounded or obtusely pointed at apex,
yellowish white, leathery, conspicuously bearded on the inner surface
from base nearly to apex. Fruit broad-ovoid to subglobose, bright
yellow, with thin acid flesh, 1'--1-1/4' long, on slender pedicels about
1/3' in length, in usually 2 or 3-fruited drooping clusters; stone
ovoid, apiculate at apex, covered with minute pits, light red; seed
yellow, with bright orange-colored cotyledons.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 2-1/2'--3-1/2' in
diameter, spreading branches armed with stout straight spines usually
3/4'--1' in length, and slender branchlets slightly angled and light
reddish brown when they first appear, becoming terete and light gray or
red-brown and marked by numerous lenticels; more often a shrub with long
vine-like stems. Bark close, dark red, astringent. Wood very heavy,
tough, hard, close-grained, compact, brown tinged with red with
lighter-colored sapwood. Hydrocyanic acid has been obtained from the
fruit.

Distribution. Florida, near Eustis Lake, Lake County, to the southern
keys, attaining its largest size on the west coast and on Long Key in
the Everglades; common on the shores of the Antilles and southward to
Brazil, and on those of west tropical Africa, the Indian peninsula, the
islands of the Malay Archipelago, New Guinea, Australia, and on those of
many of the islands of the south Pacific Ocean.

Section 3. Flowers perfect or unisexual; calyx 5-lobed; ovary superior,
1-celled; ovule solitary, rising from the bottom of the cell; fruit
inclosed in the thickened calyx; leaves persistent.




                           XIV. POLYGONACEAE.


Trees, with alternate coriaceous stalked leaves, their stipules
sheathing the stem. Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; stamens 8; ovary
3-celled; ovule orthotropous. Fruit a nutlet, inclosed in the thickened
calyx-tube; seed erect; embryo axillary in ruminate farinaceous albumen;
radicle superior, ascending, turned toward the hilum. Of this, the
Buckwheat family with thirty widely distributed genera, only Coccolobis
is arborescent in North America.




                          1. COCCOLOBIS P. Br.


Trees or shrubs. Leaves coriaceous, entire, orbicular, ovate, obovate,
or lanceolate, petiolate, their stipules inclosing the branch above the
node with membranaceous truncate entire brown persistent sheaths.
Flowers jointed on ebracteolate pedicels, in 1 or few-flowered fascicles
subtended by a minute bract and surrounded by a narrow truncate
membranaceous sheath, each pedicel and those above it being surrounded
by a similar sheath, the fascicles gathered in elongated terminal and
axillary racemes inclosed at the base of the sheath of the nearest leaf
and sometimes also in a separate sheath; calyx cup-shaped, the lobes
ovate, rounded, thin, white, reflexed after anthesis, and thickening and
inclosing the nutlet; stamens with filiform or subulate filaments
dilated and united at base into a short discoid cup adnate to the tube
of the calyx; anthers ovoid, introrse, 2-celled, the cells parallel,
opening longitudinally; ovary free, sessile, 3-angled, contracted into a
short stout style, divided into three short or elongated stigmatic
lobes. Fruit ovoid or globose, rounded or acute and crowned at apex by
the persistent lobes of the calyx, narrowed at base; flesh thin and
acidulous, more or less adnate to the thin crustaceous or bony wall of
the nutlet often divided on the inner surface near the base into several
more or less intrusive plates. Seed subglobose, acuminate at apex,
3--6-lobed; testa membranaceous, minutely pitted, dark red-brown, and
lustrous.

Coccolobis is confined to the tropics of the New World, with about one
hundred and twenty species distributed from southern Florida to Mexico,
Central America, Brazil, and Peru. It possesses astringent properties
sometimes utilized in medicine. Many of the species produce hard dark
valuable wood.

_Coccolobis_, from {kokkos} and {lobos}, is in allusion to the character
of the fruit.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Fruits crowded, in drooping racemes; leaves broadly ovate to
        suborbicular, cordate at base.
                                                      1. C. uvifera (D).
  Fruits not crowded, in erect or spreading racemes; leaves ovate to
        oblong-lanceolate.
                                                   2. C. laurifolia (D).


                 1. Coccolobis uvifera Jacq. Sea Grape.

[Illustration: Fig. 307]

Leaves broadly ovate to suborbicular rounded or sometimes short-pointed
at apex, deeply cordate at base, with undulate margins, thick and
coriaceous, minutely reticulate-venulose, dark green and lustrous above,
paler and puberulous below, 4'--5' long, 5'--6' wide, with a stout often
bright red midrib frequently covered below with pale hairs, and about 5
pairs of conspicuous primary veins red on the upper side, arcuate near
the margins and connected by cross veinlets; gradually turning red or
scarlet and falling during their second or third years; petioles short,
stout, flattened, puberulous, abruptly enlarged at base, leaving in
falling large pale elevated orbicular or semiorbicular scars; stipular
sheath 1/8' broad, slightly puberulous, persistent during 2 or 3 years.
Flowers appearing almost continuously throughout the year on slender
puberulous pedicels 1/8' long, in 1--6-flowered subsessile fascicles, in
terminal and axillary thick-stemmed many-flowered racemes 6'--14' in
length; calyx 1/8' across when expanded, the lobes puberulous on the
inner surface and rather longer than the red stamens; ovary oblong, with
short stigmatic lobes. Fruit crowded, in long hanging racemes, ovoid to
obovoid, 3/4' long, gradually narrowed into a stalk-like base, purple or
greenish white, translucent, with thin juicy flesh, and a thin-walled
light red nutlet.

A tree, in Florida rarely more than 15 deg. high, with a short gnarled
contorted trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, stout branches forming a round
compact head, and stout terete branchlets, with thick pith, light orange
color, marked by oblong pale lenticels, gradually growing darker in
their second and third years; frequently a shrub, with semiprostrate
stems; in the West Indies often 50 deg. tall. Bark about 1/16' thick,
smooth, light brown and marked by large irregular pale blotches. Wood
very heavy, hard, close-grained, dark brown or violet color, with thick
lighter colored sapwood; sometimes used in cabinet-making.

Distribution. Saline shores and beaches; Florida, from Mosquito Inlet to
the southern keys on the east coast, and from Tampa Bay to Cape Sable on
the west coast; common on the Bermuda and Bahama Islands, in the
Antilles, and in South America from Colombia to Brazil.


              2. Coccolobis laurifolia Jacq. Pigeon Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 308]

Leaves ovate, ovate-lanceolate or obovate-oblong, rounded or acute at
apex, rounded or cuneate at base, with slightly undulate revolute
margins, thick and firm, bright green above, paler below, 3'--4' long,
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a conspicuous pale midrib and 3 or 4 pairs of
remote primary veins connected by prominent reticulate veinlets;
petioles stout, flattened, 1/2' in length, abruptly enlarged at base;
stipular sheath glabrous, 1/2' wide. Flowers in early spring, on slender
pedicels 1/4' long, in few or 1-flowered fascicles on racemes terminal
on short axillary branches of the previous year, and 2'--3' in length;
calyx 1/8' across, the cup-shaped lobes rather shorter than the stamens,
with slender yellow filaments enlarged at base, and dark orange-colored
anthers; ovary oblong, with elongated stigmatic lobes. Fruit in erect or
spreading sparsely-fruited racemes, ripening during the winter and early
spring, ovoid, narrowed at base, rounded at apex, dark red, 1/3' long,
with thin acidulous flesh and a hard thin-walled light brown nutlet.

A glabrous tree, 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in
diameter, spreading branches forming a dense round-topped head, slender
terete slightly zigzag branchlets usually contorted and covered with
light orange-colored bark, becoming darker and tinged with red in their
second or third year. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, strong, brittle,
close-grained, rich dark brown tinged with red, with thick lighter
colored sapwood; occasionally used in cabinet-making.

Distribution. One of the largest and most abundant of the tropical trees
of the seacoast of southern Florida from Cape Canaveral to the keys and
on the west coast from Cape Romano to Cape Sable; common on the Bahama
Islands, on many of the Antilles, and in Venezuela.




                           XV. NYCTAGINACEAE.


Trees with alternate stalked persistent leaves without stipules. Flowers
perfect or unisexual; calyx corolla-like, 5-lobed; stamens 5--8; ovule
campylotropous. Fruit anthocarpus, crowned by the persistent teeth of
the calyx. Seed erect; cotyledons unequal, folded round the soft scanty
albumen; radicle short, inferior, turned toward the hilum. A family of
about twenty genera widely distributed chiefly in the warmer and
tropical parts of the New World, with a single arborescent
representative in North America.




                           1. TORRUBIA Vell.


Glabrous or pubescent unarmed trees or shrubs. Leaves opposite or rarely
alternate, entire, short-stalked. Flowers perfect, or rarely unisexual;
calyx tubular or funnel-shaped, elongated, 5-lobed, the lobes plaited in
the bud, erect or spreading; stamens inserted on the base of the calyx
under the ovary, minute or rudimentary in the unisexual pistillate
flower; filaments folded in the bud, filiform, unequal, free; anthers
oblong, introrse, 2-celled, the cells parallel, opening longitudinally;
ovary oblong-ovoid, sessile, 1-celled, gradually narrowed into a
columnar style; stigmas capitate, lacerate. Fruit fleshy, cylindric,
costate, smooth; utricle elongated, with a thin membranaceous wall
confluent with the thin transparent coat of the erect seed.

Torrubia, with about 15 species is confined to tropical America, one
species extending into southern Florida. The genus was named in honor of
Joseph Torrubia, a Spanish naturalist of the 18th century.


                 1. Torrubia longifolia Britt. Blolly.

                       _Pisonia longifolia_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 309]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded or occasionally emarginate at apex,
gradually narrowed at base, 1'--1-1/2' long, 1/2' wide, thick and firm,
with slightly thickened undulate margins, light green and glabrous,
paler on the lower than on the upper surface, with a stout midrib and
obscure veins; petioles stout, channeled, 1/2' in length. Flowers
perfect or unisexual, autumnal, greenish yellow, short-pedicellate, in
terminal long-stalked few-flowered panicled cymes, with slender
divergent branches, the ultimate divisions 2 or 3-flowered; bracts and
bractlets minute, acute; calyx funnel-shaped, divided nearly to the
middle into acute erect lobes about half as long as the stamens and as
long as the style. Fruit ripening in the winter or early spring,
prominently costate with ten rounded ribs, fleshy, smooth, bright red,
3/4' long; utricle terete, light brown.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg.--50 deg. high, with an erect or inclining trunk,
15'--20' in diameter, stout spreading branches forming a compact
round-topped head, and slender terete branchlets light orange color when
they first appear, later often producing numerous short spur-like
lateral branchlets, light reddish brown or ashy gray, and marked by
large elevated semiorbicular or lunate leaf-scars; usually much smaller;
often shrubby. Bark about 1/16' thick, light red-brown, and broken into
thin appressed scales. Wood heavy, rather soft, weak, coarse-grained,
yellow tinged with brown, with thick darker colored sapwood.

Distribution. Sea-beaches and the shores of salt water lagoons; Cape
Canaveral, Florida to the southern keys, attaining its largest size in
Florida on Elliott's Key and Old Rhodes Key; on the Bahama Islands and
in Cuba.

_Subdivision 2._ Petalatae. Flowers with both calyx and corolla (_without
a corolla in Lauraceae, in Liquidambar in Hamamelidaceae, in Euphorbiaceae,
in some species of Acer, in Reynosia, Condalia, and Krugiodendron in
Rhamnaceae, in Fremontia in Sterculiaceae, in Calyptranthes in Myrtaceae,
and in Conocarpus in Combretaceae_).

Section 1. Polypetalae. Corolla of separate petals.

A. Ovary superior (_partly inferior in Hamamelidaceae; inferior in Malus,
Sorbus, Crataegus and Amelanchier in Rosaceae_).




                           XVI. MAGNOLIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, branchlets lengthening by large
terminal or the flower-bearing branchlets by upper axillary buds, the
other axillary buds obtuse, flattened, and rudimentary, bitter aromatic
bark, and thick fleshy roots. Leaves alternate, conduplicate and
inclosed in their stipules in the bud, feather-veined, petiolate.
Flowers perfect, large, solitary, terminal, pedicellate, inclosed in the
bud in a stipular caducous spathe; sepals and petals imbricated in the
bud, inserted under the ovary, deciduous; stamens and pistils numerous,
imbricated in many ranks, the stamens below the pistils on the surface
of an elongated receptacle ripening into a compound fruit of 1--2-seeded
follicles or samara; ovules 2, collateral, anatropous. Four of the ten
genera of the Magnolia family are represented in North America; of these
two are arborescent.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Anthers introrse; mature carpels, fleshy, opening on the back at
        maturity, persistent; seed-coat thick, pulpy, and bright
        scarlet; leaves entire, or auriculate at base.
                                                            1. Magnolia.
  Anthers extrorse; mature carpels dry, indehiscent, deciduous;
        seed-coat dry and coriaceous; leaves lobed or truncate.
                                                        2. Liriodendron.




                        1. MAGNOLIA L. Magnolia.


Trees, with ashy gray or brown smooth or scaly bark, branchlets
conspicuously marked by large horizontal or longitudinal leaf-scars and
by narrow stipular rings, and large terete acuminate or often
obtusely-pointed more or less gibbous winter-buds usually broadest at
the middle, their scales large membranaceous stipules adnate to the base
of the petioles and deciduous with the unfolding of each successive
leaf, the petiole of the outer stipule rudimentary, adnate on the
straight side of the bud, and marked at its apex by the scar left by the
falling of the last leaf of the previous season. Leaves entire,
sometimes auriculate, persistent or deciduous, often minutely punctate,
their numerous primary veins arcuate and more or less united within the
margins. Flowers appearing in the American species after the leaves,
their stipular spathes thin and membranaceous; sepals 3, spreading or
reflexed; petals 6--12 in series of 3's, concave, erect or spreading;
stamens early deciduous, their filaments shorter than the 2-celled
introrse anthers and terminating in apiculate fleshy connectives; ovary
sessile, 1-celled; style short, recurved, stigmatic on the inner face;
ovules horizontal. Fruit a scarlet or rusty brown cone formed of the
coalescent 2-seeded drupaceous persistent follicles opening on the back;
seeds suspended at maturity by long thin cords of unrolled spiral
vessels; seed-coat thick, drupaceous, the outer portion becoming fleshy
and at maturity pulpy, red or scarlet, the inner crustaceous; embryo
minute at the base of the fleshy homogeneous albumen, its radicle next
the hilum; cotyledons short and spreading.

Magnolia with about thirty species is confined to eastern North America,
southern Mexico, and eastern and southern Asia, seven species growing
naturally in the United States. All the parts are slightly bitter and
aromatic, and the dried flower-buds are sometimes used in medicine.
Several species from eastern Asia and their hybrids producing flowers
before the appearance of the leaves are favorite garden plants in the
United States.

The genus is named in honor of Pierre Magnol (1638--1715), professor of
botany at Montpellier.


                 CONSPECTUS OF NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Styles deciduous from the follicles of the fruit; petals greenish or
        yellow; winter-buds silky tomentose.
    Petals greenish; branchlets glabrous.
                                                 1. M. acuminata (A, C).
    Petals canary yellow; branchlets pubescent.
                                                      2. M. cordata (C).
  Styles persistent on the follicles of the fruit.
    Petals white.
      Leaves coriaceous, persistent; fruit and branchlets tomentose.
                                                  3. M. grandiflora (C).
      Leaves thin, deciduous (semipersistent in 4).
        Leaves cuneate at base.
          Leaves scattered along the branches, pale and pubescent below;
                winter-buds glabrous or silky pubescent.
                                                4. M. virginiana (A, C).
          Leaves crowded at the ends of the flowering branches, green
                and glabrous below; winter-buds glabrous.
                                                 5. M. tripetala (A, C).
        Leaves cordate at the narrow base; fruit tomentose; winter-buds
              hoary-tomentose.
                                                  6. M. macrophylla (C).
    Petals pale yellow or creamy white; leaves obovate-spathulate,
          auriculate, crowded at the ends of the flowering branches;
          winter-buds glabrous.
      Leaves acute; petals pale yellow; tips of the mature carpels
            elongated, straight or incurved.
                                                   7. M. Fraseri (A, C).
      Leaves bluntly pointed; petals creamy white; tips of the mature
            carpels short, incurved.
                                                   8. M. pyramidata (C).


       1. Magnolia acuminata L. Cucumber-tree. Mountain Magnolia.

[Illustration: Fig. 310]

Leaves oblong-ovate, oblong-obovate or elliptic, abruptly short-pointed
at apex, rounded, cuneate or rarely slightly cordate at base, when they
unfold densely villose below and slightly villose above, and at maturity
thin, yellow-green and glabrous on the upper surface, paler and glabrous
or villose-pubescent on the lower surface, 6'--10' long, and 4'--6'
wide, with often undulate margins; turning dull yellow or brown in the
autumn before falling; petioles slender, pubescent early in the season,
becoming glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers on hairy soon glabrous
pedicels 1/2'--3/4' long, bell-shaped, green or greenish yellow covered
with a glaucous bloom; sepals membranaceous, acute, 1'--1-1/2' long,
soon reflexed; petals 6, ovate or obovate, concave, pointed, erect,
2-1/2'--3' long, those of the outer row rarely more than 1' wide and
much wider than those of the inner row. Fruit ovoid or oblong, often
curved, glabrous, dark red, 2-1/2'--3' long, rarely more than 1' thick;
seeds obovoid, acute, compressed, about 1/2' long.

A pyramidal tree, 60 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter,
comparatively small branches spreading below and erect toward the top of
the tree, and slender branchlets coated at first with soft pale caducous
hairs, soon bright red-brown, lustrous, and marked by numerous small
pale lenticels, turning gray during their third season. Winter-buds:
terminal, oblong-ovoid, acuminate, thickly covered with long lustrous
white hairs, 1/2'--3/5' long, and about three times as long as the
obtuse compressed lateral buds nearly surrounded by the narrow elevated
leaf-scars conspicuously marked by a double row of large fibro-vascular
bundle-scars. Bark 1/3'--1/2' thick, furrowed, dark brown, and covered
by numerous thin scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained,
durable, and light yellow-brown, with thin lighter colored often nearly
white sapwood of usually 25--30 layers of annual growth; occasionally
manufactured into lumber used for flooring and cabinet-making.

Distribution. Low mountain slopes and rocky banks of streams; southern
Ontario, western New York, central to western Pennsylvania, southern
Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, and along the Appalachian Mountains to
northern Georgia and to central Kentucky and Tennessee; banks of the
Savannah River above Augusta, and in the neighborhood of Lumpkin,
Stewart County, Georgia; northern Alabama, northeastern, northwestern
and south-central Mississippi; Eagle Rock, Barry County, and on bluffs
of the Mississippi River, Cape Girardeau County, Missouri, and Baxter
County, Arkansas; in eastern Oklahoma (Page, Le Flore County); in West
Feliciana Parish, Louisiana, represented by var. _ludoviciana_ Sarg.
differing in its broadly obovate, oval or ovate leaves, and in its
larger flowers, 3-1/2'--4' long, the outer petals 1-1/2' wide. Rare at
the north; most abundant and of its largest size at the base of the high
mountains of the Carolinas and Tennessee up to altitudes of 4000 deg.

Often planted as an ornamental tree in the eastern states and in
northern and central Europe.


                       2. Magnolia cordata Michx.

               _Magnolia acuminata_ var. _cordata_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 311]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic, abruptly short-pointed or rounded at
apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate, broad-cuneate or rarely rounded at
base, when they unfold villose-pubescent more densely on the lower than
on the upper surface, at maturity dark green, lustrous and glabrous
above, paler and covered below with short matted pale hairs, 4' or 5'
long, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib and primary
veins; remaining green until late in the autumn and turning brown and
falling after severe frost; petioles slender, covered when they first
appear with matted silky white hairs, becoming glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in
length. Flowers on stout pedicels, 1/4'--1/3' long and covered with long
silky white hairs, cup-shaped, bright canary yellow; sepals ovate,
acute, soon reflexed; petals 6, erect and spreading, 1-1/2'--1-3/4'
long, 1/2'--3/4' wide. Fruit oblong, often curved, glabrous, dark red,
1'--1-1/2' long, 1/2'--3/4' thick.

A shrub, 4 deg.--8 deg. high, flowering freely when not more than half that
size; or in gardens a tree sometimes 20 deg.--30 deg. tall with a trunk 12'--15'
in diameter, spreading branches forming a round-topped head, and slender
dark dull red-brown branchlets thickly covered during two years with
short pubescence and marked by small pale lenticels. Winter-buds
oblong-obovate, often falcate, bluntly pointed, thickly covered with
matted pale hairs, the terminal 1/2' long and 1/4' thick, the axillary
1/6'--1/4' in length and nearly surrounded by the narrow leaf-scars
marked by an irregular row of minute fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Bark
dark brown, and covered with small closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Dry Oak-woods, valley of the Savannah River, Georgia;
Spears Plantation six miles south and Goshen Plantation sixteen miles
south of Augusta, Richmond County, near Mayfield, Hancock County, and
Bath, Richmond County. Often cultivated, and preserved in gardens for
more than a century; not rediscovered as a wild plant until 1913 (_L. A.
Berckmans_); hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts.


                  3. Magnolia grandiflora L. Magnolia.

                        _Magnolia foetida_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 312]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-obovate or ovate, acute and bluntly pointed or
acuminate at apex, cuneate at base, coriaceous, bright green and shining
above, more or less densely coated below with rusty tomentum, 5'--8'
long, 2'--3' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary veins, deciduous
in the spring at the end of their second year; petioles stout,
rusty-tomentose, 1'--2' in length. Flowers on stout hoary-tomentose
pedicels 1/2'--1' long, opening from April or May until July or August,
fragrant, 7'--8' across, the petaloid sepals and 6 or sometimes 9 or 12
petals abruptly narrowed at base, oval or ovate, those of the inner
ranks often somewhat acuminate, concave, and coriaceous, 3'--4' long and
1-1/2'--2' wide; base of the receptacle and lower part of the filaments
bright purple. Fruit ovoid or oval, rusty brown, covered while young
with thick lustrous white tomentum, at maturity rusty-tomentose, 3'--4'
long, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' thick; seeds obovoid or triangular-obovoid, more or
less flattened, 1/2' long.

A tree, of pyramidal habit, 60 deg.--100 deg. or rarely 120 deg.--135 deg. high, with a
tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. or occasionally 4 deg.--4-1/2 deg. in diameter,
rather small spreading branches, and branchlets hoary-tomentose at
first, slightly tomentose in their second year, and much roughened by
the elevated leaf-scars displaying a marginal row of conspicuous
fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds pale or rusty-tomentose, the
terminal 1'--1-1/2' in length. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, gray or light
brown, and covered with thin appressed scales rarely more than 1' long.
Wood hard, heavy, creamy white, soon turning brown with exposure, hardly
distinguishable from the sapwood of 60--80 layers of annual growth;
little used except for fuel.

Distribution. Rich moist soil on the borders of river swamps and
Pine-barren ponds, or rarely on high rolling hills; coast of North
Carolina southward to De Soto County, Florida, extending across the
peninsula, and in the neighborhood of the coast through the other Gulf
states to the valley of the Brazos River, Texas, ranging inland to
central Mississippi and to southern Arkansas, and northward on the
bluffs of the lower Mississippi River to the mouth of the Yazoo River,
Mississippi; best developed and most abundant on the bluff formation of
the lower Mississippi River, and of its largest size in West Feliciana
Parish, Louisiana.

Largely cultivated as an ornamental tree in all countries of temperate
climate; in the eastern United States precariously hardy as far north as
Trenton, New Jersey. Numerous varieties, differing in the form of the
leaf and in the duration of the flowering period, have appeared in
European nurseries; of these, the most distinct is the variety
_exoniensis_ Loud., with a rather fastigiate habit and broadly elliptic
leaves densely clothed with rusty tomentum on the lower surface; this
variety begins to flower when only a few feet high.


            4. Magnolia virginiana L. Sweet Bay. Swamp Bay.

                          _Magnolia glauca_ L.

[Illustration: Fig. 313]

Leaves oblong or elliptic and obtuse or oblong-lanceolate, covered when
they unfold with long white silky deciduous hairs, at maturity bright
green, lustrous and glabrous on the upper surface, finely pubescent and
pale or nearly white on the lower surface, 4'--6' long, 1-1/2'--3' wide,
with a conspicuous midrib and primary veins; falling in the north late
in November and in early winter, at the south remaining on the branches
with little change of color until the appearance of the new leaves in
the spring; petioles slender, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers on slender
glabrous pedicels 1/2'--3/4' long, creamy white, fragrant, globular,
2'--3' across, continuing to open during several weeks in spring and
early summer; sepals membranaceous, obtuse, concave, shorter than the
9--12, obovate often short-pointed concave petals. Fruit ellipsoidal,
dark red, glabrous, 2' long and 1/2' thick; seeds obovoid, oval, or
suborbicular, much flattened, 1/4' in length.

A slender tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely more than 15'--20' in
diameter, with small mostly erect ultimately spreading branches and
slender bright green branchlets hoary-pubescent when they first appear,
soon glabrous, marked by narrow horizontal pale lenticels, gradually
turning bright red-brown in their second summer; usually a low shrub.
Winter-buds covered with fine silky pubescence, the terminal 1/2'--3/4'
long.

Distribution. Deep swamps; Magnolia, Essex County, Massachusetts, Long
Island, New York, and southward from New Jersey generally in the
neighborhood of the coast to southeastern Virginia and occasionally in
North and South Carolina and Georgia; in Pennsylvania as far west as the
neighborhood of Chambersburg, Franklin County. In the southern states
usually replaced by the var. _australis_ Sarg., differing in the thick
silky white pubescence on the pedicels and branchlets. Leaves persistent
without change of color until spring, elliptic to ovate, oblong-obovate
or rarely lanceolate, 1'--4' wide; petioles puberulous, pubescent or
tomentose.

A tree, 60 deg.--90 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk occasionally 3 deg. in
diameter, small short branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and
branchlets usually becoming glabrous in their second year; in southern
Florida often much smaller and on the Everglade Keys shrubby, and
generally not more than 10 deg. tall. Wood soft, light brown tinged with
red, with thick creamy white sapwood of 90--100 layers of annual growth;
used in the southern states in the manufacture of broom handles and
other articles of wooden ware.

Distribution. Borders of Pine-barren ponds, in shallow swamps and on
rich hummocks usually in the neighborhood of the coast; swamps of the
lower Cape Fear River near Wilmington, New Hanover County, North
Carolina, to southern Florida; common in the interior of the Florida
peninsula, and westward to the valley of the Nueces River, Texas;
ranging inland to Cuthbert, Randolph County, western Georgia, to
Tuskegee and Selma, Alabama, Tishomingo County, northeastern
Mississippi, and to Winn and Natchitoches Parishes, western Louisiana;
less abundant west of the Mississippi River than eastward.

The northern form is often cultivated as a garden plant in the eastern
states and in Europe.

x _Magnolia major_ or _Thompsoniana_, a probable hybrid between
_Magnolia virginiana_ and _Magnolia tripetala_, raised in an English
nursery a century ago, and still a favorite garden plant, is
intermediate in character between these species.


            5. Magnolia tripetala L. Umbrella-tree. Elkwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 314]

Leaves obovate-lanceolate, narrowed at the ends, acute or bluntly
pointed at apex, when they unfold nearly glabrous above, covered below
with thick silky caducous tomentum, at maturity membranaceous, glabrous,
18'--20' long, 8'--10' wide, with a thick prominent midrib and numerous
slender primary veins; falling in the autumn with little change of
color; petioles stout, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers on slender glabrous
pedicles covered with a glaucous bloom and 2'--2-1/2' long, cup-shaped,
white; sepals narrowly obovate, 5'--6' long, 1-1/2' wide, thin, light
green, becoming reflexed; petals 6 or 9, concave, coriaceous, ovate,
short-pointed, erect, those of the outer row 4'--5' long and sometimes
2' wide, much longer and broader than those of the inner rows; filaments
bright purple. Fruit ovoid, glabrous, 2-1/2'--4' long, rose color when
fully ripe; seeds obovoid, 1/2' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a straight or often inclining trunk rarely
more than 18' in diameter, stout irregularly developed contorted
branches wide-spreading nearly at right angles with the stem or turning
up toward the ends and growing parallel with it, and stout brittle
branchlets green during their first season, becoming in their first
winter bright reddish brown, very lustrous, and marked by occasional
minute scattered pale lenticels, and by the large oval horizontal
slightly raised leaf-scars with scattered fibro-vascular bundle-scars,
brown during their second and gray during their third season; generally
much smaller, sometimes surrounded by several stems springing from near
the base of the trunk and growing into a large bush surmounted by the
head of the central stem. Winter-buds: terminal, acute or bluntly
pointed, purple, glabrous, covered with a glaucous bloom, usually about
1' long; axillary globose, the color of the branch. Bark 1/2' thick,
light gray, smooth, and marked by many small bristle-like excrescences.
Wood light, soft, close-grained, not strong, light brown, with creamy
white sapwood of 35--40 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Deep rather moist rich soil along the banks of mountain
streams or the margins of swamps, and widely distributed in the
Appalachian Mountain region, but nowhere very common; valley of the
Susquehanna River, Pennsylvania (Lancaster and York Counties), to
southern Alabama, middle Kentucky and Tennessee, and northeastern
Mississippi; in central and southwestern Arkansas; and in southeastern
Oklahoma (near Page, Le Flore County, _G. W. Stevens_), extending in
Virginia and North Carolina nearly to the coast; of its largest size in
the valleys along the western slopes of the Great Smoky Mountains in
Tennessee up to altitudes of 2000 deg.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the northern states, and in
northern and central Europe.


       6. Magnolia macrophylla Michx. Large-leaved Cucumber-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 315]

Leaves obovate or oblong, acute or often abruptly narrowed and acute or
rounded at apex, narrowed and cordate at base, bright green and glabrous
on the upper surface, silvery gray and pubescent, especially along the
stout midrib and primary veins on the lower surface, 20'--30' long,
9'--10' wide; falling in the autumn with little change of color;
petioles stout, 3'--4' in length, at first tomentose, becoming
pubescent. Flowers on stout hoary-tomentose pedicels 1'--1-1/2' long,
soon becoming glabrous or puberulous, cup-shaped, fragrant, 10'--12'
across; sepals membranaceous, ovate or oblong, rounded at apex, much
narrower than the 6 ovate concave thick creamy white petals with a rose
colored blotch at base, 6'--7' long and 3'--4' wide, at maturity
reflexed above the middle, those of the inner row narrower and often
somewhat acuminate. Fruit ovoid to nearly globose, pubescent, 2-1/2'--3'
long, bright rose color when fully ripe; seeds obovoid, compressed, 2/3'
long.

A tree, 30 deg.--50 deg. high, with a straight trunk 18'--20' in diameter, stout
wide-spreading branches forming a broad symmetrical round-topped head,
and stout brittle branchlets hoary-tomentose when they first appear,
light yellow-green, pubescent, and conspicuously marked during their
first winter by the large irregularly shaped sometimes longitudinal
slightly raised leaf-scars with many scattered fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, turning reddish brown during their second and gray during
their third season. Winter-buds: terminal, bluntly pointed, covered with
a thick coat of snowy white tomentum, 1-3/4'--2' long, 1/2'--3/4' thick;
lateral, much flattened, brownish, pubescent, 1/8'--1/4' long. Bark
generally less than 1/4' thick, smooth, light gray, divided on the
surface into minute scales. Wood hard, close-grained, light, not strong,
light brown, with thick light yellow sapwood of about 40 layers of
annual growth.

Distribution. Sheltered valleys in deep rich soil; nowhere common, and
growing generally in isolated groups of a few individuals; Piedmont
region of central North Carolina to middle and western Florida, southern
Alabama, southern and northeastern Mississippi to the valley of the
Green River, Kentucky; in eastern and western Louisiana; probably most
abundant in south-central Mississippi.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern states, and
in the temperate countries of Europe; hardy as far north as eastern
Massachusetts.


7. Magnolia Fraseri Walt. Mountain Magnolia. Long-leaved Cucumber-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 316]

Leaves obovate-spatulate, acute or bluntly pointed at apex, cordate and
conspicuously auriculate at base, bright green and often marked on the
upper surface when young with red along the principal veins, glabrous,
10'--12' long, 6'--7' wide, or on vigorous young plants sometimes of
twice that size; falling in the autumn without change of color; petioles
slender, 3'--4' in length. Flowers on stout glabrous pedicels covered
with a glaucous bloom and 1'--1-1/2' long, pale yellow, sweet scented,
8'--10' across; sepals narrowly obovate, rounded at apex, 4'--5' long,
deciduous almost immediately after the opening of the bud, shorter than
the 6 or 9 obovate acuminate membranaceous spreading petals contracted
below the middle, those of the inner rows narrower and conspicuously
narrowed below. Fruit oblong, glabrous, bright rose-red when fully ripe,
4'--5' long, 1-1/2'--2' thick, the mature carpels ending in long
subulate persistent tips; seeds obovoid, compressed, 5/8' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a straight or inclining trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, often undivided for half its length or separating at the
ground into a number of stout diverging stems, regular wide-spreading or
more or less contorted and erect branches, and stout brittle branchlets
soon becoming bright red-brown, lustrous, marked by numerous minute pale
lenticels and in their first winter by the low horizontal leaf-scars
with crowded compressed fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and grayish in
their second year. Winter-buds: terminal, glabrous, purple, 1-1/2'--2'
long, 1/2' thick; axillary, minute and obtuse. Bark rarely more than
1/3' thick, dark brown, smooth, covered by small excrescences, or on old
trees broken into minute scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained, not
strong, light brown, with thick creamy white sapwood of 30--40 layers of
annual growth.

Distribution. Valleys of the streams of the southern Appalachian
Mountains from southwestern Virginia and northeastern Kentucky to
northern Georgia; in northern Alabama and in West Feliciana Parish,
Louisiana (Laurel Hill, _R. S. Cocks_); in South Carolina eastward to
the neighborhood of Aiken, Aiken County; probably most abundant and of
largest size on the upper waters of the Savannah River in South Carolina
up to altitudes of 4000 deg.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern states,
and in the temperate countries of Europe; hardy as far north as eastern
Massachusetts.


                     8. Magnolia pyramidata Pursh.

[Illustration: Fig. 317]

Leaves obovate-spatulate, the apex usually abruptly narrowed into a
short blunt point, auriculate at base, with more or less spreading
lobes, thin, glabrous, light yellow-green on the upper, pale and
glaucous on the lower surface, particularly while young, 5-1/2'--8-1/2'
long, from 3-1/2'--4-1/2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, numerous
slender forked primary veins and conspicuously reticulate veinlets;
petioles slender, 1-1/4'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers creamy white,
3-1/2'--4' across when fully expanded; sepals oblong-obovate, abruptly
narrowed to the short-pointed apex, much shorter than the
oblong-acuminate petals gradually narrowed from near the middle to the
base. Fruit oblong, 2'--2-1/2' long, bright rose color, the mature
carpels ending in short incurved persistent tips; seeds ovoid,
compressed.

A slender tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with ascending branches, slender
branchlets bright red-brown and marked by small pale lenticels and by
the small low oval leaf-scars with many crowded fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, later becoming ashy gray.

Distribution. Low rich soil in the neighborhood of streams; near
Cuthbert, Randolph County, Georgia; near Mariana, Jackson County, and
Bristol, Liberty County, Florida; valleys of the Choctawhatchee River,
Dale County, and of the Pea River, Coffee County, and near Selma, Dallas
County, Alabama; rare and local.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in western Europe.




                           2. LIRIODENDRON L.


Trees, with deeply furrowed brown bitter bark, and slender branchlets
marked by elevated leaf-scars and narrow stipular rings, and compressed
obtuse winter-buds, their scales membranaceous stipules joined at the
edges, accrescent, strap-shaped, often slightly falcate, oblique at the
unequal base, tardily deciduous after the unfolding of the leaf. Leaves
recurved in the bud by the bending down of the petiole near the middle,
bringing the apex of the blade to the base of the bud, sinuately
4-lobed, heart-shaped, truncate or slightly cuneate at base, truncate at
apex by a broad shallow sinus, and minutely apiculate. Flowers appearing
after the unfolding of the leaves, cup-shaped, conspicuous, inclosed in
the bud in a 2-valved stipular membranaceous caducous spathe; sepals
spreading or reflexed, ovate-lanceolate, concave, greenish white, early
deciduous; petals erect, rounded at base, early deciduous; filaments
filiform, half as long as the linear 2-celled extrorse anthers adnate to
the outer face of the connective terminating in a short fleshy point;
pistils imbricated on the elongated sessile receptacle into a
spindle-shaped column; ovary inserted by a broad base; style narrowly
acuminate, laterally flattened, appressed; stigmas short, recurved at
the summit; ovules 2, suspended from near the middle of the ventral
suture. Fruit a narrow light brown cone formed of the closely imbricated
dry and woody indehiscent carpels consisting of a laterally compressed
4-ribbed pericarp, the lateral ribs confluent into the margins of the
large wing-like lanceolate compressed style marked vertically by a thin
sutural line, the carpels deciduous when ripe in the autumn from the
slender elongated axis of the fruit persistent on the branch during the
winter. Seeds suspended, 2 or single by abortion; testa thin,
coriaceous, and marked by a narrow prominent raphe; embryo minute at the
base of the fleshy albumen, its radicle next the hilum.

Liriodendron, widely distributed in North America and Europe during the
cretaceous period, is now represented by two species, one in eastern
North America, the other _L. chinensis_ Sarg. in central China.

_Liriodendron_, from {lirion} and {dendron}, is descriptive of the
lily-like flower.


        1. Liriodendron Tulipifera L. Yellow Poplar. Tulip-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 318]

Leaves dark green and shining on the upper, paler on the lower surface,
5'--6' long and broad; turning clear yellow in the autumn before
falling; petioles slender, angled, 5'--6' in length. Flowers 1-1/2'--2'
deep, on slender pedicels 3/4'--1' long; petals green conspicuously
marked with orange at base. Fruit 2-1/2'--3' long, about 1/2' thick,
ripening late in September and in October, the mature carpels
1/2'--1-1/2' long and about 1/4' wide.

A tree, sometimes nearly 200 deg. high, with a straight trunk 8 deg.--10 deg. in
diameter, destitute of branches for 80 deg.--100 deg. from the ground, short,
comparatively small branches forming a narrow pyramidal, or in old age a
broader spreading head, and slender branchlets light yellow-green and
often covered with a glaucous bloom during their first summer, reddish
brown, lustrous, and marked during their first winter by many small pale
lenticels and roughened by the elevated orbicular or semiorbicular
leaf-scars marked by numerous small scattered fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, and dark gray during their third year. Winter-buds dark
red covered by a glaucous bloom, the terminal 1/2' long, much longer
than the lateral buds. Bark thin and scaly on young trees, becoming
deeply furrowed, brown, and 1'--2' thick. Wood light, soft, brittle, not
strong, easily worked, light yellow or brown, with thin creamy white
sapwood; largely manufactured into lumber used in construction, the
interior finish of houses, boat-building, and for shingles, brooms, and
wooden ware. The intensely acrid bitter inner bark, especially of the
roots, is used domestically as a tonic and stimulant, and hydrochlorate
of tulipiferine, an alkaloid separated from the bark, possesses the
property of stimulating the heart.

Distribution. Deep rich rather moist soil on the intervales of streams
or on mountain slopes; Worcester County, Massachusetts, to southwestern
Vermont (Pownal, Bennington County), and westward to southern Ontario,
southern Michigan and northeastern Missouri, and southward to Orange
County (Rock Spring Run), Florida, southern Alabama, Mississippi and
Louisiana, southeastern Missouri and northeastern Arkansas; most
abundant and of its largest size in the valleys of the lower Ohio basin,
and on the slopes of the mountains of North Carolina and Tennessee up to
altitudes of 5000 deg.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern states, and in
western and central Europe.




                            XVII. ANONACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, slender terete branchlets marked by
conspicuous leaf-scars, and fleshy roots. Leaves alternate, conduplicate
in the bud, entire, feather-veined, petiolate, without stipules. Flowers
perfect, solitary, axillary or opposite the leaves; sepals 3, valvate in
the bud; petals 6, in 2 series, imbricated or valvate in the bud;
stamens numerous, inserted on the subglobose or hemispheric receptacle,
with distinct filaments shorter than their fleshy connectives
terminating in a broad truncate glandular appendage; anthers introrse,
2-celled, opening longitudinally; pistils inserted on the summit of the
receptacle; ovary 1-celled; ovules 1 or many, anatropous. Fruit baccate
or compound. Seeds inclosed in an aril; seed-coat thin, crustaceous,
smooth, brown, and lustrous; albumen ruminate, deeply penetrated by the
folds of the inner layer of the seed-coat; embryo minute; radicle next
the hilum. Two of the forty-eight or fifty genera of the Custard-apple
family, confined almost exclusively to the tropics and more numerous in
the Old World than in the New, occur in North America.


                CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN GENERA.

  Petals imbricated in the bud; ovules numerous; fruit developed from
        one pistil.
                                                             1. Asimina.
  Petals valvate in the bud; ovule solitary; fruit developed from
        several confluent pistils.
                                                               2. Anona.




                           1. ASIMINA Adans.


Trees or shrubs, emitting a heavy disagreeable odor when bruised, with
minute buds covered with cinereo-pubescent caducous scales, and
branchlets marked by conspicuous leaf-scars. Leaves membranaceous,
reticulate-venulose, deciduous. Flowers, solitary pedicellate, nodding;
sepals ovate, smaller than the petals, green, deciduous; petals
imbricated in the bud, hypogynous, sessile, ovate or obovate-oblong,
reticulate-veined, accrescent, the three exterior alternate with the
sepals, spreading, those of the interior row opposite the sepals, erect,
and much smaller than those of the outer row; stamens linear-cuneate,
densely packed on the receptacle; filaments shorter than the fleshy
connective; anther-cells separated on the connective; pistils 3--15,
sessile on the summit of the receptacle, projecting from the globular
mass of stamens; ovary 1-celled; style oblong, slightly recurved toward
the apex and stigmatic along the margin; ovules 4--20, horizontal,
2-ranked on the ventral suture, the raphe toward the suture. Fruit
baccate, sessile or stipitate, oval or oblong, smooth. Seeds in 1 or 2
ranks, ovoid, apiculate, compressed, marked at the base by a large pale
hilum.

Asimina is confined to eastern North America. Six species are
distinguished; of these one is a small tree; the others are low shrubs
of the south Atlantic and Gulf regions.

_Asimina_ is from _Asiminier_, the old colonial name of the French in
America for the Pawpaw.


                   1. Asimina triloba Dunal. Pawpaw.

[Illustration: Fig. 319]

Leaves obovate-lanceolate, sharp-pointed at apex, gradually and
regularly narrowed to the base, when they unfold covered below with
short rusty brown caducous tomentum and slightly pilose above, and at
maturity light green on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface,
10'--12' long, 4'--6' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary veins.
Flowers nearly 2' across when fully grown, on stout club-shaped pedicels
from axils of the leaves of the previous year, 1'--1-1/2' long and
covered with long scattered rusty brown hairs; sepals ovate, acuminate,
pale green, densely pubescent on the outer surface; petals green at
first, covered with short appressed hairs, gradually turning brown and
at maturity deep vinous red and conspicuously venulose, those of the
outer row broadly ovate, rounded or pointed at apex, reflexed at
maturity above the middle and 2 or 3 times longer than the sepals, those
of the inner row pointed, erect, their base concave, glandular,
nectariferous, marked by a broad band of a lighter color. Fruit attached
obliquely to the enlarged torus, oblong, nearly cylindric, rounded or
sometimes slightly pointed at the ends, more or less falcate, often
irregular from the imperfect development of some of the seeds, 3'--5'
long, 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, greenish-yellow, becoming when fully ripe
in September and October dark brown or almost black, with pale yellow or
nearly white barely edible flesh on some plants and on others with
orange-colored succulent flesh; seeds separating readily from the aril,
1' long, 1/2' broad, rounded at the ends.

A shrub or low tree, sometimes 35 deg.--40 deg. high, with a straight trunk
rarely exceeding a foot in diameter, small spreading branches, and
slender glabrous or rusty pubescent, light brown branchlets tinged with
red and marked by longitudinal parallel or reticulate narrow shallow
grooves. Winter-buds acuminate, flattened, 1/8' long, and clothed with
rusty brown hairs. Bark rarely more than 1/8' thick, dark brown, marked
by large ash-colored blotches, covered by small wart-like excrescences
and divided by numerous shallow reticulate depressions. Wood light, soft
and weak, coarse-grained, spongy, light yellow shaded with green, with
thin darker colored sapwood of 12--20 layers of annual growth. The inner
bark stripped from the branches in early spring is used by fishermen of
western rivers for stringing fish. The sweet and luscious wholesome
fruit is sold in large quantities in the cities and towns in those parts
of the country where the tree grows naturally.

Distribution. Deep rich moist soil; western New Jersey and western New
York (Greece, Monroe County) to the northern shores of Lake Ontario,
westward to southern Michigan, southwestern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska,
eastern Kansas and eastern Oklahoma, and southward to Western Florida
(Taylor County), central Alabama, and through Mississippi and Louisiana
to eastern Texas (near Marshall, Harrison County, and Dennison, Grayson
County); comparatively rare in the region adjacent to the Atlantic
seaboard; very common in the Mississippi valley, forming thick forest
undergrowth on rich bottom-lands, or thickets many acres in extent.

Occasionally cultivated in the eastern states, and hardy as far north as
eastern Massachusetts; interesting as the most northern representative
of the Custard-apple family and its only species extending far beyond
the tropics.




                              2. ANONA L.


Trees or shrubs, with glandular often reticulated bark, terete
branchlets marked by conspicuous leaf-scars, and often pubescent during
their first season. Leaves coriaceous, often glandular-punctate,
persistent or tardily deciduous. Flowers nodding on bracted pedicels;
calyx small, 3-lobed, green, deciduous; petals 6 in 2 series, valvate in
the bud, hypogynous, sessile, ovate, concave, 3-angled at apex, thick
and fleshy, white or yellow, the exterior alternate with the lobes of
the calyx, those of the inner row often much smaller than those of the
outer row; stamens club-shaped, densely packed on the receptacle;
filaments shorter than the fleshy connective; anther-cells confluent;
pistils sessile on the receptacle, free or united; ovary 1-celled; style
sessile or slightly stipitate, oblong, stigmatic on the inner face;
ovule 1, erect; raphe ventral. Fruit compound, many-celled, fleshy,
ovoid or globose, many-seeded. Seeds ovoid to ellipsoidal; cotyledons
appressed.

Of the fifty species of Anona widely distributed in the tropics of the
two worlds, a single species reaches the coast of southern Florida. Of
exotic species, _Anona muricata_ L., the Soursop and _Anona reticulata_
L., of the West Indies, and _Anona Cherimolia_ Mill., of western
tropical America, are now occasionally cultivated as fruit-trees in
Florida.

_Anona_ is the name given by early authors to the Soursop.


                     1. Anona glabra L. Pond Apple.

                    _Anona palustris_ Small, not L.

[Illustration: Fig. 320]

Leaves elliptic or oblong, acute, tapering or rounded at base, bright
green on the upper, paler on the lower surface, coriaceous, 3'--5' long,
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a prominent midrib; deciduous late in the winter;
petioles, stout 1/2' in length. Flowers nodding on short stout pedicels
thickened at the ends, opening in April from an ovoid 3-angled bud;
divisions of the calyx broad-ovate, acute; petals connivent, acute,
concave, pale yellow or dirty white, those of the outer row marked on
the inner surface near the base by a bright red spot, and broader and
somewhat longer than those of the inner row. Fruit ripening in November,
broadly ovate, truncate or depressed at base, rounded at apex, 3'--5'
long, 2'--3-1/2' broad, light green when fully grown, becoming yellow
and often marked by numerous dark brown blotches when fully ripe, with a
thick elongate fibrous torus and light green slightly aromatic insipid
flesh of no comestible value; seeds 1/2' long, slightly obovoid, turgid,
rounded at the ends, their margins contracted into a narrow wing formed
by the thickening of the outer coat.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a short trunk often 18' in diameter above
the swell of the thickened tapering base sometimes enlarged into
spreading buttresses, stout wide-spreading often contorted branches,
slender branchlets brown or yellow during their first season, becoming
in their second year brown and marked by small scattered wart-like
excrescences. Bark 1/8' thick, dark reddish brown, divided by broad
shallow fissures, separating on the surface into numerous small scales.
Wood light, soft, not strong, light brown streaked with yellow.

Distribution. Florida: Indian River on the east coast, and the shores of
the Manatee River on the west coast to the southern Keys; in shallow
fresh water ponds, on swampy hummocks, or on the borders of fresh water
streams flowing from the everglades; of its largest size on the shores
of Bay Biscayne near the Miami River, growing in the shade of larger
trees; forming a pure forest of great extent on the swampy borders of
Lake Okechobee; on the Bahama Islands and on several of the Antilles.




                            XVIII. LAURACEAE.


Aromatic trees and shrubs, with slender terete or angled branchlets,
naked or scaly buds, and alternate punctate leaves without stipules.
Flowers small, perfect or polygamo-dioecious, yellow or greenish; calyx
6-lobed, the lobes in 2 series, imbricated in the bud; corolla 0;
stamens 9 or 12, inserted on the base or near the middle of the calyx in
3 or 4 series of 3's, distinct; anthers 4-celled, superposed in pairs,
opening from below upward by persistent lids; ovary 1-celled; stigma
discoid or capitate; ovule solitary, suspended from the apex of the
cell, anatropous. Fruit a 1-seeded berry; seed without albumen; testa
thin and membranaceous, of 2 coats; embryo erect; cotyledons thick and
fleshy; radicle superior, turned toward the hilum, included between
thick and fleshy cotyledons. The Laurel family with about forty genera,
confined mostly to the tropics, is represented in North America by seven
genera; of these five are arborescent.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Leaves entire, persistent; stamens 12, those of the inner row reduced
        to staminodes.
    Calyx-lobes persistent under the fruit, in our species.
                                                              1. Persea.
    Calyx-lobes deciduous.
      Flower cymose in axillary or subterminal panicles.
                                                              2. Ocotea.
      Flowers in axillary many-flowered umbels inclosed before anthesis
            in an involucre of deciduous scales.
                                                        3. Umbellularia.
  Leaves entire or lobed, deciduous; stamens 9 in the American species;
        flowers in few-flowered drooping racemes.
                                                           4. Sassafras.
  Leaves entire, persistent; stamens 9, those of the outer row fertile
        and united in a column inclosing the pistil; flowers in terminal
        or axillary cymose panicles.
                                                           5. Misanteca.




                            1. PERSEA Mill.


Trees, with naked buds. Leaves revolute in the bud, alternate,
scattered, penniveined, subcoriaceous, rigid, tomentose or rarely
glabrous, persistent. Flowers perfect, vernal, in short axillary or
axillary and terminal panicles on slender peduncles from axils of the
leaves of the year, pedicellate, their pedicels bibracteolate near the
middle, the lateral flowers of the ultimate divisions of the
inflorescence in the axils of small deciduous lanceolate acute bracts;
calyx campanulate, divided nearly to the base into 6 lobes, those of the
outer series shorter than the others, deciduous, or enlarged and
persistent under the fruit; stamens about as long as the inner lobes of
the calyx; filaments flattened, longer than the anthers, hirsute, those
of the third series furnished near the base with 2 nearly sessile
orange-colored glands rounded on the back and slightly 2-lobed on the
inner face; anthers ovoid, flattened, erect, those of the outer series
introrse or subintrorse, those of the third series extrorse or laterally
dehiscent, the upper cells rather larger than the lower; staminodes
large, sagittate, stipitate, 2-lobed on the inner face, beaded at apex;
ovary sessile, subglobose, glabrous, narrowed into a slender simple
style gradually enlarged at apex into a discoid obscurely 2-lobed
stigma. Fruit ripening in the autumn, oblong-obovoid to subglobose, more
or less fleshy. Seed globose, pendulous, without albumen; testa thin and
membranaceous, separable into 2 coats, the outer cartilaginous, grayish
brown, the inner gray or nearly white, closely adherent to the thick
dark red cotyledons.

About one hundred species of Persea are distinguished. They are
distributed in the New World, from the coast region of the southeastern
United States and Texas to Brazil and Chile, and occur in the Canary
Islands and in tropical and subtropical Asia. _Persea americana_ Mill.,
the Avocado or Alligator Pear, a native of the Antilles and cultivated
for its edible fruit in all tropical countries, is now sparingly
naturalized in southern Florida. Many species yield hard dark-colored
handsome wood valued in cabinet-making.

_Persea_ was the classical name of a tree of the Orient, transferred by
Plumier to one of the tropical species of this genus.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Calyx persistent under the fruit (_Tamala Raf._ Persea, sec. Eupersea
        Benth. _Notaphoebe_ sec. _Eriodaphne_ Meisn.)
    Peduncles short; leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, obscurely
          veined, glabrous; branchlets puberulous.
                                                     1. P. Borbonia (C).
    Peduncles elongated; leaves elliptic to lanceolate, conspicuously
          veined, tomentose on the lower surface; branchlets tomentose.
                                                    2. P. palustris (C).


                  1. Persea Borbonia Spreng. Red Bay.

[Illustration: Fig. 321]

Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, entire, often slightly contracted
into a long point rounded at apex, gradually narrowed below, when they
unfold thin, pilose, and tinged with red, and at maturity thick and
coriaceous, bright green and lustrous above, pale and glaucous below,
3'--4' long, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with thickened revolute margins, a
narrow orange-colored midrib, remote obscure primary veins arcuate near
the margins, and thin closely reticulated veinlets; unfolding early in
the spring, gradually turning yellow a year later, and falling during
their second spring and summer; petioles stout, rigid, red-brown,
1/2'--2/3' in length, flattened and somewhat grooved on the upper side,
in falling leaving small circular leaf-scars displaying the end of a
single fibro-vascular bundle. Flowers: peduncles glabrous, 1/2'--1' in
length; calyx pale yellow or creamy white, about 1/8' long, with thin
lobes ciliate on the margins, the outer broadly ovate, rounded and
minutely apiculate, puberulous, about half as long as the
oblong-lanceolate acute lobes of the inner series covered within by long
pale hairs. Fruit 1/2' long, dark blue or nearly black, very lustrous;
flesh thin and dry, not readily separable from the ovoid slightly
pointed seed.

A tree, 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, stout erect
branches forming a dense shapely head, thick fleshy yellow roots, and
branchlets many-angled, light brown, glabrous or coated with pale or
rufous pubescence when they first appear, becoming in their second year
terete and dark green; usually much smaller. Winter-buds coated with
thick rufous tomentum, 1/4' long. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, dark red,
deeply furrowed and irregularly divided into broad flat ridges
separating on the surface into small thick appressed scales. Wood heavy,
hard, very strong, rather brittle, close-grained, bright red, with thin
lighter colored sapwood of 4 or 5 layers of annual growth; occasionally
used for cabinet-making, the interior finish of houses, and formerly in
ship and boat-building.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps in rich moist soil, or
occasionally in dry sandy loam in forests of the Long-leaved Pine;
southern Delaware (Cypress swamp near Dogsboro, Sussex County, teste
_Nuttall_); coast region from Virginia to the shores of Bay Biscayne and
Cape Romano, Florida, along the Gulf coast to the valley of the Brazos
River, Texas, and northward through Louisiana to southern Arkansas.


                  2. Persea palustris Sarg. Swamp Bay.

                        _Persea pubescens_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 322]

Leaves elliptic or lanceolate, entire, often narrowed toward the apex
into a long point, gradually narrowed at base, when they unfold dark
red, thin and tomentose, at maturity pale green and lustrous above, pale
and pubescent and rusty-tomentose on the midrib and primary veins below,
4'--6' long, 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with thick conspicuous veins and
slightly revolute margins; persistent until after the beginning of their
second year and then turning yellow and falling gradually; petioles
stout, rusty-tomentose, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers: peduncles
tomentose, 2'--3' in length; calyx pale yellow or creamy white, often
nearly 1/4' long, with thick firm lobes coated on the outer surface with
rusty tomentum, those of the outer series broadly ovate, abruptly
pointed at apex, pubescent on the inner surface, about half as long as
the ovate lanceolate lobes of the inner series slightly thickened at the
apex and hairy within. Fruit nearly black, 3/4' long.

A slender tree, occasionally 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk rarely
exceeding a foot in diameter, and stout branchlets terete or slightly
angled while young, coated when they first appear with rusty tomentum
reduced in their second season to fine pubescence persistent until the
end of their second or third year. Bark rarely exceeding 1/4' in
thickness, dull brown, irregularly divided by shallow fissures, the
surface separating into thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, soft,
strong, close-grained, orange color streaked with brown, with thick
light brown or gray sapwood of 36--40 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Pine-barren swamps, often almost to the exclusion of other
plants, usually in the neighborhood of the coast from southeastern
Virginia (Dismal Swamp) to the valley of the Caloosahatchee River and
the Everglades Keys, Florida, Alabama and Mississippi; extending inland
to the neighborhood of Wilmington, North Carolina, Aiken, South
Carolina, western Georgia (Meriwether County), the interior of the
Florida peninsula and to Autauga, Chilton and Tuscaloosa Counties,
Alabama (_R. H. Harper_).




                            2. OCOTEA Aubl.


Leaves scattered, alternate or rarely subopposite, penniveined,
coriaceous, rigid, glabrous or more or less covered with pubescence.
Flowers glabrous or tomentose on slender bibracteolate pedicels from the
axils of lanceolate acute minute bracts, in cymose clusters in axillary
or subterminal stalked panicles; calyx-tube campanulate, the 6 lobes of
the limb nearly equal, deciduous; stamens of the inner series reduced to
linear staminodes, with minute abortive anthers; filaments inserted on
the tube of the calyx, those of the outer series opposite its exterior
lobes, shorter or sometimes rather longer than the anthers, glabrous or
hirsute, furnished in the third series near the base with two
conspicuous globose stalked yellow glands; anthers oblong, flattened,
4-celled, introrse in the 2 outer series, extrorse, subextrorse, or very
rarely introrse in the third series, in the pistillate flower
rudimentary and sterile; ovary ovoid, glabrous, more or less immersed in
the tube of the calyx, gradually narrowed into a short erect style
dilated at apex into a capitate obscurely lobed stigma; in the staminate
flower linear-lanceolate, effete or minute, sometimes 0; raphe ventral;
micropyle superior. Fruit nearly inclosed while young in the thickened
tube of the calyx, exserted at maturity, surrounded at base by the
cup-like truncate or slightly lobed calyx-tube; pericarp thin and
fleshy. Seed ovoid, pendulous; testa thin, membranaceous.

Ocotea with nearly two hundred species is confined principally to the
tropical region of the New World from southern Florida to Brazil and
Peru, with Old World representatives in the Canary Islands, South
Africa, and the Mascarene Islands. One species grows naturally in
Florida.

Ocotea produces hard, strong, durable, beautifully colored wood often
employed in cabinet-making.

The name is derived from the native name of one of the species of
Guiana.


                       1. Ocotea Catesbyana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 323]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, entire, slightly contracted above into a long
point rounded at apex, when they unfold thin, membranaceous, light green
tinged with red, and sometimes puberulous on the lower surface, at
maturity thick and coriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, pale
below, 3'--6' long, 1'--2' wide, with thickened slightly revolute
margins, a broad stout midrib, slender remote primary veins arcuate and
united near the margins and connected by coarsely reticulate conspicuous
veinlets; petioles broad, flat, 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers perfect,
appearing in early summer in elongated panicles, their peduncles
slender, glabrous, light red, solitary or 2 or 3 together from the axils
of the leaves of the year or from those of the previous year, and 3'--4'
long; calyx nearly 1/4' across when expanded, puberulous on the outer
surface, hoary pubescent on the inner surface and on the margins of the
lobes, about twice as long as the stamens; filaments of the 2 outer
series slightly hirsute at the base and shorter than their introrse
anthers; filaments of the third series as long or longer than their
extrorse anthers. Fruit ripening in the autumn, ovoid or subglobose,
2/3' long, lustrous, dark blue or nearly black, the thickened cup-like
tube of the calyx truncate or obscurely lobed and bright red like the
thickened pedicels; flesh thin and dry; seed with a thin brittle
red-brown coat, the inner layer lustrous on the inner surface and marked
by broad light-colored veins radiating from the small hilum; embryo 1/3'
long, light red-brown.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 18' in diameter,
slender spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and thin
terete branchlets glabrous and dark reddish brown when they first
appear, soon becoming lighter colored, and in their second year light
brown or gray tinged with red and often marked by minute pale lenticels,
and in their second or third year by small semiorbicular leaf-scars,
displaying a single central fibro-vascular bundle-scar. Bark about 1/8'
thick, dark reddish brown, and roughened on the otherwise smooth surface
by numerous small excrescences. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, rich
dark brown, with thick bright yellow sapwood of 20--30 layers of annual
growth.

Distribution. Shores and islands of Florida south of Cape Canaveral on
the east coast and of Cape Romano on the west coast; comparatively
common except on some of the western keys, and most abundant and of its
largest size in the rich wooded hummocks adjacent to Bay Biscayne; in
the Bahamas.




                         3. UMBELLULARIA Nutt.


A pungent aromatic tree, with dark brown scaly bark, slender terete
branchlets marked in their second and third years by small semicircular
or nearly triangular elevated leaf-scars displaying a horizontal row of
minute fibro-vascular bundle-scars, naked buds, and thick fleshy brown
roots. Leaves alternate, involute in the bud, lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate, acute or rounded at the narrow apex, cuneate or
somewhat rounded at base, entire with thickened slightly revolute
margins, petiolate, coated when they appear on the lower surface with
pale soft pubescence and puberulous on the upper surface, at maturity
thick and coriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, dull and paler
below, with a slender light yellow midrib, and remote, obscure, arcuate
veins more or less united near the margins, and connected by conspicuous
reticulate veinlets. Flowers perfect in axillary stalked many-flowered
umbels, inclosed in the bud by an involucre of 5 or 6 imbricated broadly
ovate or obovate pointed concave yellow caducous scales, the latest
umbels subsessile at the base of terminal leaf-buds; pedicels slender,
puberulous, without bractlets, from the axils of obovate membranaceous
puberulous deciduous bracts decreasing in size from the outer to the
inner; calyx divided almost to the base into 6 nearly equal broadly
obovate rounded pale yellow lobes spreading and reflexed after anthesis;
stamens inserted on the short slightly thickened tube of the calyx;
filaments flat, glabrous, pale yellow, rather shorter than the anthers,
those of the third series furnished near the base with 2 conspicuous
stipitate orange-colored orbicular flattened glands; anthers oblong,
flattened, light yellow, those of the first and second series introrse,
those of the third series extrorse; stamens of the fourth series reduced
to minute ovate acute yellow staminodes; ovary sessile, ovoid, often
more or less gibbous, glabrous, abruptly contracted into a stout
columnar style rather shorter than the lobes of the calyx and crowned by
a simple capitate discoid stigma. Fruit ovoid, surrounded at base by the
enlarged and thickened truncate or lobed tube of the calyx, yellow-green
sometimes more or less tinged with purple; pericarp thin and fleshy.
Seed ovoid, light brown; testa separable into 2 coats, the outer thick,
hard, and woody, the inner thin and papery, closely investing the
embryo, chestnut-brown and lustrous on the inner surface.

Umbellularia consists of a single species.

The generic name, a diminutive of _umbella_, relates to the character of
the inflorescence.


    1. Umbellularia californica Nutt. California Laurel. Spice-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 324]

Leaves 2'--5' long, 1/2'--1-1/2' wide, unfolding in winter or early in
the spring and continuing to appear as the branches lengthen until late
in the autumn; beginning to fade during the summer, turning to a
beautiful yellow or orange color and falling one by one during their
second season, or often remaining on the branches until the sixth year;
petioles 1/10'--1/5' in length. Flowers appearing in January before the
unfolding of the young leaves, the umbels on peduncles sometimes 1' in
length. Fruit about 1' long, in clusters of 2 or 3, on elongated
thickened pedicels, persistent on the branch after the fruit ripens and
falls late in the autumn; seeds germinating soon after they reach the
ground, the fruit remaining below the surface of the soil and attached
to the young plant until midsummer.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--75 deg., occasionally 100 deg.--175 deg. high, with a trunk
3 deg.--6 deg. in diameter, sometimes tall and straight but usually divided near
the ground into several large diverging stems, stout spreading or rarely
pendulous (var. _pendula_ Redh.) branches forming a broad round-topped
head, and branchlets light green and coated with soft pale pubescence
when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous and yellow-green, and in
their second and third years light brown tinged with red; at high
altitudes, and in southern California much smaller; often reduced to a
large or small shrub, or on bluffs facing the ocean to broad mats of
prostrate stems. Bark 3/4'--1' thick, dark brown tinged with red,
separating on the surface into thin appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, close-grained, light rich brown, with thick lighter colored
sapwood of 30--40 layers of annual growth; the most valuable wood
produced in the forests of Pacific North America for the interior finish
of houses and for furniture. The leaves yield by distillation a pungent
volatile oil, and from the fruit a fat containing umbellulic acid has
been obtained.

Distribution. Valley of Coos River, Oregon, southward through the
California coast ranges and along the high western slopes of the Sierra
Nevada to the southern slopes of the San Bernardino Mountains up to
altitudes of 2500 deg.; usually near the banks of water-courses and
sometimes on low hills; common where it can obtain an abundant supply of
water; most abundant and of its largest size in the rich valleys of
southwestern Oregon, forming with the Broad-leaved Maple a considerable
part of the forest growth.




                     4. SASSAFRAS Nees. Sassafras.


                       _Pseudosassafras_ H. Lec.

Aromatic trees, with thick deeply furrowed dark red-brown bark, scaly
buds, slender light green lustrous brittle branchlets containing a thick
white mucilaginous pith and marked by small semiorbicular elevated
leaf-scars displaying a single horizontal row of minute fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, and stout spongy stoloniferous roots covered by thick
yellow bark. Flower-bearing buds terminal, ovoid, acute, with 9 or 10
imbricated scales increasing in size from without inward, the 3 outer
scales ovate, rounded, often apiculate at apex, keeled and thickened on
the back, pale yellow-green below, dull yellow-brown above the middle,
loosely imbricated, slightly or not at all accrescent, deciduous at the
opening of the bud, much smaller than the thin accrescent light
yellow-green scales of the next rows turning dull red before falling,
and obovate, rounded at apex, cuneate below, concave, coated on the
outer surface with soft silky pubescence, glabrous or lustrous on the
inner surface, reflexed, 3/4' long, nearly 1/2' broad, tardily
deciduous, the 2 inner scales foliaceous, lanceolate, acute, light
green, coated on the outer surface with delicate pale hairs, glabrous on
the inner surface, infolding the leaves; sterile and axillary buds much
smaller. Leaves involute in the bud, ovate or obovate, entire or often
1--3-lobed at apex, the lobes broadly ovate, acute, divided by deep
broad sinuses, gradually narrowed at base into elongated slender
petioles, feather-veined, with alternate veins arcuate and united or
running to the points of the lobes, the lowest parallel with the
margins, conspicuously reticulate-venulose, mucilaginous, deciduous.
Flowers opening in early spring with the first unfolding of the leaves,
the males and females usually on different individuals, in lax drooping
few-flowered racemes in the axils of large obovate bud-scales, their
pedicels slender, rarely forked and 2-flowered, without bracts, pilose,
from the axils of linear acute scarious hairy deciduous bracts, or that
of the terminal flower often without a bract; calyx pale yellow-green,
divided nearly to the base into narrow obovate concave lobes spreading
or reflexed after anthesis, glabrous or pubescent on the inner surface,
those of the inner row a little larger than the others; stamens in the
American species 9, in the Asiatic 12 with those of the inner series
reduced to staminodes, inserted on the somewhat thickened margin of the
shallow concave calyx-tube, those of the outer series opposite its outer
lobes; filaments flattened, elongated, light yellow, those of the inner
series furnished at base with 2 conspicuous orange-colored stipitate
glands rounded on the back, obscurely lobed on the inner face, in the
Asiatic species alternating with 3 staminodes; anthers introrse, oblong,
flattened, truncate or emarginate at apex, 4-celled, 2-celled in the
Formosan species, orange-colored, in the female flower reduced to
flattened ovate pointed or slightly 2-lobed dark orange-colored
stipitate staminodes, 6 in 2 rows in the American species and 12 similar
to the stamens and staminodes of the staminate flower in the Asiatic
species; or occasionally fertile and similar to or a little smaller than
those of the staminate flower; ovary ovoid, light green, glabrous,
nearly sessile in the short tube of the calyx, narrowed into an
elongated simple style gradually enlarged above into a capitate oblique
obscurely lobed stigma; in the staminate flower 0 in the American
species, present, usually abortive, rarely fertile in the Asiatic
species. Fruit an oblong dark blue or black lustrous berry surrounded at
base by the enlarged and thickened obscurely 6-lobed or truncate scarlet
or orange-red limb of the calyx, raised on a much elongated scarlet
stalk thickened above the middle; pericarp thin and fleshy. Seed oblong,
pointed, light brown; testa thin, membranaceous, barely separable into 2
coats, the inner coat much thinner than the outer, dark chestnut-brown,
and lustrous.

Sassafras is confined to temperate eastern North America, central China
and to Formosa where _Sassafras tzumu_ Hemsl. and _S. randaiense_ Rehd.
occur.

_Sassafras_ was first used as a popular name for this tree by the French
in Florida.


               1. Sassafras officinale Nees & Ebermaier.

                      _Sassafras Sassafras_ Karst.

[Illustration: Fig. 325]

Leaves 4'--6' long, 2'--4' wide, densely pubescent when they first
appear, pubescent or puberulous below at maturity especially on the
midrib and veins; turning in the autumn delicate shades of yellow or
orange more or less tinged with red; petioles 3/4'--1-1/2' in length.
Flowers 1/3' long when fully expanded glabrous on the inner surface of
the perianth, in racemes about 2' in length, stamens 9. Fruit ripening
in September and October, blue, 1/3' long, on stalks 1-1/2'--2' in
length, separating when ripe from the thick scarlet calyx-lobes
persistent with the stalks of the fruit on the branches until the
beginning of winter.

A tree, occasionally 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk nearly 6 deg. in diameter,
short stout more or less contorted branches spreading almost at right
angles and forming a narrow usually flat-topped head, and slender
branchlets light yellow-green and coated when they first appear with
pale pubescence, becoming glabrous, bright green and lustrous, gradually
turning reddish brown at the end of two or three years; frequently not
more than 40 deg.--50 deg. tall; at the north and in Florida generally smaller
and often shrubby. Winter-buds 1/4'--3/8' long. Bark of young stems and
branches thin, reddish brown divided by shallow fissures, becoming on
old trunks sometimes 1-1/2' thick, dark red-brown, and deeply and
irregularly divided into broad flat ridges separating on the surface
into thick appressed scales. Wood soft, weak, brittle, coarse-grained,
very durable in the soil, aromatic, dull orange-brown, with thin light
yellow sapwood of 7 or 8 layers of annual growth; largely used for
fence-posts and rails, in the construction of light boats, ox-yokes, and
in cooperage. The roots and especially their bark are a mild aromatic
stimulant, and oil of sassafras, used to perfume soap and other
articles, is distilled from them. Gumbo filet, a powder prepared from
the leaves by the Choctaw Indians of Louisiana, gives flavor and
consistency to gumbo soup. Passing into the var. _albidum_ Blake, with
glabrous or nearly glabrous young leaves, glabrous often glaucous young
branchlets, and lighter colored less valuable wood; uplands of western
New England to the mountains of western North Carolina and eastern
Tennessee.

Distribution. Usually in rich sandy well-drained soil, southern Maine
and eastern Massachusetts, through southern Vermont to southern Ontario,
central Michigan, and southeastern Iowa to eastern Kansas and Oklahoma,
and southward to central Florida (Orange County) and the valley of the
Brazos River, Texas; ascending on the southern Appalachian Mountains to
altitudes of 4000 deg.; in the south Atlantic and Gulf states often taking
possession of abandoned fields.

Occasionally cultivated in the eastern states as an ornamental tree.




                       5. MISANTECA Cham. & Schl.


Trees with terete branchlets. Leaves coriaceous, persistent. Flowers
perfect, minute, on slender pedicels, in terminal or axillary cymose
panicles; peduncles and pedicels from the axils of acuminate caducous
bracts and bractlets; perianth fleshy, ovoid or obovoid, 6-toothed;
stamens 9, inserted near the middle of the perianth, those of the outer
rank united into a fleshy column, furnished at base with three pairs of
glands, inclosing the pistil and slightly longer than the perianth,
those of the inner ranks, sterile, short or obsolete; anthers extrorse,
2-celled, the cells united; ovary gradually narrowed into a thick style
as long as the staminal tube; stigma capitate. Fruit baccate,
olive-shaped, surrounded at base by the enlarged ligneous capsular
perianth of the flower much thickened on the margin; pericarp thin and
fleshy; endocarp thin, crustaceous; seed filling the cavity of the
fruit; testa thin, crustaceous; hilum minute, apical; cotyledons
plano-convex, fleshy; radicle superior, minute.

Of the three species of the genus now known one occurs in southern
Florida and Cuba, and the others in tropical Mexico.

The name of the genus is derived from the name of the tree, Palo
Misanteca at Misantha, near the coast of the state of Vera Cruz where
the type species was discovered.


                       1. Misanteca triandra Mez.

[Illustration: Fig. 326]

Leaves elliptic-lanceolate, ovate or broad-elliptic, entire, abruptly
long-pointed and acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed and acuminate at
base, deeply tinged with red and villose on the under side of the midrib
when they unfold, soon glabrous, and at maturity dark green and lustrous
above, pale below, 3'--4' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with slightly
undulate margins, a prominent midrib, slender primary veins, and
reticulate veinlets conspicuous on the lower surface; petioles stout,
narrow wing-margined at apex, pubescent when they first appear, soon
glabrous, 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers glabrous or puberulous,
purplish, about 1/12' long, in 3--5-flowered cymes on slender peduncles,
in pubescent panicles shorter than the leaves; tube of the perianth
funnel-form, the lobes equal, triangular, acute; column of stamens
pilose; ovary glabrous. Fruit in few-fruited clusters on much elongated
and thickened peduncles, ellipsoidal or slightly ovoid, acute, dark
blue, 4/5' long and 3/5' thick; cupule light red, thickened and
verrucose, acute at base, the margin reflexed, thin and entire on the
inner edge, thick and crenulate on the outer edge; seed ellipsoidal,
pointed at apex, rounded at base, light brown, slightly ridged when dry.

A tree in Florida 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a tall trunk 15'--20' in diameter,
small spreading and pendent branches forming a broad round-topped head,
and slender red branchlets pubescent when they first appear, soon
becoming glabrous, and marked by numerous large pale lenticels.

Rich hummocks between Miami and Homestead, Dade County, Florida; in Cuba
and Jamaica.




                           XIX. CAPPARIDACEAE.


Annual or perennial herbs, trees, or shrubs, with acrid often pungent
juices, alternate or rarely opposite leaves, regular or irregular
usually perfect flowers in terminal cymes or racemes or solitary,
numerous ovules inserted in two rows on each of the two placentas,
capsular or baccate 1-celled fruit, and seeds without albumen. A family
of thirty-four genera, mostly confined to the warmer parts of the world
and widely distributed in the two hemispheres. Of the seven genera which
occur in North America only one has an arborescent representative.




                             1. CAPPARIS L.


Trees, with naked buds. Leaves conduplicate in the bud, entire,
feather-veined, coriaceous, persistent, without stipules. Flowers
regular, in terminal cymes; sepals 4, valvate in the bud, glandular on
the inner surface; petals 4, inserted on the base of the short
receptacle; stamens numerous, inserted on the receptacle, their
filaments free, elongated, much longer than the introrse 2-celled
anthers opening longitudinally; ovary long-stalked, 2-celled, with 2
parietal placentas; stigmas sessile, orbicular; ovules campylotropous.
Fruit baccate, siliquiform (in the North American species) separating
into 3 or 4 valves. Seeds reniform, numerous, surrounded by pulp;
seed-coat coriaceous; embryo convolute; cotyledons foliaceous, fleshy.

Capparis, with more than one hundred species, mostly tropical, is found
in the two hemispheres, the largest number of species occurring in
Central and South America. Two of the West Indian species reach the
shores of southern Florida, the most northern station of the genus in
America; of these one is arborescent.

_Capparis_, from {kapparis}, the classical name of _Capparis spinosa_
L., is derived from the Persian _kabor_, capers, the dried flower-buds
of that species.


                     1. Capparis jamaicensis Jacq.

[Illustration: Fig. 327]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, rounded and emarginate at apex, slightly
revolute, coriaceous, light yellow-green, smooth and lustrous on the
upper surface, covered on the lower by minute ferrugineous scales,
2'--3' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib and inconspicuous
primary veins; petioles stout covered at first with ferrugineous scales
often becoming nearly glabrous, 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers 1-1/4' in
diameter, opening in Florida in April and May from obtuse or acute,
4-angled buds; sepals ovate, acute, lepidote on the outer surface,
furnished on the inner with a small ovate gland, recurved when the
flower is fully expanded, and about half the size of the round white
petals turning purple in fading; stamens 20--30, with purple filaments
villose toward the base, 1-1/2'--2' long; anthers yellow; ovary raised
on a slender stipe about 1-1/2' in length. Fruit 9'--12' long, terete,
sometimes slightly torulose, pubescent-lepidote, the long stalk
appearing jointed by the enlargement of the pedicel and torus below the
insertion of the stipe; seed light brown, 1-1/4' long.

A small slender shrubby tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes
5'--6' in diameter, and thin angled branchlets dark gray, smooth or
slightly rugose, and covered with minute ferrugineous scales. Bark
rarely more than 1/8' thick, slightly fissured, the dark red-brown
surface broken into small irregularly shaped divisions. Wood heavy,
hard, close-grained, yellow faintly tinged with red, with lighter
colored sapwood of about 15 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Coast of Florida; Cape Canaveral and Cape Sable to the
southern keys; generally distributed, but nowhere abundant; common on
several of the Antilles.




                           XX. HAMAMELIDACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, slender terete branchlets, naked or
scaly buds, and fibrous roots. Leaves alternate, petiolate, stipulate,
deciduous. Flowers perfect or unisexual; calyx 4-parted or 0; petals 4
or 0; stamens 4--8; anthers attached at the base, introrse, 2-celled;
ovary inserted in the bottom of the receptacle, 2-celled; ovules 1 or
many, anatropous, suspended from an axile placenta; micropyle superior;
raphe ventral. Fruit a woody capsule opening at the summit. Seed usually
1; embryo surrounded by fleshy albumen; cotyledons oblong, flat, longer
than the terete radicle turned toward the hilum. The Witch Hazel family
with twenty genera is confined to eastern North America, southwestern,
southern, and eastern Asia, the Malay Archipelago, Madagascar, and South
Africa. Of the three North American genera two are arborescent.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Flowers usually unisexual, capitate, without petals, limb of the calyx
        short or nearly obsolete; capsules consolidated by their base
        into a globose head; seed with a terminal wing; leaves palmately
        lobed.
                                                         1. Liquidambar.
  Flowers usually perfect, with calyx and corolla; capsules not
        consolidated into a head; seed without a wing.
                                                           2. Hamamelis.




                           1. LIQUIDAMBAR L.


Trees, with balsamic juices, scaly bark, terete often winged branchlets,
scaly buds, and fibrous roots. Leaves plicate in the bud, alternate,
palmately lobed, glandular-serrate, long-petiolate; stipules lanceolate,
acute, caducous. Flowers monoecious or rarely perfect in capitate heads
surrounded by an involucre of 4 deciduous bracts, the staminate in
terminal racemes, the pistillate in solitary long-stalked heads from the
axils of upper leaves; staminate flowers without a calyx and corolla;
stamens indefinite, interspersed with minute scales; filaments filiform,
shorter than the oblong obcordate anthers opening longitudinally;
pistillate flowers surrounded by long-awned scales, the whole confluent
into a globular head; calyx obconic, its limb short or nearly obsolete;
stamens usually 4, inserted on the summit of the calyx; anthers minute,
usually rudimentary or abortive, rarely fertile; ovary partly inferior,
of 2 united carpels terminating in elongated subulate recurved
persistent styles stigmatic on the inner face; ovules numerous. Capsules
armed with the hardened incurved elongated styles free above,
septicidally dehiscent, consolidated by their base into a globose head;
pericarp thick and woody; endocarp thin, corneous, lustrous on the inner
surface. Seeds usually solitary or 2 by the abortion of many ovules,
compressed, angulate; seed-coat opaque, crustaceous, produced into a
short membranaceous obovate terminal wing rounded at the oblique apex.

Liquidambar with about four species is confined to the eastern United
States, southern and central Mexico, Central America, southwestern Asia,
middle and southeastern China, and Formosa. Liquid storax, an opaque
grayish brown resin, is derived from _Liquidambar orientalis_ Mill., a
native of Asia Minor.

Liquidambar from _liquidus_ and _ambar_ in allusion to the fragrant
juices.


           1. Liquidambar Styraciflua L. Sweet Gum. Bilsted.

[Illustration: Fig. 328]

Leaves generally round in outline, truncate or slightly heart-shaped at
base, deeply 5--7-lobed, with acutely pointed divisions finely serrate
with rounded appressed teeth, when they unfold pilose on the lower
surface, soon becoming glabrous with the exception of large tufts of
pale rufous hairs in the axils of the principal veins, at maturity thin,
bright green, smooth and lustrous, 6'--7' across, with broad primary
veins and finely reticulate veinlets; exhaling when bruised a pleasant
resinous fragrance; in the autumn turning deep crimson; petioles
slender, covered at first near the base with rufous caducous hairs, and
5'--6' in length; stipules entire, glabrous, 1/3'--1/2' long. Flowers:
staminate in terminal racemes 2'--3' long covered with rufous hairs, in
heads stalked toward the base of the raceme and nearly sessile above,
1/4' in diameter, and surrounded by ovate acute deciduous hairy bracts
much larger than the lanceolate acute bracts of the female inflorescence
1/2' across and conspicuous from the broad stigmatic surfaces of the
recurved and contorted styles. Fruit 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, persistent
during the winter, the carpels opening in the autumn; seed 1/2' long and
rather longer than its wing, with a light brown coat conspicuously
marked by oblong resin-ducts.

A tree, 80 deg.--140 deg. high, with a straight trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter,
slender branches forming while the tree is young a pyramidal head, and
in old age a comparatively small oblong crown, and slender branchlets
containing a large pith, slightly many-angled, covered when they first
appear with caducous rufous hairs, light orange color to reddish brown
in their first winter, marked by occasional minute dark lenticels and by
large arcuate leaf-scars showing the ends of 3 conspicuous
fibro-vascular bundles, developing in their second season corky wings
appearing on the upper side of lateral branches in 3 or 4 parallel ranks
and irregularly on all sides of vertical branches, and increasing in
width and thickness for many years, sometimes becoming 2'--3' broad and
1' thick. Winter-buds acute, 1/4' long, and covered by ovate acute
minutely apiculate orange-brown scales rounded on the back, those of the
inner rows accrescent, tipped with red, and about 1' long at maturity.
Wood heavy, hard, straight, close-grained, not strong, bright brown
tinged with red, with thin almost white sapwood of 60--70 layers of
annual growth; used for the outside and inside finish of houses, in
cabinet-making, for street pavement, wooden dishes, and fruit boxes.

Distribution. Fairfield County, Connecticut, and in the neighborhood of
the coast to southeastern Pennsylvania, southward to Cape Canaveral and
the shores of Tampa Bay, Florida, and westward through southern Ohio,
Indiana and Illinois to southeastern Missouri, and through Arkansas to
eastern Oklahoma and the valley of the Trinity River, Texas; reappearing
on the mountains of central and southern Mexico and on the highlands of
Guatemala; in the maritime region of the south Atlantic and Gulf states
and in the basin of the lower Mississippi River one of the common trees
of the forest, covering rich river bottom-lands usually inundated every
year; in the northern and middle states on the borders of swamps and low
wet swales; at the north rarely more than 60 deg.--70 deg. tall, with a trunk
usually not more than 2 deg. in diameter.

Unsurpassed in the brilliancy of the autumnal colors of the leaves; and
often planted as an ornamental tree in the eastern states.




                      2. HAMAMELIS L. Witch Hazel.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, terete zigzag branchlets, naked buds,
and fibrous roots. Leaves involute in the bud, more or less
unsymmetrical at base, crenately toothed or lobed, the primary veins
conspicuous; stipules acute, infolding the bud, deciduous. Flowers
perfect, autumnal or hiemal, in 3 or rarely 4-flowered terminal
clusters, from buds appearing in summer, on short recurved peduncles
from the axils of leaves of the year, furnished near the middle with 2
acute deciduous bractlets, covered like their acute bracts and bractlets
with dark ferrugineous pubescence, each flower surrounded by 2 or 3
ovate acute bracts, the outer slightly united at base into a 3-lobed
involucre; calyx 4-parted pale pubescent on the outer surface,
orange-brown, yellow or red on the inner surface, persistent on the base
of the ovary, the lobes reflexed; petals bright yellow, inserted on the
margin of the cup-shaped receptacle, alternate with the sepals,
strap-shaped, falling with the stamens when the ovules are fertilized;
stamens 8, inserted in 2 rows on the margin of the receptacle, the 4
opposite the lobes of the calyx fertile, the others reduced to minute
strap-shaped scales; filaments free, shorter than the calyx, prolonged
into a thickened pointed connective; anthers ellipsoid, opening
laterally from without by persistent valves; ovary of 2 carpels, free at
apex, inserted in the bottom of the receptacle, partly superior,
remaining during the winter without enlarging and surrounded and
protected by the calyx; styles subulate, spreading, stigmatic at apex,
persistent; ovule solitary. Fruit ripening in the autumn, usually 2 from
each flower-cluster, capsular, 2-beaked at apex, surrounded for
one-third or one-half its length by the enlarged persistent calyx
bearing at the base the blackened remnants of the floral bracts, the
thick and woody outer layer splitting from above loculicidally before
the opening of the thin crustaceous inner layer. Seed oblong, acute,
suspended; testa crustaceous, chestnut brown, shining; forcibly
discharged when ripe by the contraction of the edges of the valves of
the bony endocarp; embryo surrounded by thick fleshy albumen; cotyledons
foliaceous; hilum oblong, depressed.

Hamamelis is confined to eastern North America and eastern Asia, with
three American and two or three Asiatic species; of the American species
two are sometimes small trees, and the third _H. vernalis_ Sarg. is a
shrub of southern Missouri, western Arkansas, and eastern Oklahoma.

The name is from {ama}, at the same time with, and {melis}, an
Apple-tree, and was applied by the ancients to the Medlar or some
similar tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves smooth, conspicuously unsymmetrical at base; flowers autumnal.
                                                1. H. virginiana (A, C).
  Leaves roughened by persistent tubercles, slightly unsymmetrical at
        base; flowers hiemal.
                                                  2. H. macrophylla (C).


                       1. Hamamelis virginiana L.

[Illustration: Fig. 329]

Leaves obovate, acuminate, long-pointed or sometimes rounded at apex,
very unequal at base, the lower side rounded or subcordate, the upper
usually cuneate and smaller, irregularly and coarsely crenately lobed
above the middle, entire or dentate below, when they unfold coated,
especially on the lower surface of the midrib and veins and on the
petioles and stipules with stellate ferrugineous pubescence, at maturity
membranaceous, dull dark green and glabrous or pilose above, lighter
colored and lustrous below, and pubescent or puberulous on the stout
midrib and 6 or 7 pairs of primary veins, 4'--6' long, 2'--2-1/2' wide;
turning delicate yellow in the autumn; petioles slender, pubescent early
in the season, becoming glabrous 1/3'--1' in length; stipules
lanceolate, acute, coriaceous, 1/3'--1/2' long. Flowers opening from the
middle of September to the middle of November; calyx orange-brown on the
inner surface; petals bright yellow; 1/2'--2/3' long. Fruit ripening
when the flowers of the season are expanding, 1/2' long, pubescent, dull
orange-brown and surrounded for half its length by the large persistent
calyx; seed 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a short trunk 12'--14' in
diameter, spreading branches forming a broad open head, and slender
flexible branchlets coated at first with scurfy rusty stellate hairs,
gradually disappearing during the summer, and in their first winter
glabrous or slightly puberulous, light orange-brown and marked by small
white dots, becoming in their second year dark or reddish brown; usually
a stout shrub sending up from the ground numerous rigid diverging stems
5 deg.--20 deg. tall. Winter-buds acute, slightly falcate, light orange-brown,
covered with short fine pubescence, 1/4'--1/2' long. Bark 1/8' thick,
light brown, generally smooth but broken into minute thin appressed
scales disclosing in falling the dark reddish purple inner bark. Wood
heavy, hard, very close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thick
nearly white sapwood of 30--40 layers of annual growth. The bark and
leaves are slightly astringent and although not known to possess
essential properties are largely used in the form of fluid extracts and
decoctions and in homoeopathic practice, Pond's Extract being made by
distilling the bark in diluted alcohol.

Distribution. Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and the valley of the St.
Lawrence River to southern Ontario, southern Wisconsin, southeastern
Minnesota and northeastern Iowa, and southward to central Georgia and
southern Arkansas, growing usually on the borders of the forest in low
rich soil or on the rocky banks of streams; of its largest size and
probably only arborescent on the slopes of the high Alleghany Mountains
in North and South Carolina and Tennessee.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the northern states,
and in western and northern Europe.


                    2. Hamamelis macrophylla Pursh.

[Illustration: Fig. 330]

Leaves short-obovate or occasionally broad-elliptic, rounded, acute or
rarely acuminate at apex, cuneate, rounded or cordate at the narrow
slightly unsymmetrical base, crenate-lobulate above the middle with
small rounded lobes, covered with short stellate hairs more abundant on
the upper than on the lower surface, and at maturity dark green above,
paler below, and roughened by the persistent tubercle-like bases of the
stellate hairs, 3'--5' long, 2'--3' wide, with a slender midrib and five
or six pairs of primary veins; petioles slender, pubescent, 1/2'--3/4'
in length; stipules lanceolate, acuminate, scarious, hoary-pubescent,
1/5'--1/6' long. Flowers opening in December, January and February;
calyx yellow on the inner surface; petals light yellow, 1/2' long and
less than 1/24' wide. Fruit ripening in the autumn, about 1/2' in
length; seed dark chestnut-brown or nearly black.

A tree, often 30 deg.--45 deg. high, producing stoloniferous shoots round the
tall trunk often 1 deg. in diameter, erect and spreading branches, and
branchlets rusty or hoary-tomentose during their first year, becoming
glabrous or nearly glabrous and grayish brown in their second season;
often a shrub. Winter-buds rusty-tomentose, about 1/3' in length.

Distribution. Rich soil, by streams or along the borders of the forest;
valley of the lower Savannah River, near Savannah, Chatham County, and
along the Wittlocoochee River, Lowndes County, Georgia, to central and
western Florida; through Alabama; in southern and central Mississippi,
and through Louisiana to eastern Texas (Beaumont, Jefferson County, and
Fletcher, Harding County), and southern Arkansas; generally distributed
and most abundant in Louisiana; probably of its largest size on the
bluffs of the Alabama River in Dallas County, Alabama.




                            XXI. PLATANACEAE.


Trees, with watery juice, thick deeply furrowed scaly bark exfoliating
from the branches and young trunks in large thin plates, terete zigzag
pithy branchlets prolonged by an upper axillary bud, and fibrous roots.
Winter-buds axillary, conic, large, smooth, and lustrous, nearly
surrounded at base by the narrow leaf-scars displaying a row of
conspicuous dark fibro-vascular bundle-scars, covered by 3 deciduous
scales, the 2 inner accrescent, strap-shaped, rounded at apex at
maturity, marking in falling the base of the branchlet with narrow
ring-like scars, the outer scale surrounding the bud and splitting
longitudinally with its expansion, the second light green, covered by a
gummy fragrant secretion and usually inclosing a bud in its axil, the
third coated with long rufous hairs. Leaves longitudinally plicate in
vernation, alternate, broadly ovate, cordate, truncate, or cuneate and
decurrent on the petiole at base, more or less acutely 3--7-lobed, and
occasionally furnished with a more or less enlarged basal lobe, the
lobes entire, dentate with minute remote callous teeth, or coarsely
sinuate-toothed, penniveined, the veins arcuate and united near the
margins and connected by inconspicuous reticulate veinlets, clothed
while young like the petioles, stipules, and young branchlets with
caducous stellate sharp-pointed branching hairs, pale on the lower and
rufous on the upper surface, long-petiolate; turning brown and withering
in the autumn before falling; petioles abruptly enlarged at base and
inclosing the buds; stipules membranaceous, laterally united below into
a short tube surrounding the branchlet above the insertion of their
leaf, acute, more or less free above, dentate or entire, thin and
scarious on flowering shoots, broad and leaf-like on vigorous sterile
branchlets, caducous, marking the branchlet in falling with narrow
ring-like scars. Flowers minute, appearing with the unfolding of the
leaves in dense unisexual pedunculate solitary or spicate heads, the
staminate and pistillate heads on separate peduncles or rarely united on
the same peduncle; staminate heads dark red on axillary peduncles;
pistillate heads light green tinged with red, on long terminal
peduncles, the lateral heads in the spicate clusters sessile and
embracing at maturity the peduncle, usually persistent on the branches
during the winter; calyx of the staminate flower divided into 3--6
minute scale-like sepals slightly united at base, about half as long as
the 3--6 cuneiform sulcate scarious pointed petals; stamens as many as
the divisions of the calyx, opposite them, with short nearly obsolete
filaments, and elongated clavate 2-celled anthers, their cells opening
longitudinally and crowned by a capitate pilose truncate connective;
calyx of the pistillate flower divided into 3--6, usually 4, rounded
sepals much shorter than the acute petals; stamens scale-like,
elongated-obovoid, pilose at apex; ovaries as many as the divisions of
the calyx, superior, oblong, sessile, surrounded at base by long ridged
jointed pale hairs persistent round the fruit, gradually narrowed into
long simple bright red styles papillose-stigmatic to below the middle
along the ventral suture; ovules 1 or rarely 2, suspended laterally,
orthotropous. Head of fruit composed of elongated obovoid akenes rounded
and obtuse or acute at apex, surmounted by the persistent styles,
1-seeded, light yellow-brown; pericarp thin, coriaceous. Seed
elongated-oblong, suspended; testa thin and firm, light chestnut-brown;
embryo erect in thin fleshy albumen; cotyledons oblong, about as long as
the elongated cylindric erect radicle turned toward the minute apical
hilum. Wood hard and heavy not strong, light brown tinged with red, with
numerous broad conspicuous medullary rays and bands of smaller ducts
marking the layers of annual growth. A family of a single genus.




                       1. PLATANUS L. Plane-tree.


Characters of the family.

A genus of four or five species of eastern and western North America,
Mexico, Central America, and of southwestern Asia, all resembling each
other except in the form of the lobes of the leaves and the amount of
pubescence on their lower surface, in the pointed or obtuse apex of the
akene, and in the number of heads of pistillate flowers on their
peduncle.

Of the exotic species, the Old World _Platanus acerifolia_ Willd., of
doubtful origin, and often considered a hybrid between _P. orientalis_
L. and the Plane-tree of the eastern United States, is now a common
street tree in the cities of all the countries of temperate Europe, and
is largely used as a street and shade tree in the eastern states and in
California.

_Platanus_ is the classical name of the Plane-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Heads of fruit usually solitary; leaves broadly ovate, slightly
        3--5-lobed, the lobes broad, mostly serrulate, or entire,
        truncate or rarely cuneate at base.
                                              1. P. occidentalis (A, C).
  Heads of fruit racemose.
    Leaves 3--5-lobed to below the middle, the lobes entire, remotely
          and obscurely dentate, or rarely sinuate-toothed, truncate or
          slightly cordate or cuneate at base.
                                                     2. P. racemosa (G).
    Leaves deeply 5--7-lobed, the lobes elongated, slender, entire, or
          rarely remotely dentate, deeply cordate or rarely cuneate or
          truncate at base.
                                                     3. P. Wrightii (H).


           1. Platanus occidentalis L. Sycamore. Buttonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 331]

Leaves broadly ovate, more or less 3--5-lobed by broad shallow sinuses
rounded at the bottom, the lobes broad, acuminate, sinuate-toothed with
long straight or curved remote acuminate teeth, or entire with undulate
margins, truncate or slightly cordate, or long-cuneate and decurrent on
the petiole at base (var. _attenuata_ Sarg.), thin and firm, bright
green on the upper surface, paler on the lower, glabrous at maturity
with the exception of a slight pubescence on the under side of the thin
midrib and stout yellow veins, 4'--7' long and broad, or twice as large
on vigorous shoots and then frequently furnished with dentate basal
lobes; petioles stout, terete or slightly angled, becoming puberulous
3'--5' in length; stipules 1'--1-1/2' long, entire or sinuate-toothed.
Flowers: peduncles coated with pale tomentum, bearing 1 and sometimes 2
heads of flowers. Fruit: heads 1' in diameter, on slender glabrous stems
3'--6' in length; akene about 2/3' long and truncate or obtusely rounded
at apex.

A tree, occasionally 140 deg.--170 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 10 deg.--11 deg. in
diameter above its abruptly enlarged base, often divided near the ground
into several large secondary trunks, or rising 70 deg.--80 deg., with a straight
column-like shaft free of branches and with little diminution of
diameter, massive spreading limbs forming a broad open irregular head
sometimes 100 deg. in diameter, their extremities usually erect or more or
less pendulous, and slender branchlets coated at first like the leaves,
petioles, and stipules with thick pale deciduous tomentum, during their
first summer dark green and glabrous, marked by minute oblong pale
lenticels, becoming dark orange-brown and rather lustrous during their
first winter and light gray in their second year. Winter-buds 1/4'--3/8'
long. Bark of young trunks and large branches rarely more than 1/2'
thick, dark reddish brown, broken into small oblong thick appressed
plate-like scales, smooth, light gray, and separating higher on the tree
into large thin scales, in falling exposing large irregular surfaces of
the pale yellow, whitish, or greenish inner bark, becoming at the base
of large trunks 2'--3' thick, dark brown, and divided by deep furrows
into broad rounded ridges covered by small thin appressed scales. Wood
the favorite material for tobacco boxes, ox-yokes, and butcher's blocks,
and now largely used for furniture and the interior finish of houses.

Distribution. Borders of streams and lakes on rich bottom-lands;
southeastern Maine to northern Vermont and through southern Ontario and
Michigan to central and southern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska, eastern
Kansas, and eastern Oklahoma to the valley of the Arkansas River (Clay
County), and southward to western Florida (Gladsden County) central
Alabama and Mississippi, and the valley of the Rio Grande (Zavalla
County) western Texas; common but most abundant and of its largest size
on the bottom lands of streams in the basin of the lower Ohio and
Mississippi rivers; less abundant and of smaller size in the coast
region of the Carolinas and in western Texas; ascending the Appalachian
Mountains up to altitudes of 2500 deg. The most massive if not the tallest
deciduous-leaved tree of eastern North America.

Sometimes planted as a street tree, especially in the cities of eastern
Texas; passing into


              1. Platanus occidentalis var. glabrata Sarg.

                       _Platanus glabrata Fern._

[Illustration: Fig. 332]

Leaves usually broader than long, truncate, broad-cuneate or rarely
cordate at base, 3-lobed by sinuses acute or rounded in the bottom, the
lobes long-acuminate, entire, the lateral lobes often furnished near the
base with one or rarely with two small acuminate incurved secondary
lobes occasionally found also on the terminal lobe, tomentose below and
pubescent above when the flowers open the end of March in Texas, later
becoming glabrous except on the under side of the midrib and veins,
usually about 2-3/4'--5-1/2' long and 3'--3-1/2' wide; petioles
pubescent, becoming glabrous. Peduncles bearing one or rarely two heads.
Flowers and Fruit like those of the species.

Distribution. Western Texas, common; valley of the Colorado River, near
Austin, Travis County, to that of the Devil's River, Valverde County; in
Coahuila and Nuovo Leon; rarely northward with widely scattered
individuals; the prevailing form on the Edwards Plateau and in the
counties adjacent to the Rio Grande.


                  2. Platanus racemosa Nutt. Sycamore.

[Illustration: Fig. 333]

Leaves 3--5-lobed to below the middle by broad sinuses acute or rounded
in the bottom, the lobes acute or acuminate, entire, dentate with remote
callous tipped teeth, or occasionally coarsely sinuate-toothed, usually
cordate or sometimes truncate, or cuneate and decurrent on the petiole
at base, thick and firm, light green above, paler and more or less
thickly coated below with pale pubescence most abundant along the midrib
and primary veins, 6'--10' long and broad; petioles stout, pubescent,
1'--3' in length; stipules 1'--1-1/2' long, entire or dentate, often
persistent until spring. Flowers: peduncles hoary-pubescent, bearing
usually 4 or 5 heads of staminate flowers and 2--7 heads of pistillate
flowers, a head of the staminate flowers occasionally appearing on the
pistillate peduncle above the heads of fertile flowers. Fruit: heads
3/4' in diameter, on slender zigzag glabrous or pubescent stems 6'--9'
in length; akene acute or rounded at apex, 1/3' long, tomentose while
young, becoming glabrous.

A tree, 40 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 9 deg. in diameter above the
broad tapering base, erect and free of branches for half its height,
more often divided near the ground into secondary stems erect,
inclining, or prostrate for 20 deg.--30 deg. at their base, thick heavy more or
less contorted spreading branches forming an open irregular round-topped
head, and branchlets coated at first with thick pale deciduous tomentum,
light reddish brown, and marked by numerous small lenticels in their
first winter, becoming gradually darker in their second and third years;
usually smaller, with a trunk 2 deg.--4 deg. in diameter. Winter-buds nearly
1/2' long. Bark at the base of old trunks 3'--4' thick, dark brown,
deeply furrowed, with broad rounded ridges separating on the surface
into thin scales; thinner, smooth, and pale, or almost white higher on
the trunk and on the branches.

Distribution. Banks of the streams of western California; valley of the
upper Sacramento River (Tehama County) southward through the interior
valleys, along the western foothills of the Sierra Nevada and on the
southern coast ranges; and on Mount San Pedro Martir in Lower
California; exceedingly common in all the valleys of the California
coast ranges from Monterey to the southern borders of the state, and
ascending the southern slopes of the San Bernardino Mountains to
altitudes of 3000 deg.--4000 deg.


                3. Platanus Wrightii S. Wats. Sycamore.

[Illustration: Fig. 334]

Leaves divided by narrow sinuses to below the middle and sometimes
nearly to the center into 3--7 but usually into 3--5 elongated acute
lobes entire, or dentate with callous-tipped teeth, or occasionally
furnished with 1 or 2 lateral lobes, sometimes deeply cordate by the
downward projection of the lower lobes, or often truncate or cuneate at
base, thin and firm in texture, light green and glabrous above, covered
below with pale pubescence, 6'--8' long and broad, with a slender
midrib, and primary veins connected by conspicuous reticulate veinlets;
petioles stout, glabrous or puberulous, 1-1/2'--3' in length. Flowers:
peduncles hoary-tomentose, bearing 1--4 heads of flowers. Fruit: heads
on slender glabrous stems 6'--8' long, about 3/4' in diameter; akenes
glabrous, 1/4' long, truncate at apex.

A tree, often 60 deg.--80 deg. high, with a straight trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter,
gradually tapering and free of branches for 20 deg.--30 deg., or with a trunk
divided at the ground into 2 or 3 large stems usually more or less
reclining and often nearly prostrate for 15 deg.--20 deg., thick contorted
branches, the lowest growing almost at right angles to the trunk and
50 deg.--60 deg. long, the upper usually erect at first, finally spreading into
a broad open handsome head, and slender branchlets coated when they
first appear with thick pale tomentum, becoming glabrous or slightly
puberulous during their first winter, marked by minute scattered
lenticels, and light brown tinged with red or ashy gray, and gradually
darker in their second or third year. Winter-buds hardly more than 1/8'
long. Bark at the base of the trunk dark, 3'--4' thick, deeply and
irregularly divided into broad ridges, and covered on the surface with
small appressed scales, thinner and separating into large scales
10 deg.--15 deg. above the ground, and gradually passing into the smooth much
thinner creamy white bark faintly tinged with green of the upper
branches.

Distribution. Banks of streams in the mountain canyons of southwestern
New Mexico and southern Arizona; in northern Arizona in Oak Creek Canyon
near Flagstaff (_P. Lowell_); and in Sonora; the largest and one of the
most abundant of the deciduous-leaved trees on all the mountain ranges
of southern Arizona, extending from the mouth of canyons up to altitudes
of 5000 deg.--6000 deg. above the sea.




                             XXII. ROSACEAE.


Trees, shrubs and herbs, with watery juices, terete branchlets, scaly
buds, and alternate leaves (_opposite in Lyonothamnus_), with stipules.
Flowers perfect; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5 (_0 in Cercocarpus_),
imbricated in the bud, inserted with the numerous distinct stamens on
the edge of a disk lining the calyx-tube; anthers introrse (_extrorse in
Vauquelinia_), 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary
superior in Lyonothamnus and Heteromeles, often partly superior in
Amelanchier; ovules 2 in each cell (_1 in Cowania and Cercocarpus, 4 in
Lyonothamnus_), anatropous. Seeds without albumen (_albuminous in
Lyonothamnus and Cowania_). A family of about ninety genera chiefly
confined to the temperate parts of the world and producing many of the
most valuable fruits, including the apple, pear, quince, strawberry,
raspberry, and blackberry. The six tribes into which the genera of the
family are grouped, have arborescent representatives in North America.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Tribe 1. Spiraeoideae. Fruit a woody capsule.
    Flowers in terminal cymose corymbs; calyx-lobes persistent; ovary
          5-celled; ovules ascending; mature carpels adherent below and
          opening down the back; albumen 0; leaves simple.
                                                         1. Vauquelinia.
    Flowers in terminal corymbs; calyx-lobes deciduous; ovary 2-celled;
          ovules 4 in each cell, pendulous; mature carpels opening on
          the ventral and partly on the dorsal suture; albumen thin;
          leaves opposite, simple or pinnately divided.
                                                        2. Lyonothamnus.
  Tribe 2. Pomoideae. Fruit a pome composed of the thickened and
        succulent calyx-tube inclosing the papery or bony carpels;
        stipules free from the petioles.
    Mature carpels papery.
      Carpels as many as the styles.
        Flowers in few-flowered terminal racemes on short spur-like
              lateral branchlets; ovary 3--5-celled; styles more or less
              united below; leaves simple; winter-buds small.
                                                               3. Malus.
        Flowers in broad compound terminal cymes; ovary 2--4, usually
              3-celled; styles distinct; fruit subglobose; leaves
              unequally pinnate; winter-buds large.
                                                              4. Sorbus.
        Flowers in large terminal corymbose panicles; ovary nearly
              superior, 2-celled; styles distinct; fruit obovoid.
                                                         5. Heteromeles.
      Carpels becoming at maturity twice as many as the styles; flowers
            in erect or nodding racemes; ovary inferior or partly
            superior; styles 2--5, more or less united below; fruit
            subglobose or pyriform; leaves simple, deciduous.
                                                         6. Amelanchier.
    Mature carpels bony; flowers in terminal cymose corymbs; ovary
          1--5-celled; styles distinct; fruit globose to pyriform;
          leaves simple, deciduous.
                                                            7. Crataegus.
  Tribe 3. Dryadae. Calyx-tube turbinate, campanulate or hemispheric;
        petals 5; ovary composed of 1 or several carpels; fruit an akene
        tipped with the elongated plumose style.
    Flowers terminal on short branchlets, solitary; calyx-tube
          turbinate; carpels 5--12; leaves alternate, toothed or
          pinnatifid.
                                                             8. Cowania.
  Tribe 4. Cercocarpae. Calyx-tube salver-shaped; petals 0; ovary
        composed of a single carpel; fruit an akene, tipped with the
        elongated plumose style.
    Leaves alternate, simple, entire or serrate.
                                                         9. Cercocarpus.
  Tribe 5. Prunoideae. Fruit a 1-seeded drupe; ovary 1-celled; style
        terminal; ovules pendulous.
    Flowers in fascicled umbels, or racemes; leaves simple, deciduous or
          persistent.
                                                             10. Prunus.
  Tribe 6. Chrysobalanoideae. Fruit a 1-seeded drupe; ovary 1-celled;
        style lateral, ovules ascending.
    Flowers in axillary or terminal cymose panicles; leaves simple,
          persistent.
                                                      11. Chrysobalanus.




                          1. VAUQUELINIA Corr.


Trees or shrubs, with slender terete branchlets and scaly bark. Leaves
alternate or rarely opposite, lanceolate, serrate, long-petiolate,
reticulate-veined, coriaceous, persistent; stipules minute, acute,
deciduous. Flowers on slender bibracteolate pedicels, in compound
terminal leafy cymose corymbs; calyx short-turbinate, coriaceous,
5-lobed, the lobes ovate, obtuse or acute, erect, persistent; petals 5,
orbicular or oblong, white, becoming reflexed, persistent; stamens
15--25, inserted in 3 or 4 series, equal or semiequal, those of the
outer row opposite the petals; filaments subulate, exserted, persistent;
anthers versatile, extrorse; carpels 5, opposite the sepals, inserted on
the thickened base of the calyx-tube and united below into a 5-celled
ovoid tomentose ovary crowned with 5 short spreading styles dilated into
capitate stigmas; ovules subbasilar, ascending, prolonged at the apex
into thin membranaceous wings; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit
a woody ovoid 5-celled tomentose capsule inclosed at the base by the
remnants of the flower, the mature carpels adherent below and at
maturity splitting down the back. Seeds 2 in each cell, ascending,
compressed; testa membranaceous, expanded into a long terminal
membranaceous wing; embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons
flat; radicle straight, erect.

Vauquelinia is confined to the New World and is distributed from New
Mexico, Arizona and Lower California to southern Mexico. Three species
are distinguished; of these one inhabits the mountain ranges of southern
Arizona and New Mexico.

The generic name is in honor of the French chemist Louis Nicholas
Vauquelin (1763--1829).


                    1. Vauquelinia californica Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 335]

Leaves narrowly lanceolate, acuminate or rarely rounded at apex,
abruptly cuneate or slightly rounded at base, and remotely serrate with
minute glandular teeth, when they unfold puberulous above and densely
tomentose below, and at maturity coriaceous, bright yellow-green and
glabrous on the upper and tomentose on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--3'
long, 1/4'--1/2' wide, with a thick conspicuous midrib grooved on the
upper side, and numerous thin primary veins connected by reticulate
veinlets; deciduous in spring or early summer; petioles thick,
1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers appearing in June, 1/4' in diameter, in
hoary-tomentose panicles 2'--3' across; petals oblong; inner surface of
the disk pilose. Fruit fully grown by the end of August, 1/4' long,
persistent on the branches after opening until the spring of the
following year; conspicuous from the contrast of the bright red faded
petals and the white silky pubescence of the calyx and carpels; seed
1/12' long, and one third as long as its wing.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a slender often hollow trunk 5'--6' in
diameter, rigid upright contorted branches, and slender branchlets at
first bright reddish brown and more or less thickly covered with hoary
tomentum, becoming light brown or gray in their second year and marked
by large elevated leaf-scars; or more often a low shrub. Winter-buds:
axillary minute, acuminate, reddish brown, pubescent. Bark about 1/16'
thick, dark red-brown, and broken on the surface into small square
persistent plate-like scales. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, dark
rich brown streaked with red, with 14 or 15 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Bottoms and rocky sides of gulches, or on grassy slopes;
mountain ranges of extreme southwestern New Mexico (Guadalupe Canyon,
teste _E. A. Means_), southern Arizona, Sonora, and Lower California;
arborescent and of its largest size in Arizona on the Santa Catalina
Mountains at altitudes of about 5000 deg. above the sea.




                        2. LYONOTHAMNUS A. Gray.


A tree or shrub, with scaly bark exfoliating in long strips, stout
terrete pubescent ultimately glabrous branchlets, and scaly, acuminate
buds. Leaves opposite, long-petiolate, lanceolate, acuminate, rounded or
cuneate at base, entire, finely crenulate-serrate or serrulate lobulate
below the middle, or sometimes irregularly pinnately parted into 3--8
linear-lanceolate remote lobulate segments, coriaceous, transversely
many-veined, dark green above, paler and more or less pubescent below,
persistent; stipules lanceolate, acute, minute, caducous. Flowers on
slender pedicels, in broad compound terminal pubescent cymose corymbs,
with minute acute persistent bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube
hemispheric, with 1--3 bractlets, tomentose on the outer surface, the
lobes nearly triangular, slightly keeled, apiculate, persistent; disk
10-lobed, with a slightly thickened margin; petals 5, orbicular,
sessile, white; stamens 15, inserted in pairs opposite the petals and
singly opposite the sepals; filaments subulate, incurved, as long as the
petals; anthers oblong, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally;
carpels 2, inserted in the bottom of the calyx-tube, forming a superior
glandular, hairy ovary; styles 2, spreading; stigmas capitate, truncate;
ovules 4 in each cell, suspended; micropyle superior; raphe ventral.
Fruit of 2 woody ovoid glandular-setulose carpels, dehiscent on the
ventral and partly dehiscent on the dorsal suture. Seeds ovate-oblong,
pointed at the ends; seed-coat light brown, thin and membranaceous;
hilum orbicular, apical; raphe broad and wing-like; cotyledons oblong,
acuminate, twice as long as the straight radicle directed toward the
hilum.

Lyonothamnus is represented by a single species found only on the
islands off the coast of southern California.

_Lyonothamnus_, in honor of its discoverer, William S. Lyon.


             1. Lyonothamnus floribundus A. Gray. Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 336]

Leaves 4'--8' long, 1/2' wide when entire, or 4' wide when pinnately
divided, when they unfold covered below with hoary deciduous tomentum,
at maturity dark green and lustrous above and yellow-green, glabrous or
pubescent below, with an orange-colored midrib. Flowers in June and
July, 1/8'--1/4' in diameter, in clusters varying from 4'--8' across.
Fruit ripens in August and September, 3/16' long.

A bushy tree, rarely 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a single straight trunk 8'--10'
in diameter, and slender branchlets at first pale orange color and
coated with deciduous pubescence, becoming at the end of their first
season bright red and lustrous; usually shrubby, with several tall
stems, or in exposed situations a low bush. Bark 1/3' thick, dark
red-brown, and composed of numerous thin papery layers, forming after
exfoliating long loose strips persistent on the stem. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, bright clear red faintly tinged with orange.

Distribution. Steep slopes of canyons in dry rocky soil; on the islands
of Santa Catalina, Santa Cruz, San Clemente, Santa Rosa, California;
most abundant and of its largest size on the northern shores of Santa
Cruz; on Santa Catalina much smaller and rarely arborescent.

Now occasionally cultivated in California.




                         3. MALUS Hall. Apple.


Trees, with scaly bark, slender terete branchlets, small obtuse buds
covered by imbricated scales, those of the inner ranks accrescent and
marking the base of the branchlet with conspicuous ring-like scars, and
fibrous roots. Leaves conduplicate in the bud in the American species,
simple, often incisely lobed, especially those near the end of vigorous
branchlets, petiolate, deciduous, the petioles in falling leaving narrow
horizontal scars marked by the ends of three equidistant fibro-vascular
bundles; stipules free from the petioles, filiform, early deciduous.
Flowers in short terminal racemes, with filiform deciduous bracts and
bractlets, on short lateral spur-like often spinescent branchlets;
calyx-tube obconic, 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud, acuminate,
becoming reflexed, persistent and erect on the fruit or deciduous;
petals rounded at apex, contracted below into a stalk-like base, white,
pink or rose color; stamens usually 20 in 3 series, those of the outer
series opposite the petals; carpels 3--5, usually 5, alternate with the
petals, united into an inferior ovary; styles united at base; ovules 2
in each cell, ascending; raphe dorsal; micropyle inferior. Fruit a pome
with homogeneous flesh, and papery carpels joined at apex, free in the
middle; seeds 2, or by abortion 1 in each cell, ovoid, acute, erect,
without albumen; seed-coat cartilaginous, chestnut-brown and lustrous;
embryo erect; cotyledons plano-convex, fleshy; radicle short, inferior.
Malus is confined to North America where nine species have been
recognized, to western and southeastern Europe, and to central,
southern, and eastern Asia. Of exotic species, _Malus pumila_ Mill. of
southeastern Europe and central Asia, the Apple-tree of orchards, has
become widely naturalized in northeastern North America. Several of the
species of eastern Asia and their hybrids are cultivated for their
handsome flowers, or for their fruits, the Siberian Crabs of
pomologists.

_Malus_ is the classical name of the Apple-tree.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Calyx persistent on the green or rarely yellow fruit covered with a
        waxy exudation; leaves of vigorous shoots laterally lobed;
        anthers dark (Chloromeles).
    Leaves glabrous at maturity.
      Leaves on flowering branchlets, acute or acuminate, serrate.
        Leaves at the end of vigorous shoots distinctly lobed, those of
              flowering branchlets incisely serrate or lobed.
          Leaves subcordate, with the lowest pair of veins springing
                directly from the base, light green on the lower
                surface.
                                                     1. M. glabrata (A).
          Leaves truncate or rounded at base, the lowest pair of veins
                at some distance from the base.
            Leaves glaucescent beneath, thickish at maturity.
                                               2. M. glaucescens (A, C).
            Leaves light green on the lower surface, thin.
                                                 3. M. coronaria (A, C).
        Leaves at the end of vigorous shoots only slightly lobed, those
              of flowering branchlets serrate.
          Leaves oval-elliptic, acute; fruit much depressed, distinctly
                broader than high.
                                                4. M. platycarpa (A, C).
          Leaves lanceolate, acuminate, thin; fruit subglobose.
                                                       5. M. lancifolia.
        Leaves on flowering branchlets usually rounded at apex, those at
              the end of vigorous shoots only slightly lobed; fruit
              subglobose.
                                              6. M. angustifolia (A, C).
    Leaves tomentose or villose at maturity, at least those of vigorous
          shoots, strongly veined.
      Calyx glabrous on the outer surface; leaves of flowering
            branchlets without lobes, glabrous or nearly so.
                                                 7. M. bracteata (A, C).
      Calyx tomentose or pubescent on the outer surface; leaves usually
            incisely lobed, pubescent or tomentose beneath, rarely
            glabrous.
                                                   8. M. ioensis (A, C).
  Calyx deciduous from the yellow or reddish fruit without a waxy
        exudation; leaves of vigorous shoots often 3-lobed at apex;
        anthers yellow (Sorbomalus).
                                                     9. M. fusca (B, G).


                  1. Malus glabrata Rehd. Crab Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 337]

Leaves triangular-ovate or ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, cordate or
rarely truncate at base, lobed with 2 or 3 pairs of short-acute or
short-acuminate coarsely serrate lobes, when they unfold bronze color
and sparingly covered with caducous hairs, glabrous when fully expanded,
and at maturity dark yellow-green and lustrous above, pale below,
2-1/2'--3' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with 5--7 pairs of prominent
primary veins, the lowest pair from the base of the leaf; petioles
slender, glabrous, 4/5'--1-1/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots more deeply lobed and often 4' long and 3-1/2' wide. Flowers
about 1-1/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous purple pedicels
3/5'--1-1/4' long, in 4--7-flowered clusters; calyx-tube purple and
glabrous, the lobes glabrous on the outer surface, slightly longer than
the tube; petals suborbicular or broadly ovate, abruptly contracted
below, about 3/5' wide, often erose-denticulate; stamens about one third
shorter than the petals; styles 5, slightly longer than the stamens,
villose below the middle. Fruit on slender pedicels about 4/5' in
length, depressed globose, slightly angled, distinctly ribbed at the
deeply impressed apex, about 1-1/4' high and 1-1/2' in diameter, with a
deep basal cavity; seed obovoid-oblong, about 1/3' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--25 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely 1 deg. in diameter,
spreading branches often armed with stout straight spines up to 1-1/2'
in length, and glabrous purple branchlets, becoming purple-brown and
slightly lustrous at the end of their first season, dull red-brown in
their second year, and ultimately grayish brown. Winter-buds ovoid or
oblong-ovoid, acute, glabrous, dark purple-brown up to 1/4' in length.

Distribution. A common Crab Apple in the valleys of western North
Carolina at altitudes of 2000 deg.--3500 deg.; near Biltmore, Buncombe County,
Dillsboro, Jackson County, and Highlands, Macon County.


                 2. Malus glaucescens Rehd. Crab Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 338]

Leaves triangular-ovate or ovate, acute, short-acuminate or rounded at
apex, truncate or rounded at base, those of flowering branchlets more or
less lobed and coarsely serrate with abruptly acuminate teeth, their
lobes triangular, broad-ovate and abruptly acuminate, those of the
lowest pair usually the longest, bronze color and covered with thin
floccose tomentum when they unfold, soon glabrous, dull yellowish green
above, glaucescent below, 1-1/2'--3-1/2' long and 1-1/4'--3' wide, with
4--7 pairs of prominent primary veins; turning yellow or dark purple and
falling early in the autumn; petioles slender, slightly villose at
first, soon glabrous, 1-1/2'--3' in length; stipules filiform, purple,
glabrous or slightly villose, about 1/3' long; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots broad-ovate, acuminate, rounded or slightly cordate at
base, often deeply lobed, 3'--3-1/2' long, 3' wide, with petioles
1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers 1-1/3'--1-1/2' in diameter, on slender
glabrous pedicels, 4/5'--1-1/4' in length, in usually 5--7-flowered
clusters, calyx-tube coated with floccose caducous pubescence or
glabrous, slightly shorter than the long-acuminate lobes densely
tomentose on the inner surface; petals oval, abruptly contracted below
into a long claw, white or rose color, 1/2'--3/5' wide; stamens about
one third shorter than the petals; styles 5, about as long as the
stamens, densely villose below and united at base for about one fourth
of their length. Fruit depressed globose, pale yellow when ripe,
1'--1-1/4' high, 1-1/4'--1-3/4' in diameter, with a shallow only
slightly corrugated cavity at apex and a shallow concave depression at
base.

An arborescent shrub or small tree, rarely more than 15 deg. high, often
spreading into thickets, with a trunk 4' or 5' in diameter, spreading
spinescent branches forming an open irregular head, and slender
branchlets slightly pubescent at first, soon glabrous, bright red-brown
in their first and second years, becoming dark gray-brown and marked by
yellow lenticels. Bark dark gray, divided by shallow longitudinal
fissures and finally separating into small thin scales.

Distribution. Glades and open woods in rich soil; western New York
(Ontario, Munroe, Cattaraugus and Erie Counties) to southern Ontario,
western Pennsylvania (near Carnot, Allegheny County); and southeastern
and northern Ohio; Tiptop, Tazewell County, Virginia; near Spruce Pine,
Mitchell County, North Carolina; slopes of Lookout Mountain, above
Valleyhead, DeKalb County, Alabama; apparently most generally
distributed and most abundant in Ohio.


            3. Malus coronaria L. Crab Apple. Garland Tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 339]

Leaves ovate to oval, rounded, acute or acuminate and often abruptly
short-pointed at apex, rounded or cuneate at base, and coarsely serrate
usually only above the middle, tinged with red and villose-pubescent
when they unfold, soon glabrous, and at maturity yellow-green above,
paler below, 2'--3' long and 1-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib and
thin inconspicuous primary veins; turning yellow in the autumn before
falling; petioles slender, at first puberulous, becoming glabrous,
1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate,
usually lobed with short acute lobes, more coarsely serrate, thicker,
often 3'--4' long and 2'--3' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary
veins, and stout petioles often tinged with red and 1-1/2'--2' in
length. Flowers 1-1/4'--1-1/2' in diameter, on glabrous pedicels
1/2'--1' long, in 3--6-flowered clusters; calyx-tube glabrous, or rarely
more or less densely villose-pubescent (var. _dasycalyx_ Rehd.), the
lobes long-acuminate, longer than the tube, sparingly pubescent on the
outer surface, hoary-tomentose on the inner surface; petals
oblong-obovate, gradually or abruptly narrowed into a long claw, about
1/2' wide; stamens shorter than the petals; styles 5, clothed for half
their length with long white hairs and united at the base. Fruit on
slender pedicels 1-1/2'--2' in length, green when fully grown,
yellow-green at maturity, 3/4'--1' high and 1'--1-1/4' wide.

A tree, often forming dense thickets, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk
12'--14' in diameter, dividing 8 deg.--10 deg. above the ground into several
stout spreading branches forming a wide open head, and branchlets
hoary-tomentose when they first appear, glabrous or slightly pubescent,
bright red-brown and marked by occasional small pale lenticels in their
first winter, and developing in their second year stout, spur-like,
somewhat spinescent lateral branchlets. Winter-buds obtuse, with bright
red scales scarious and ciliate on the dark margins. Bark 1/3' thick,
longitudinally fissured, the outer layer separating into long narrow
persistent red-brown scales. Wood heavy, close-grained, not strong,
light red, with yellow sapwood of 18--20 layers of annual growth; used
for levers, the handles of tools, and many small domestic articles.

Distribution. Western New York to southern Ontario and westward through
Ohio, southern Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, and southern Wisconsin to
Missouri (Jackson and Butler Counties), and southward through
Pennsylvania to northern Delaware, and along the Appalachian Mountains
to North Carolina, sometimes up to altitudes of 3300 deg.; the var.
_dasycalyx_ common and widely distributed in Ohio (Lorain, Clark,
Franklin, Hardin and Lucas Counties, _R. E. Horsey_), and in Wells and
Porter Counties, Indiana (_C. C. Deam_).

Sometimes planted in the gardens of the northern and eastern states;
passing into


                  Malus coronaria var. elongata Rehd.

                         _Malus elongata_ Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 340]

Leaves oblong-ovate, gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex, rounded
or broad-cuneate at base, incisely serrate or slightly lobed,
floccose-tomentose when they unfold, soon glabrous, dark yellow-green
above, lighter below, 2'--3-1/2' long, 1'--1-1/4' wide; at the end of
vigorous shoots ovate, rounded or broad and cuneate at base, acuminate,
lobed with short acuminate lobes, 3-1/2'--4' long, 2'--2-1/2' wide, with
a prominent midrib and primary veins, and slightly pubescent
orange-colored petioles 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers and Fruit as in
the species.

A shrub or small tree, sometimes forming dense almost impenetrable
thickets.

Distribution. Western New York (Ontario, Cattaraugus and Erie Counties);
Virginia (on Peak Mountain, Pulaski County); West Virginia (near Elkins,
Randolph County, and White Sulphur Springs, Greenbrier County), and
westward to southern Ohio (Oberlin, Lorain County); North Carolina (near
Highlands, Macon County); and northeastern Georgia (Rabun County).


                 4. Malus platycarpa Rehd. Crab Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 341]

Leaves ovate to elliptic, abruptly contracted at the rounded apex into a
short point, rounded at base, and sharply usually doubly serrate, when
they unfold covered with long white hairs caducous except from the
midrib and at maturity glabrous; dark yellow-green, lustrous, and
slightly rugulose on the upper surface, lighter on the lower surface,
2-1/2'--3-1/4' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with 5--7 pairs of
prominent primary veins; petioles slender, villose, often becoming
nearly glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length; on vigorous shoots often
broad-ovate and lobed with short triangular lobes sometimes 4' long and
nearly as wide. Flowers about 1-1/2' in diameter, on glabrous pedicels
1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, in 3--6-flowered clusters; calyx-tube glabrous or
rarely pubescent (var. _Hoopesii_ Rehd.), the lobes lanceolate,
acuminate, longer than the tube, glabrous on the outer surface, densely
tomentose on the inner surface; petals orbicular-obovate, usually
irregularly incisely dentate and abruptly contracted at base into a
short claw, slightly villose on the inner surface near the base, 1/2' to
nearly 1' wide; stamens slightly shorter than the petals; styles 5,
somewhat shorter than the stamens, villose below the middle and united
below for one third their length. Fruit on slender pedicels,
1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length, depressed globose with a deep cavity at base
and apex, 1-1/2'--1-3/4' high and 2'--2-1/2' wide; seeds oblong-obovoid,
about 1/3' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 4' or 5' in diameter, spreading
unarmed branches, and branchlets clothed when they first appear with
thin villose tomentum, becoming by the end of their first year glabrous,
brown or purple-brown and lustrous, dull brown in their second season,
and ultimately grayish brown. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, glabrous except
on the villose margins of the purplish brown scales, about 1/4' long.

Distribution. Near Franklin, Macon County, North Carolina; Mercer
Springs, Mercer County, West Virginia; near Olympia, Bath County,
Kentucky; Youngstown, Mahoning County, Ohio (_R. E. Horsey_).


                 5. Malus lancifolia Rehd. Crab Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 342]

Leaves ovate-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute or short-acuminate
at apex, rounded or broad-cuneate at base, finely or coarsely doubly
serrate with short or occasionally with larger teeth pointing forward,
covered with thin floccose tomentum when they unfold, soon glabrous,
bright yellow-green, 1-1/2'--3' long, 1/2'--1' wide, with 8--10 pairs of
veins; petioles slender, slightly villose at first, soon glabrous,
1/2'--1' in length; leaves on vigorous shoots ovate or oblong-ovate,
slightly lobed, more densely pubescent below, 2-1/2'--3-3/4' long,
2'--2-1/2' wide, with a thin midrib and 4--7 pairs of veins slightly
villose through the season, and stouter petioles. Flowers 1-1/4'--1-1/2'
in diameter, in 3--6-flowered clusters, on slender glabrous pedicels
about 1-1/4' in length; calyx glabrous, the lobes longer than the tube,
oblong-lanceolate, glabrous on the outer surface, coated with villose
tomentum on the inner surface; petals contracted into a long narrow
claw, glabrous, white or rose color, 1/2' wide; stamens shorter than the
petals; styles 5, densely villose below the middle. Fruit on slender
drooping pedicels about 1' long, subglobose, 1'--1-1/4' wide.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--15' in diameter, spreading
spinescent branches forming an open pyramidal head, and slender
branchlets slightly pubescent or nearly glabrous when they first appear,
becoming reddish brown at the end of their first season and ultimately
gray-brown. Bark of the trunk brownish gray, divided by shallow
longitudinal fissures and separating into thin plates.

Distribution. Northeastern Pennsylvania (Scranton, Lackawanna County) to
the western and southwestern parts of the state, and southward to
Randolph and Greenbrier Counties, West Virginia, Pulaski County (on Peak
Mountain), Virginia, and to the mountains of North Carolina up to
altitudes of 3200 deg., and westward to northeastern Kentucky, through
southern Ohio, eastern Indiana (Delaware County) and southern Illinois
(Richland, Jackson, Gallatin and Pope Counties); Missouri (Jackson and
Wayne Counties).


                6. Malus angustifolia Michx. Crab Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 343]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-obovate, rounded or acute and apiculate at
apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, and crenately serrate,
hoary-tomentose below and sparingly villose above when they unfold, soon
glabrous, or occasionally pubescent on the midrib below, and at maturity
subcoriaceous dull green on the upper and light green on the lower
surface, 1'--2' long, 1/2'--3/4' wide; turning brown in drying; petioles
slender, at first villose, soon glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; stipules
linear, rose-colored, 1/3' long; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
ovate, oblong-ovate or elliptic, usually lobed with numerous short acute
lobes, or coarsely serrate, usually rounded at apex, broad-cuneate at
base, at maturity glabrous, or slightly floccose-pubescent below,
especially on the midrib and veins, 2'--3' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, with
stout often rose-colored glabrous or pubescent petioles. Flowers about
1' in diameter, very fragrant, on slender glabrous or rarely puberulous
pedicels, 3/4'--1' long, in mostly 3--5-flowered clusters; calyx-tube
short and broad, glabrous, the lobes about as long as the tube, glabrous
on the outer surface, thickly covered with hoary tomentum on the inner
surface; petals oblong-obovate, gradually narrowed below into a long
claw, rose-colored, about 1/4' wide; stamens shorter than the petals;
styles 5, united at base, villose below the middle. Fruit
depressed-globose, pale yellow-green, 3/4'--1' in diameter.

A tree, rarely 30 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in diameter, rigid
spreading or rarely slender and pendulous (var. _pendula_ Rehd.)
branches forming a broad open head, and young branchlets clothed at
first with pale caducous pubescence, soon glabrous, in their first
winter brown slightly tinged with red, and in their second year light
brown and marked by occasional orange-colored lenticels. Winter-buds
1/16' long, chestnut-brown, slightly pubescent. Bark 3/8'--1/4' thick,
dark reddish brown, and divided by deep longitudinal fissures into
narrow ridges broken on the surface into small persistent plate-like
scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, light brown tinged with red,
with thick yellow sapwood; occasionally employed for levers, the handles
of tools and other small objects. The fruit is used for preserves.

Distribution. Southeastern Virginia in the neighborhood of the coast,
southward to western Florida, and through southern Alabama and
Mississippi to western Louisiana (near Winnfield, Winn County); in the
Carolinas and Georgia, ranging inland to the Appalachian foothills and
in Mississippi to the neighborhood of Iuka, Tishomingo County in the
northeastern corner of the state; in southern Illinois (Pope and Johnson
Counties, _E. J. Palmer_).


                        7. Malus bracteata Rehd.

[Illustration: Fig. 344]

Leaves elliptic-ovate to oblong-ovate, acute, on flowering branchlets
sometimes obtusish at apex, cuneate or rounded at base, serrate or
incisely serrate, sometimes slightly lobed near the base, covered below
with floccose tomentum when they unfold, soon glabrous, and at maturity
thin, bright yellow-green and lustrous above, light green below,
1-1/2'--3' long, 1'--1-1/4' wide; petioles glabrous, reddish like the
under side of the midrib, 2/3'--1' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots ovate, acute, cuneate at base, usually lobed with 4 or 5
pairs of short acute or rounded lobes, more thickly tomentose when they
unfold, at maturity thicker, glabrous above, more or less pubescent
below, often 3'--3-1/2' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout midrib
and petiole. Flowers 1'--1-1/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous or
nearly glabrous pedicels, in 3--5-flowered clusters, with subulate
bractlets 1/5'--1/8' long, often persistent until after the flowers
open; calyx-tube glabrous, the lobes slightly longer than the tube,
villose on the inner surface; petals oval, narrowed into a slender claw,
deep pink, 5/12'--1/2' wide; stamens about one third shorter than the
petals; styles slightly shorter than the stamens, united at base and
villose below for a third of their length. Fruit depressed-globose, with
a shallow basal cavity and a shallow slightly corrugated cavity at apex,
slightly viscid, 4/5'--1' high and 1'--1-1/4' wide.

A tree, 15 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk up to 6' or 7' in diameter, thick
branches forming a broad often symmetrical head, and stout branchlets
red and glabrous when they first appear, becoming reddish brown and
lustrous at the end of their first season, and dull red-brown and armed
with occasional stout spines or unarmed the following year, the vigorous
shoots more or less pubescent early in the season, becoming glabrous, or
often densely pubescent until autumn. Winter-buds red-brown, glabrous,
or slightly pubescent. Bark dark brown and broken into thin closely
appressed scales.

Distribution. Missouri (Allenton, St. Louis County, and Campbell,
Dunklin County); northern Kentucky (Fordsville, Ohio County); Tennessee,
without locality; North Carolina (Biltmore, Buncombe County, near
Highlands, Macon County, up to altitudes of 3500 deg., and Abbottsburg,
Bladen County); Georgia (Dillard, Rabun County, near Augusta, Richmond
County); Florida (River Junction, Gadsden County).


                  8. Malus ioensis Britt. Crab Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 345]

Leaves elliptic to ovate or oblong-obovate, acute, acuminate or rounded
at apex, cuneate or rounded at the narrow base, crenately serrate, and
often slightly lobed with acute or rounded lobes, hoary-tomentose below
and floccose-pubescent above when they unfold, and at maturity thick and
firm, dark green, lustrous and glabrous above, pale yellow-green and
tomentose or nearly glabrous below, 2-1/2'--4' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide,
with a slender midrib and primary veins; turning yellow in the autumn
before falling; petioles slender, hoary-tomentose in early spring,
becoming pubescent or nearly glabrous, 3/4'--1' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate to oblong-ovate, acute, rounded at
the broad or narrow base, often deeply lobed, covered below through the
season with floccose easily detached tomentum, often 4' or 5' long and
3' or 4' wide, with a thick midrib and primary veins, and stout
hoary-tomentose petioles 3/4'--1' in length. Flowers 1-1/2'--2' in
diameter, on villose pubescent pedicels 1'--1-1/2' long, in
3--6-flowered clusters; calyx covered with hoary tomentum, the lobes
narrow, rather longer than the tube; petals obovate, gradually narrowed
below into a long slender claw, rose color or white, about 1/2' wide;
stamens shorter than the petals; styles 5, united at base, covered below
for a third of their length with long white hairs. Fruit on stout
tomentose or villose stems 1'--1-1/2' long, depressed globose, with
shallow basal and apical depressions, green or greenish yellow, 3/4'--1'
high, and 1'--1-1/4' wide.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, stout
spreading branches forming a wide open head, and branchlets
hoary-tomentose when they first appear, glabrous or slightly pubescent,
bright red-brown and marked by occasional small pale lenticels in their
first winter, the lateral branchlets usually spinescent. Winter-buds
minute, obtuse, pubescent above the middle. Bark 1/3' thick, covered
with long narrow persistent red-brown scales.

Distribution. Southeastern Minnesota to Iowa, eastern Nebraska, and
Missouri, and through southern Wisconsin and Illinois to Huntington
County, Indiana. Passing into var. _Palmeri_ Rehd., differing from the
type in its smaller oblong more thinly pubescent leaves usually rounded
at apex, those of the flowering branchlets crenately serrate and not
lobed; a small tree rarely more than 15 deg. high, with a slender stem,
spiny zigzag branches and stout branchlets densely tomentose when they
first appear, becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous and reddish or
gray-brown at the end of their first season; the common form in
Missouri, Arkansas and eastern Oklahoma. On the Edwards Plateau, in
western Texas (Blanco, Kendall, and Kerr Counties) _M. ioensis_ is
represented by the var. _texana_ Rehd., differing in its smaller and
broader leaves only slightly or not at all lobed and densely villose
through the season; usually an intricately branched shrub forming large
dense thickets. A shrub from Campbell, Dunklin County, southeastern
Missouri, with small leaves and flowers, a glabrescent calyx, and long
slender flexible branches armed with numerous long straight spines is
distinguished as var. _spinosa_ Rehd. A variety with elliptic-ovate to
oblong-ovate leaves rounded or broadly cuneate at base, nearly entire or
crenately serrate, pubescent below at least on the veins, with densely
villose petioles is distinguished as var. _creniserrata_ Rehd.; a small
tree with slender spineless branchlets villose while young; near
Pineville, Rapides Parish, and Crowly, Arcadia Parish, western
Louisiana. A variety with less deeply lobed glabrescent
oblong-lanceolate leaves is distinguished as var. _Bushii_ Rehd.;
Williamsville, Wayne County, and Monteer, Shannon County, southern
Missouri.

Malus ioensis var. _plena_ Rehd., the Bechtel Crab, a form with large
rose-colored double flowers is a favorite garden plant.

x _Malus Soulardii_ Britt. with ovate, elliptic or obovate usually
obtuse leaves, rugose and tomentose on the lower surface, and
depressed-globose fruit 2'--2-1/2' in diameter, is believed to be a
hybrid of _Malus ioensis_ and _Malus pumila_.


                    9. Malus fusca Schn. Crab Apple.

                        _Malus rivularis_ Roem.

[Illustration: Fig. 346]

Leaves ovate to elliptic or lanceolate, acute or acuminate, cuneate or
rounded at base, sharply serrate with appressed glandular teeth, and
often slightly 3-lobed, when they unfold pubescent on the lower and
puberulous on the upper surface, at maturity thick and firm, dark green
and glabrous above, pale and pubescent or glabrous below, 1'--4' long,
1/2'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary veins and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; before falling in the autumn turning
bright orange and scarlet; petioles stout, rigid, pubescent, 1'--1-1/2'
in length; stipules narrowly lanceolate, acute, 1/2'--3/4' long; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots ovate to obovate, acuminate, often 3-lobed
above the middle, rounded or cuneate at base, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long and
wide, with petioles often 2' in length. Flowers 3/4' in diameter on
slender pubescent or glabrous pedicels, 1/2'--3/4' long, in short
many-flowered clusters; calyx-tube deciduous from the mature fruit,
glabrous, puberulous or tomentose, the lobes rather longer than the
tube, minutely apiculate, glabrous or tomentose, hoary-tomentose on the
inner surface; petals orbicular to obovate, erose or undulate on the
margins, abruptly contracted into a short claw, 1/4' wide, white or rose
color; styles 2--4, glabrous. Fruit obovoid-oblong, 1/2'--3/4' long,
yellow-green, light yellow flushed with red or sometimes nearly red;
flesh thin and dry.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, and slender
branchlets coated at first with long pale hairs soon deciduous or
persistent until the autumn, becoming bright red and lustrous, and later
dark brown, and marked by minute remote pale lenticels; often a shrub
with numerous slender stems. Winter-buds 1/16' long, chestnut-brown, the
inner scales at maturity lanceolate, usually bright red, and nearly 1/2'
in length. Bark 1/4' thick, and covered by large thin loose light
red-brown plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, light
brown tinged with red, with lighter colored sapwood of 20--30 layers of
annual growth; used for mallets, mauls, the handles of tools, and the
bearings of machinery. The fruit has a pleasant subacid flavor.

Distribution. Deep rich soil in the neighborhood of streams, often
forming almost impenetrable thickets of considerable extent; Aleutian
Islands southward along the coast and islands of Alaska and British
Columbia to Sonoma and Plumas Counties, California; of its largest size
in the valleys of western Washington and Oregon.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern states,
and in western Europe.

x _Malus Dawsoniana_ Rehd., a hybrid of _Malus fusca_ and a form of _M.
pumila_, has been raised at the Arnold Arboretum from seeds collected in
Oregon.




                       4. SORBUS L. Mountain Ash.


Trees or shrubs, with smooth aromatic bark, stout terete branchlets,
large buds covered by imbricated scales, the inner accrescent and
marking the base of the branchlet by conspicuous ring-like scars, and
fibrous roots. Leaves alternate, pinnate in the American species, the
pinnae conduplicate in the bud, serrate, deciduous; stipules free from
the petioles, foliaceous. Flowers in broad terminal leafy cymes;
calyx-tube urn-shaped, 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud,
persistent; petals rounded, abruptly narrowed below, white; stamens
usually 20 in 3 series, those of the outer series opposite the petals;
carpels 2--5, usually 3; styles usually 3, distinct; ovules 2 in each
cell, ascending; raphe dorsal; micropyle inferior. Fruit a small
subglobose red or orange-red pome with acid flesh, and papery carpels
free at the apex. Seeds 2, or by abortion 1, in each cell, ovoid, acute,
erect; seed-coat cartilaginous, chestnut-brown and lustrous; embryo
erect; cotyledons plano-convex, flat; radicle short, inferior.

Sorbus is widely distributed through the northern and elevated regions
of the northern hemisphere with three or four species in North America
of which one is arborescent, and with many species in eastern Asia and
in Europe. Of the exotic species, _Sorbus Aucuparia_ L., the common
European Mountain Ash, or Rowan-tree, with several of its varieties and
hybrids, is often cultivated as an ornamental tree in Canada and the
northern states and has become sparingly naturalized northward.

_Sorbus_ is the classical name of the Pear or of the Service-tree.


                       1. Sorbus americana Marsh.

[Illustration: Fig. 347]

Leaves 6'--8' long, with 13--17 lanceolate acute taper-pointed leaflets
unequally cuneate or rounded and entire at base, sharply serrate above
with acute often glandular teeth, sessile or short-stalked, or the
terminal leaflet on a stalk sometimes 1/2' long, when they unfold
slightly pubescent below, at maturity membranaceous, glabrous, dark
yellow-green, on the upper surface, and paler or glaucescent and rarely
pubescent on the lower surface, 2'--4-1/2' long, 1/4'--1' wide, with a
prominent midrib and thin veins; turning bright clear yellow before
falling in the autumn; petioles grooved, dark green or red, 2'--3' in
length, the rachis often furnished with tufts of dark hairs at the base
of the petiolules; stipules broad, nearly triangular, variously toothed,
caducous. Flowers appearing after the leaves are fully grown, 1/8' in
diameter, on short stout pedicels, in flat cymes 3'--4' across, with
acute minute caducous bracts and bractlets; calyx broadly obconic and
puberulous, with short, nearly triangular lobes tipped with minute
glands and about half as long as the nearly orbicular creamy white
petals. Fruit 1/4' in diameter, subglobose or slightly pyriform, bright
orange-red, with thin flesh; seeds pale chestnut color, rounded at apex,
acute at base, about 1/8' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely more than a foot in diameter,
spreading slender branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and stout
branchlets pubescent at first, soon glabrous, becoming in their first
winter brown tinged with red, and marked by the large leaf-scars and by
oblong pale remote lenticels, and darker in their second year, the thin
papery outer layer of bark then easily separable from the bright green
fragrant inner layers; more often a tall or sometimes a low shrub, with
numerous stems. Winter-buds acute, 1/4'--3/4' long, with dark vinous red
acuminate scales rounded on the back, more or less pilose, covered with
a gummy exudation, the inner scales hoary-tomentose in the bud. Bark
1/8' thick, with a smooth light gray surface irregularly broken by small
appressed plate-like scales. Wood close-grained, light, soft and weak,
pale brown, with lighter colored sapwood of 15--20 layers of annual
growth. The astringent fruit is employed domestically in infusions and
decoctions, and in homoeopathic remedies.

Distribution. Borders of swamps and rocky hillsides; Newfoundland to
Manitoba and southward through the maritime provinces of Canada, Quebec
and Ontario, the elevated portions of the northeastern United States and
the region of the Great Lakes to Minnesota, and on the Appalachian
Mountains from western Pennsylvania and West Virginia to North Carolina
and Tennessee; in North Carolina ascending to altitudes of nearly 6000 deg.;
probably of its largest size on the northern shores of Lakes Huron and
Superior; in the United States, except in New England, more often a
shrub than a tree; on the Appalachian Mountains usually low, with
narrower leaflets and smaller fruit than northward.

Often cultivated in Canada and the northeastern States for the beauty of
its fruit and the brilliancy of its autumn foliage. Of its forms the
most distinct is


                   Sorbus americana var. decora Sarg.

         _Pyrus sambucifolia_ A. Gray, not Cham. and Schlecht.
                 _Pyrus americana_ var. _decora_ Sarg.
                         _Sorbus decora_ Schn.
            _Sorbus scopulina_ Britt., in part, not Greene.
             _Pyrus sitchensis_ Rob. and Fern., not Piper.

[Illustration: Fig. 348]

Leaves 4'--6' long, with 7--13 oblong-oval to ovate-lanceolate leaflets
blunt and rounded, abruptly short-pointed or acuminate at apex,
pubescent below as they unfold, at maturity glabrous, dark bluish green
on the upper surface and pale on the lower surface; petioles stout,
usually red 1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers 1/4' in diameter, in rather
narrower clusters, appearing eight to ten days later than those of the
type. Fruit subglobose, bright orange-red, often 1/2' in diameter.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in
diameter, and spreading branches forming a round-topped handsome head.

Distribution. Coast of Labrador to the northern shores of Lake Superior
and Minnesota, southward to the mountains of northern New Hampshire,
Vermont, and New York. Distinct in its extreme forms but connected with
_Sorbus americana_ by intermediate forms.

This variety of _Sorbus americana_, perhaps the most beautiful of the
genus when the large and brilliant fruits cover the branches in autumn
and early winter, occasionally finds a place in the gardens of eastern
Canada and the northern states.




                          5. HETEROMELES Roem.


A tree, with smooth pale aromatic bark, stout terete branchlets
pubescent or puberulous while young, acute winter-buds covered by
loosely imbricated red scales, and fibrous roots. Leaves
oblong-lanceolate, acute at the ends, sharply and remotely serrate with
rigid glandular teeth, or rarely almost entire, dark green and lustrous
above, paler below, feather-veined, with a broad midrib and conspicuous
reticulate veinlets; petiolate with stout petioles often furnished near
the apex with 1 or 2 slender glandular teeth; stipules free from the
petioles, subulate, rigid, minute, early deciduous. Flowers on short
stout pedicels, in ample tomentose terminal corymbose leafy panicles,
their bracts and bractlets acute, minute, usually tipped with a small
gland, caducous; calyx-tube turbinate, tomentose below, glabrate above,
the lobes short, nearly triangular, spreading, persistent; disk
cup-shaped, obscurely sulcate; petals flabellate, erose-denticulate or
emarginate at apex, contracted below into a short broad claw, thick,
glabrous, pure white; stamens 10, inserted in 1 row with the petals in
pairs opposite the calyx-lobes; filaments subulate, incurved, anthers
oblong-ovoid, emarginate; carpels 2, adnate to the calyx-tube, and
slightly united into a subglobose tomentose nearly superior ovary;
styles distinct, slightly spreading, enlarged at apex into a broad
truncate stigma; ovules 2 in each cell, ascending; raphe dorsal;
micropyle inferior. Fruit obovoid, fleshy, the thickened calyx-tube
connate to the middle only with the membranaceous carpels coated above
with long white hairs filling the cavity closed by the infolding of the
thickened persistent calyx-lobes, their tips erect and crowning the
fruit. Seed usually solitary in each cell, ovoid, obtuse, slightly
ridged on the back; seed-coat membranaceous, slightly punctate, light
brown; hilum orbicular, conspicuous; embryo filling the cavity of the
seed; cotyledons plano-convex; radicle short, inferior.

The genus is represented by a single species of western North America.

The generic name, from {eteros} and {melon}, is in reference to its
difference from related genera.


            1. Heteromeles arbutifolia Roem. Tollon. Toyon.

[Illustration: Fig. 349]

Leaves appearing with the flowers in early summer, 3'--4' long,
1'--1-1/2' wide, usually persistent during at least two winters;
petioles 1/2'--2/3' in length. Flowers opening from June to August in
clusters 4'--6' across and often more or less hidden by young lateral
branchlets rising above them. Fruit ripening in November and December,
mealy, astringent and acid, scarlet or rarely yellow, 1/3' long,
remaining on the branches until late in the winter.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a straight trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
dividing a few feet above the ground into many erect branches forming a
handsome narrow round-topped head, and slender branchlets covered at
first with pale pubescence, in their first winter dark red and slightly
puberulous, ultimately becoming darker and glabrous. Winter-buds 1/4'
long. Bark 1/2'--2/3' thick, light gray, with a generally smooth surface
roughened by obscure reticulate ridges. Wood very heavy, hard,
close-grained, dark red-brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood of 7 or
8 layers of annual growth. The fruit-covered branches are gathered in
large quantities and used in California in Christmas decorations.

Distribution. Usually in the neighborhood of streams or on dry hills and
especially on their northern slopes, and often on steep sea-cliffs;
California: coast region from Mendocino County to Lower California; most
common and of its largest size on the islands off the California coast;
on the foothills of the Sierra Nevada and on the San Bernardino
Mountains up to altitudes of 2000 deg. above the sea and usually shrubby;
very abundant and forming groves of considerable extent on the island of
Santa Catalina.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in California, and rarely
in the countries of southern Europe.




                          6. AMELANCHIER Med.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, slender terete branchlets, acute or
acuminate buds, with imbricated scales, those of the inner rows
accrescent and bright-colored, and fibrous roots. Leaves alternate,
conduplicate in the bud, simple, entire or serrate, penniveined,
petiolate, deciduous; stipules free from the petioles, linear,
elongated, rose color, caducous. Flowers in erect or terminal racemes,
on slender bibracteolate pedicels developed from the axils of lanceolate
acuminate pink deciduous bracts; calyx-tube campanulate or urceolate,
the lobes acute or acuminate, recurved, persistent on the fruit; disk
green, entire or crenulate, nectariferous; petals white, obovate-oblong,
spatulate or ligulate, rounded, acute or truncate at apex, gradually
contracted below into a short slender claw; stamens usually 20, inserted
in 3 rows, those of the outer row opposite the petals; filaments
subulate, persistent on the fruit, anthers oblong; ovary inferior or
superior, more or less adnate to the calyx-tube, the summit glabrous or
tomentose, 5-celled, each cell incompletely divided by a false
partition; styles 2--5, connate below, spreading and dilated above into
a broad truncate stigma; ovules 2 in each cell, erect; micropyle
inferior. Fruit subglobose or pyriform, dark blue or bluish black, often
covered with a glaucous bloom, open at the summit, the cavity surrounded
by the lobes of the calyx and the remnants of the filaments; flesh
sweet, dry or juicy; carpels membranaceous, free or connate, glabrous,
or villose at apex. Seeds 10 or often 5 by the abortion of 1 of the
ovules in each cell, ovoid-ellipsoid; seed-coat coriaceous, dark
chestnut-brown, mucilaginous; embryo filling the cavity of the seed;
cotyledons plano-convex; radicle inferior.

Amelanchier is widely distributed with many species through the
temperate, northern and mountainous regions of eastern and western North
America; it occurs with one species in southern Europe, northern Africa
and southwestern Asia, and with another in central and western China and
Japan. Only three species, all North American, attain the habit and size
of trees. The fruit of nearly all the species is more or less succulent,
and several are cultivated in gardens for the beauty of their early and
conspicuous flowers, and occasionally for their fruit. The name is of
doubtful origin.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves finely serrate, acute or acuminate at apex; flowers on
        elongated pedicels in nodding racemes; summit of the ovary
        glabrous; winter-buds lanceolate, long-acuminate.
    Leaves densely white tomentose while young; flowers appearing before
          or as the leaves unfold in silky tomentose racemes;
          calyx-lobes ovate, acuminate or nearly triangular and acute;
          fruit dry and tasteless.
                                                   1. A. canadensis (A).
    Leaves slightly pubescent as they unfold, soon glabrous, dark
          red-brown while young; flowers appearing after the leaves are
          nearly half grown in glabrous racemes; calyx-lobes lanceolate
          or subulate, long-acuminate; fruit sweet and succulent.
                                                       2. A. laevis (A).
  Leaves coarsely serrate usually only above the middle, rounded at
        apex, oblong-ovate or oval; flowers on shorter pedicels in short
        erect or spreading racemes; summit of the ovary covered with
        hoary tomentum; winter-buds ovoid or ellipsoid, acute or
        short-acuminate.
                                                3. A. florida (F, C, G).


        1. Amelanchier canadensis Med. Service Berry. Shad Bush.

            _Amelanchier canadensis_ var. _tomentula_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 350]

Leaves ovate-oval, oblong-obovate or rarely lanceolate or oblanceolate,
acuminate and often abruptly short-pointed at apex, rounded, slightly
cordate or occasionally cuneate at base, and finely serrate with
acuminate teeth pointing forward; thickly coated when they unfold with
silvery white tomentum, more or less densely pale pubescent below until
midsummer, later becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous, yellowish green
on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, usually 2'--4' long
and 1'--2' wide, southward sometimes up to 6' in length, with a slender
midrib, and thin primary veins; petioles slender, hoary-tomentose at
first, usually becoming glabrous by midsummer, 1-1/2'--2' in length.
Flowers 1/4'--1/3' long, appearing in early spring before or as the
leaves unfold, on pedicels 1/4'--1/2' in length, in short nodding silky
tomentose racemes, their bracts and bractlets linear-lanceolate,
villose, bright red; calyx-tube campanulate, glabrous or densely
hoary-tomentose, the lobes ovate, acuminate or nearly triangular and
acute, glabrous or hoary-tomentose on the outer surface, tomentose on
the inner surface, reflexed after the petals fall; petals
oblong-obovate, rounded or nearly truncate at apex, about 1/6' wide;
summit of ovary glabrous. Fruit ripening in June and July,
maroon-purple, dry and tasteless, about 1/4' in diameter.

A tree, occasionally 50 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
small erect and spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head,
and slender branchlets thickly covered when they first appear with long
white hairs, soon glabrous, bright red-brown during their first year,
becoming darker in their second season, and marked by numerous pale
lenticels; usually smaller, and in the south Atlantic and Gulf states
sometimes a shrub only a few feet tall. Winter-buds green tinged with
brown, 1/2'--2/3' long, about 1/12' thick. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick, dark
ashy gray, divided by shallow fissures into longitudinal ridges covered
by small persistent scales.

Distribution. At the north usually on dry exposed hills, on the borders
of woods and in fence rows, southward often on the banks of streams and
the borders of swamps; valley of the Penobscot River (Winn and Milford,
Penobscot County) and Washington County (Pembroke, _M. L. Fernald_),
Maine; Quebec (near Longueuil, _Bro. M. Victorin_); valley of the
Connecticut River (central Vermont, southern New Hampshire,
Massachusetts and Connecticut), and westward through western
Massachusetts, New York, southern Ontario, southern Ohio, southern
Michigan, and Indiana and Illinois; in central Iowa and southeastern
Nebraska (Nemaha County, _J. M. Bates_), and southward to western
Florida, southern Alabama, south central Mississippi, Louisiana westward
to St. Landry Parish (near Opelousas, _R. S. Cocks_), northwestern
Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma; rare and of small size in the south
Atlantic coast-region; ascending the southern Appalachian Mountains to
altitudes of about 2200 deg., not common; abundant and probably of its
largest size in western New York and southern Michigan.

Occasionally cultivated, and the first of all the cultivated species to
flower in the spring.


               2. Amelanchier laevis Wieg. Service Berry.

       _Amelanchier canadensis_ of many authors, in part, not L.

[Illustration: Fig. 351]

Leaves ovate to elliptic or rarely lanceolate, acute or acuminate and
often abruptly short-pointed at apex, rounded and occasionally slightly
cordate or rarely cuneate at base, and sharply and coarsely serrate with
subulate callous-tipped teeth, covered when they unfold with long matted
pale hairs more abundant on the lower surface than on the upper surface,
soon glabrous, dark red-brown until nearly half grown, and at maturity
dark green and slightly glaucous above, paler below, usually 2'--2-1/2'
long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, rarely 3'--3-1/2' long and not more than 1'
wide, with a thin midrib and primary veins, rarely deep green and
lustrous above (f. _nitida_ Wieg.); petioles slender, slightly villose
at first, soon glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers 1/2'--3/4' long,
appearing when the leaves are nearly half grown on pedicels 1/2'--1' in
length, in open few-flowered nodding racemes, becoming much lengthened
before the fruit ripens, their bracts and bractlets linear-lanceolate,
slightly villose, tinged with rose color; calyx-tube campanulate,
glabrous, the lobes lanceolate or subulate, long-acuminate, glabrous on
the outer surface, tomentose on the inner surface, usually reflexed
before the petals fall; petals oblong-obovate, rounded at apex, about
1/6' wide; summit of the ovary glabrous. Fruit ripening in June and
July, obovoid to subglobose, usually rather broader than long, about
1/3' in diameter, purple or nearly black, glaucous, sweet and succulent,
on pedicels often 1-1/2'--2' in length.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg.--40 deg. high, often with a tall trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, small spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head,
and slender glabrous branchlets reddish brown when they first appear,
rather darker during their first winter and dull grayish brown in their
second season, and marked by small dark lenticels; at the north often a
shrub sometimes only a few feet high. Winter-buds 1/2' long, about 1/12'
thick, green tinged with red, the inner scales lanceolate, bright red
above the middle, ciliate with silky white hairs, and sometimes 1' long
when fully grown. Bark 1/4'--1/2' thick, dark reddish brown, divided by
shallow fissures into narrow longitudinal ridges and covered by small
persistent scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, strong, close-grained,
dark brown sometimes tinged with red, with thick lighter-colored sapwood
of 40--50 layers of annual growth; occasionally used for the handles of
tools and other small implements.

Distribution. Cool ravines and hillsides; Newfoundland, through the
maritime provinces of Canada, Quebec and Ontario to northern Wisconsin,
and southward through New England, New York and Pennsylvania, and along
the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia; on the North Carolina
Mountains ascending to altitudes of 5500 deg.; common and generally
distributed at the north and in New England, New York and through the
Appalachian forests; the forma _nitida_ only in Newfoundland.

Occasionally cultivated and very beautiful in spring with its abundant
pure white flowers and conspicuous red-brown leaves.


              3. Amelanchier florida Lindl. Service Berry.

           _Amelanchier alnifolia_ Sarg., probably not Nutt.
                      _Amelanchier Cusickii_ Fern.

[Illustration: Fig. 352]

Leaves oblong-ovate to oval or ovate, or at the end of vigorous shoots
broad-ovate or occasionally broad-obovate, rounded or rarely acute at
apex, rounded or slightly cordate at base, and coarsely serrate only
above the middle with straight teeth; when they unfold often tinged with
red and sometimes floccose-pubescent below, usually soon glabrous, at
maturity thin, dark green on the upper surface, pale and rarely
pubescent on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--1-1/2'
wide, with a thin midrib and about ten pairs of primary veins; petioles
slender, at first glabrous or puberulous becoming glabrous, 1/2'--1' in
length. Flowers 1/2'--3/4' long, appearing when the leaves are about
half grown on pedicels 1/6'--1/4' in length, in short crowded erect
glabrous or pubescent racemes, their bracts and bractlets scarious,
slightly villose; calyx-tube campanulate, glabrous or tomentose, the
lobes ovate, long-acuminate, glabrous or tomentose on the outer surface,
tomentose or rarely nearly glabrous on the inner surface, soon reflexed;
petals oblong-obovate gradually narrowed or broad at the rounded apex,
1/6'--1/4' wide; summit of the ovary densely tomentose. Fruit usually
ripening in July, on pedicels 1/2'--3/4' long, in short nearly erect or
spreading racemes, short-oblong or ovoid, dark blue, more or less
covered with a glaucous bloom, 1/4' to nearly 1/2' in diameter, sweet
and succulent.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a tall trunk 12'--14' in
diameter, small erect and spreading branches forming an oblong open
head, and slender branchlets glabrous, pubescent or puberulous when they
first appear, bright red-brown and usually glabrous during their first
season, rather darker in their second year, and ultimately dark
gray-brown; more often a large or small shrub. Winter-buds ovoid to
ellipsoidal, acute or acuminate, dark chestnut-brown, glabrous or
puberulous, 1/6'--1/4' long, scales of the inner ranks ovate, acute,
brightly colored, coated with pale silky hairs, 1/2'--3/4' long. Bark
about 1/8' thick, smooth or slightly fissured, and light brown slightly
tinged with red. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, light brown. The
nutritious fruit was an important article of food with the Indians of
northwestern America, who formerly gathered and dried it in large
quantities.

Distribution. Valley of the Yukon River (near Dawson) and Wrangell,
Alaska, and southward to the coast region of British Columbia, and
southward in Washington and Oregon possibly to northern California,
ranging east in the United States to western Idaho, and probably to the
northern Rocky Mountain region; its range, like that of the other
species of western North America, still very imperfectly known.




                         7. CRATAEGUS. Hawthorn.


Trees or shrubs, with usually dark scaly bark, rigid terete more or less
zigzag branchlets marked by oblong mostly pale lenticels, and by small
horizontal slightly elevated leaf-scars, light green when they first
appear, becoming red or orange-brown and lustrous or gray, rarely
unarmed or armed with stout or slender short or elongated axillary
simple or branched spines generally similar in color to that of the
branches or trunk on which they grow, often bearing while young linear
elongated caducous bracts, and usually producing at their base one or
rarely two buds often developing the following year into a branch, a
leaf, or a cluster of flowers, or sometimes lengthening into a leafy
branch. Winter-buds small, globose or subglobose, covered by numerous
imbricated scales, the outer rounded and obtuse at apex, bright
chestnut-brown and lustrous, the inner accrescent, green or rose color,
often glandular, soon deciduous. Leaves conduplicate in the bud, simple,
generally serrate, sometimes 3-nerved, often more or less lobed,
especially on vigorous leading branchlets, membranaceous to coriaceous,
petiolate, deciduous; stipules often glandular-serrate, linear,
acuminate, frequently bright-colored, deciduous, or on vigorous
branchlets often foliaceous, coarsely serrate, usually lunate and
stalked and mostly persistent until autumn. Flowers pedicellate, in few
or many-flowered simple or compound cymose corymbs terminal on short
lateral leafy branchlets, with linear usually bright-colored often
glandular caducous bracts and bractlets leaving prominent gland-like
scars, the lower branches of compound corymbs usually from the axils of
upper leaves; branches of the inflorescence mostly 3-flowered, the
central flower opening before the others; calyx-tube usually obconic,
5-lobed, the lobes acute or acuminate and usually gland-tipped, rarely
foliaceous, glandular-serrate or entire, green or reddish toward the
apex, reflexed after the flowers open, persistent and often enlarged on
the fruit, or deciduous; disk thin or fleshy, entire, lobed or slightly
sulcate, concave or somewhat convex; petals imbricated in the bud,
orbicular, entire or somewhat erose or rarely toothed at apex, white or
rarely rose color, spreading, soon deciduous; stamens often variable in
number in the same species by imperfect development, but normally 5 in 1
row and alternate with the petals, or 10 in 5 pairs in 1 row alternate
with the petals, or 15 in 2 rows, those of the outer row in 5 pairs
opposite the sepals and alternate with and rather longer than those of
the inner row, or 20 in 3 rows, those of the inner row shorter and
alternate with those of the 2d row, or 25 in 4 rows, those of the 4th
row alternate with those of the 3d row; filaments broad at base,
subulate, incurved, often persistent on the fruit; anthers pale yellow
to nearly white, or pink to light or dark rose color or purple; ovary
composed of 1--5 carpels inserted in the bottom of the calyx-tube and
united with it; styles free, with dilated truncate stigmas, persistent
on the mature carpels; ovules ascending; raphe dorsal; micropyle
inferior. Fruit subglobose, ovoid or short-oblong, scarlet,
orange-colored, red, yellow, blue, or black, generally open and concave
at apex; flesh usually dry and mealy; nutlets 1--5; united below, more
or less free and slightly spreading above the middle, thick-walled,
rounded, acute, or acuminate at apex, full and rounded or narrowed at
base, rounded or conspicuously ridged and grooved on the back,
flattened, or nearly round when only 1, their ventral faces plane or
plano-convex, in some species penetrated by longitudinal cavities or
hollows, and marked by a more or less conspicuous hypostyle sometimes
extending to below the middle or nearly to the base of the nutlet. Seed
solitary by abortion, erect, compressed, acute, with a membranaceous
light chestnut-brown coat; embryo filling the cavity of the seed;
cotyledons plano-convex, radicle short, inferior.

Crataegus is most abundant in eastern North America, where it is
distributed from Newfoundland to the mountains of northern Mexico, and
is represented by a large number of arborescent and shrubby species. A
few species occur in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific-coast regions, and
in China, Japan, Siberia, central and southwestern Asia, and in Europe.
The genus is still very imperfectly known in North America, and in the
absence of sufficient information concerning them several arborescent
species are necessarily excluded from the following enumeration. The
beautiful and abundant flowers and showy fruits make many of the species
desirable ornaments of parks and gardens, and several are cultivated. Of
exotic species, the Old World _Crataegus Oxyacantha_ L., and _C.
monogyna_ Jacq., early introduced into the United States as hedge
plants, have now become naturalized in many places in the northeastern
and middle states. Crataegus produces heavy hard tough close-grained
red-brown heartwood and thick lighter colored usually pale sapwood;
useful for the handles of tools, mallets, and other small articles.

The number of the stamens, although it differs on the same species
within certain usually constant limits, and the color of the anthers,
which appears to be specifically constant with one exception, afford the
most satisfactory characters for distinguishing the species in the
different groups.

_Crataegus_, from {kratos}, is in reference to the strength of the wood
of these trees.


   CONSPECTUS OF THE NATURAL GROUPS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT
                                SPECIES.

  1. Nutlets without ventral cavities.
    *Veins of the leaves extending to the points of the lobes only.
      +Petioles short, usually slightly wing-margined above the middle,
            glandless or with occasional minute glands; leaves cuneate
            at base.
        Corymbs compound, generally many-flowered; flowers appearing
              after the unfolding of the leaves; flesh of the fruit
              usually green or greenish yellow, dry and mealy.
          Leaves coriaceous or subcoriaceous, rarely thin, dark green
                and shining above, usually serrate only above the
                middle, their veins thin except on vigorous shoots;
                fruit mostly subglobose to short-oblong; nutlets 1--5,
                thick, usually obtuse and rounded at the ends,
                prominently ridged on the back.
                                               I. Crus-galli (page 400).
          Leaves membranaceous or subcoriaceous, mostly acute, their
                veins prominent; fruit short-oblong to subglobose, often
                conspicuously punctate, 1/3'--1' long; nutlets 2--5,
                prominently ridged on the back.
                                                II. Punctatae (page 422).
        Corymbs simple, few-flowered; flowers appearing with or before
              the unfolding of the leaves; fruit scarlet, lustrous;
              flesh yellow, juicy, subacid; nutlets rounded and slightly
              grooved on the back.
                                              III. AEstivales (page 434).
      +Petioles elongated, slender, eglandular or occasionally
            glandular; corymbs many-flowered (_few-flowered in one
            species each of Dilatatae and Intricatae_).
        ++Leaves acute or acuminate at the ends, broad at base on one
              species; fruit not more than 5/8' in diameter; flesh
              usually thin and dry.
                                                 IV. Virides (page 437).
        ++Leaves usually broad at base.
          Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, often broader than high, red
                or green, often slightly 5-angled, pruinose; mature
                calyx raised on a short tube; flesh of the fruit dry and
                mealy; nutlets 5, grooved on the back.
                                                 V. Pruinosae (page 449).
          Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, ovoid or obovoid, generally
                longer than broad, rarely slightly pruinose, mature
                calyx sessile; flesh of the fruit dry and mealy; stamens
                10, anthers rose color; leaves hairy above early in the
                season.
                                               VI. Silvicolae (page 453).
          Fruit short-oblong to obovoid, red or scarlet; flesh of the
                fruit usually soft and juicy; anthers rose color or
                pink; leaves thin, at maturity glabrous below.
                                             VII. Tenuifoliae (page 456).
          Fruit subglobose, oblong or obovoid, crimson, scarlet, or
                rarely yellow; flesh thick, occasionally succulent, and
                edible; nutlets usually 5, thin, pointed at the ends,
                mostly obscurely grooved or ridged on the back; corymbs
                tomentose or pubescent; leaves membranaceous to
                subcoriaceous, broad, rounded or cuneate at base, at
                maturity usually pubescent or tomentose below.
                                                VIII. Molles (page 463).
          Fruit short-oblong to obovoid, scarlet; flesh usually soft and
                juicy; nutlets 3--5, grooved and usually ridged on the
                back; corymbs glabrous or tomentose; leaves thin or
                rarely subcoriaceous, oblong-ovate or oval, more or less
                acutely lobed; anthers rose or purple; rarely white in
                shrubby species.
                                                IX. Coccineae (page 488).
          Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, crimson, or red tinged with
                green, its calyx enlarged and prominent; nutlets 5;
                stamens 20; anthers rose color; leaves thin, at the end
                of vigorous shoots as broad or broader than long.
                                                 X. Dilatatae (page 500).
        ++Leaves cuneate at base.
          Corymbs many-flowered; leaves subcoriaceous; fruit subglobose,
                rarely short-oblong; nutlets 2 or 3, obtuse at the ends,
                conspicuously ridged on the back; corymbs glabrous or
                tomentose; leaves dark green and lustrous above.
                                            XI. Rotundifoliae (page 504).
          Corymbs few-flowered (_many-flowered in one species of
                Bracteatae_).
            Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, greenish or yellowish;
                  nutlets 3--5, usually rounded at the ends,
                  conspicuously ridged on the back; leaves
                  subcoriaceous, yellow-green.
                                              XII. Intricatae (page 508).
            Fruit subglobose, red or orange-red; nutlets 3--5, slightly
                  grooved on the back; stamens 20; anthers rose color;
                  leaves thin, incisely lobed.
                                           XIII. Pulcherrimae (page 511).
            Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, 1/2'--5/8' long; nutlets
                  3--5, narrowed at the ends, prominently ridged on the
                  back; corymbs villose; bracts large and conspicuous;
                  calyx-lobes foliaceous; stamens 20; anthers yellow;
                  leaves dark green, lustrous and scabrate above, their
                  petioles sparingly glandular through their whole
                  length.
                                              XIV. Bracteatae (page 513).
      +Petioles long or short, leaves and corymbs glandular; corymbs
            usually simple, few-flowered; fruit subglobose to
            short-oblong or obovoid, green, orange, or red, flesh
            usually hard and dry; branchlets conspicuously zigzag.
                                                   XV. Flavae (page 515).
    **Veins of the leaves extending to the points of the lobes and to
          the sinuses; corymbs many-flowered; stamens usually 20.
      Fruit depressed-globose to short-oblong, not more than 1/4' long,
            scarlet; nutlets 2--5, prominently ridged and often grooved
            on the back; anthers rose color or yellow.
                                             XVI. Microcarpae (page 530).
      Fruit subglobose, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, blue or blue-black;
            nutlets 3--5, obtuse at the ends, slightly ridged on the
            back; anthers yellow; leaves cuneate at base, dark green and
            lustrous.
                                         XVII. Brachyacanthae (page 533).
  2. Nutlets longitudinal cavities on their ventral faces; flowers in
        many flowered compound corymbs.
    Fruit obovoid to subglobose or short-oblong, lustrous, orange or
          scarlet; nutlets 2 or 3, obtuse at the ends, prominently
          ridged on the back; leaves thin to subcoriaceous, mostly
          pubescent below.
                                          XVIII. Macracanthae (page 535).
    Fruit short-oblong to subglobose, black; rarely chestnut color;
          nutlets 5, obtuse at the ends, obscurely ridged on the back;
          stamens 10--20; anthers pale rose color.
                                            XIX. Douglasianae (page 545).
    Fruit subglobose, short-oblong to ovoid, scarlet; nutlets 3--5,
          acute at the ends, ridged on the back, ventral cavities
          obscure; leaves scabrate above.
                                                 XX. Anomalae (page 547).




                             I. CRUS-GALLI.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Corymbs, leaves, and young branchlets slightly hairy while young, soon
        becoming glabrous (_glabrous while young in_ 1, 4, 6, 9, _and_
        13).
    Stamens 10.
      Anthers rose color or purple.
        Leaves glabrous, obovate-cuneiform, coriaceous, their veins
              within the parenchyma; fruit short-oblong to subglobose,
              dull red often covered with a glaucous bloom.
                                                   1. C. Crus-galli (A).
        Leaves oblong to ovate, usually acute, coriaceous; fruit
              short-oblong to subglobose, dark crimson, lustrous, the
              flesh red and juicy.
                                                       2. C. Canbyi (A).
        Leaves obovate, usually short-pointed at the broad apex,
              subcoriaceous; fruit short-oblong to obovoid, bright
              scarlet.
                                                   3. C. peoriensis (A).
        Leaves oblong-obovate to oval, or broadly ovate, their petioles
              glandular with minute stipitate glands; fruit short-oblong
              to subglobose, orange-red, villose until nearly fully
              grown.
                                                      4. C. fecunda (A).
      Anthers yellow.
        Leaves subcoriaceous.
          Leaves oval to elliptic, acute or acuminate; fruit
                short-oblong, green tinged with red.
                                                      5. C. regalis (C).
          Leaves glabrous, obovate, acute, acuminate, or rounded at
                apex; fruit short-oblong, dull dark crimson.
                                                     6. C. arduennae (A).
          Leaves obovate to oblong-cuneiform, rounded or acute at apex;
                fruit subglobose to obovoid, dull red, or green flushed
                with red.
                                                    7. C. algens (A, C).
          Leaves broadly oval to oblong, rounded or acute or
                short-pointed at apex; fruit subglobose, dull green
                tinged with red or cherry-red.
                                                      8. C. Palmeri (C).
        Leaves thin.
          Leaves ovate to obovate, acute, dull green above; fruit
                subglobose, flattened at the ends, dark dull crimson.
                                                       9. C. erecta (A).
          Leaves oval to oblong-obovate, acute or acuminate, lustrous
                above; fruit short-oblong, rounded at the ends, bright
                scarlet.
                                                  10. C. acutifolia (A).
    Stamens 20.
      Anthers rose color.
        Leaves broad-obovate, coarsely serrate; corymbs many-flowered;
              anthers large, bright rose color; fruit green tinged with
              dull red.
                                                      11. C. Bushii (C).
        Leaves narrow-obovate, finely serrate; corymbs few-flowered;
              anthers small pale rose color; fruit crimson, lustrous.
                                                     12. C. Cocksii (C).
      Anthers yellow.
        Leaves oblong-obovate to oblanceolate; calyx-lobes slender,
              elongated.
                                                     13. C. arborea (C).
        Leaves oblong-obovate; calyx-lobes short and broad.
                                                      14. C. uniqua (C).
  Corymbs, leaves, and branchlets more or less villose or pubescent
        through the season.
    Stamens 10.
      Anthers rose color or pink.
        Leaves finely crenately serrate, scabrate above; anthers rose
              color.
                                                 15. C. Engelmannii (A).
        Leaves coarsely serrate with straight teeth, glabrous above;
              anthers pink.
                                                   16. C. montivaga (C).
      Anthers yellow (_doubtful in 17 and 18_).
        Leaves oval, oblong-obovate or elliptic, acute, thin to
              subcoriaceous; fruit globose to subglobose, orange-red.
                                                     17. C. denaria (C).
        Leaves obovate to obovate-cuneiform, rounded or acute at apex,
              thin; fruit short-oblong, dark red, more or less pruinose.
                                                     18. C. signata (C).
    Stamens 20.
      Anthers rose color.
        Leaves oblong-obovate, acute, scabrate; fruit short-oblong, dull
              green tinged with red, slightly pruinose.
                                                       19. C. edita (C).
        Leaves oblong to obovate-cuneiform, rounded and obtuse or
              occasionally acute at apex, glabrous or scabrate above;
              fruit globose to subglobose or short-oblong, dark red.
                                                       20. C. tersa (C).
      Anthers yellow.
        Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded or gradually narrowed at apex,
              subcoriaceous, pale below; fruit subglobose, orange color
              with a red cheek.
                                                21. C. berberifolia (C).
        Leaves oblong or obovate-cuneiform, rounded and obtuse or rarely
              acute at apex, coriaceous, glabrate or slightly scabrate
              above; fruit subglobose, orange or yellow with a red
              cheek.
                                                       22. C. edura (C).
        Leaves oblong to obovate-cuneiform, rounded or acute at apex,
              subcoriaceous, glabrous or glabrate above, pale below;
              fruit ellipsoid to short-oblong, yellow.
                                                     23. C. crocina (C).
        Leaves oblong to obovate-cuneiform, rounded or obtuse or rarely
              truncate at apex, coriaceous, scabrate above; fruit
              globose to subglobose, bright red or scarlet.
                                                        24. C. fera (C).
        Leaves obovate, acute, thin to subcoriaceous; fruit subglobose
              to short-oblong, somewhat flattened at apex, bright
              orange-red.
                                                      25. C. Mohrii (C).


               1. Crataegus Crus-galli L. Cock-spur Thorn.

[Illustration: Fig. 353]

Leaves glabrous, obovate, acute or rounded at apex, cuneate and
gradually narrowed to the slender entire base, and sharply serrate above
with minute appressed usually gland-tipped teeth, when they unfold
tinged with red, membranaceous and nearly fully grown when the flowers
open about the 1st of June, and at maturity thick and coriaceous, dark
green and lustrous above, pale below, reticulate-venulose, 1'--4' long,
and 1/4'--1' wide, with a slender midrib, and primary veins within the
parenchyma; turning bright orange and scarlet in the autumn before
falling; petioles stout, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots acute or acuminate, coarsely serrate, often 5'--6' long.
Flowers 2/3' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in many-flowered glabrous
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes
linear-lanceolate, entire or minutely glandular-serrate; stamens 10;
anthers rose color; styles usually 2, surrounded at base by tufts of
pale hairs. Fruit ripening late in October and persistent on the
branches until spring, short-oblong to subglobose, 1/2' long, dull red
often covered with a glaucous bloom; calyx little enlarged; nutlets
usually 2, full and rounded at the ends, with a high rounded grooved
ridge, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter, covered
with dark brown, scaly bark, stout rigid spreading branches forming a
broad round-topped head, and glabrous, light brown or gray branchlets
armed with stout straight or slightly curved sharp-pointed
chestnut-brown or ashy gray spines 3'--4' long and becoming on the trunk
and large branches 6'--8' in length and furnished with slender lateral
spines.

Distribution. Usually on the slopes of low hills in rich soil; valley of
the St. Lawrence River near Montreal, southward to Delaware and along
the Appalachian foothills to North Carolina, and westward through
western New York and Pennsylvania to southern Michigan.

A form, var. _pyracanthifolia_ Ait., with narrower elliptic to obovate
leaves acute or rounded at apex, and slightly pubescent while young on
the upper side of the midrib, and with rather smaller flowers and
smaller bright red fruit, is not rare in eastern Pennsylvania and
northern Delaware; a form, var. _salicifolia_ Ait., cultivated in
European gardens, but not known in a wild state, with thinner narrower
and more elongated lanceolate or oblanceolate leaves, should also
probably be referred to this species. A form, var. _oblongata_ Sarg.,
with rather brighter colored oblong fruit often 1' long, and nutlets
acute at the ends, is not rare near Wilmington, Delaware, and at Durham,
Bucks County, Pennsylvania. A form, var. _capillata_ Sarg., with thinner
leaves, slightly villose corymbs, and 1 or rarely 2 nutlets, occurs near
Wilmington, Delaware.

Often cultivated as an ornamental plant and for hedges in the eastern
United States, and very frequently in the countries of eastern and
northern Europe.


                        2. Crataegus Canbyi Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 354]

Leaves oblong-ovate to ovate, obovate or oval, acute, acuminate or
rarely rounded at apex, gradually narrowed, cuneate and entire at base,
and coarsely often doubly serrate above the middle, more than half grown
when the flowers open about the 1st of May and then glabrous or very
rarely with a few scattered hairs on the upper side of the midrib and on
the corymbs, and at maturity coriaceous, glabrous, dark green and very
lustrous above, pale and dull below, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--1-1/2'
wide, with a thick pale midrib, and 4 or 5 pairs of remote primary veins
conspicuous on the lower surface; petioles glandular with scattered dark
red persistent glands, red below the middle, 1/2'--3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often deeply and irregularly
divided into broad acute lobes, and frequently 3'--4' long and 2' wide.
Flowers 5/8' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in broad loose
many-flowered long-branched corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, the
lobes entire or serrate with minute scattered glandular teeth; stamens
usually 10, occasionally 12 or 13; anthers, small, rose color; styles
3--5. Fruit ripening in October but persistent until after the beginning
of winter, on elongated slender stems, in loose many-fruited drooping
clusters, short-oblong to subglobose, rounded at the ends, with a
distinct depression at the insertion of the stalk, lustrous, dark
crimson, marked by occasional large pale dots, 1/2'--5/8' long;
calyx-lobes reflexed, closely appressed, often deciduous before the
fruit ripens; flesh thick, bright red, very juicy; nutlets 3--5, with a
broad rounded ridge, bright chestnut-brown, about 1/4' long.

A bushy tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
large ascending wide-spreading branches forming a broad open irregular
head occasionally 30 deg.--35 deg. in diameter, and glabrous chestnut-brown
branchlets armed with thick usually straight chestnut-brown spines
3/4'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Hedges and thickets near Wilmington, Newcastle County,
Delaware; shores of Chesapeake Bay (near Perryville, Cecil County),
Maryland, and in eastern Pennsylvania.


                      3. Crataegus peoriensis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 355]

Leaves obovate, short-pointed or occasionally rounded at the broad apex,
gradually narrowed, cuneate and entire below, sharply and often doubly
serrate usually only above the middle, and sometimes irregularly lobed
with short broad terminal lobes, when they unfold villose above,
especially toward the base of the midrib, and bright bronze color,
becoming at maturity thick and firm, glabrous, dark green and very
lustrous above, pale below, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 3/4' wide, with 4 or 5
pairs of thin primary veins conspicuous on the under side and extending
obliquely from the slender midrib to the end of the lobes; petioles
usually about 1/4' in length, slightly glandular above the middle, and
covered when they first appear with short pale deciduous hairs; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots deeply divided into broad acute lateral
lobes, 2'--3' long, and 1-1/2' wide. Flowers opening in May and June,
cup-shaped, about 1/2' in diameter, on slender elongated pedicels, in
broad loose glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, the lobes
narrow acuminate, entire or irregularly glandular-serrate, pubescent
below the middle on the inner surface; stamens 10; anthers small, rose
color; styles 2 or 3, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale
tomentum. Fruit ripening early in October, on slender elongated
pedicels, in drooping many-fruited clusters, short-oblong or obovoid,
rounded at the ends, slightly depressed at the insertion of the stalk,
bright scarlet, marked by many small dark dots, 1/2'--3/4' long;
calyx-lobes enlarged, erect, incurved and persistent; flesh thick,
nearly white, firm and dry; nutlets 2 or 3, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 1 deg. in diameter, stout
spreading branches forming a broad flat-topped symmetrical head, and
slender orange-brown branchlets armed with straight or slightly curved
thin dull chestnut-brown spines 2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. Open woods, the moist borders of streams and depressions
in the prairie, and on hillsides in clay soil, Short and Peoria
Counties, Illinois.


                       4. Crataegus fecunda Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 356]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oval, or broad-ovate, acute or rarely rounded
and short-pointed at apex, gradually or abruptly narrowed at base, and
coarsely and usually doubly serrate except toward the base, when they
unfold dark green, lustrous and roughened above by short pale appressed
caducous hairs and pale yellow-green and villose on the midrib and
primary veins below, about half grown when the flowers open early in May
and at maturity thin and firm in texture, dark green and lustrous on the
upper surface, pale yellow-green on the lower surface, 2'--2-1/2' long,
and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a stout midrib and remote primary veins after
midsummer often bright red below; turning late in the autumn to
brilliant shades of orange or scarlet or deep rich bronze color;
petioles often glandular, at first coated with pale hairs, soon
glabrous, dull red at maturity, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end
of vigorous shoots often slightly lobed with short broad acute lobes,
convex by the hanging down of the margins, 3'--4' long, and 2'--3' wide.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in wide many-flowered
slightly villose corymbs, with large glandular bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, more or less villose, the lobes elongated,
acute, coarsely serrate with stipitate dark red glands, villose on the
inner surface; stamens usually 10, occasionally 12--15; anthers small,
dark rose color; styles 2 or 3. Fruit on slender pedicels often 1/2'
long, in broad many-fruited drooping clusters, short-oblong to
subglobose, full and rounded at the ends, covered until nearly fully
grown with long soft pale hairs, and at maturity orange-red marked by
many small dark dots, 7/8'--1' long; calyx-lobes linear-lanceolate,
erect and incurved, coarsely glandular-serrate above the middle, dark
red on the upper side toward the base; flesh very thick, firm and hard,
pale green; nutlets 2 or 3, 1/3' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' in diameter, covered with
dark brown scaly bark, stout wide-spreading branches forming a broad
symmetrical round-topped rather open head, and stout branchlets covered
at first with soft matted pale hairs, soon glabrous, light orange-green,
becoming ashy gray in their second season, and armed with numerous very
slender straight or slightly curved chestnut-brown shining spines
2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. Rich woodlands near Allenton, St. Louis County, Missouri,
and on the bottom-lands of the Mississippi River, St. Claire County,
Illinois.


                       5. Crataegus regalis Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 357]

Leaves oval to elliptic, acute or acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed
and concave-cuneate at the entire base, and coarsely, often doubly
serrate above with acute straight or incurved teeth, when they unfold
tinged with red and sparingly villose above and on the midrib below,
soon glabrous, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at the end of
April, becoming at maturity thick and firm or subcoriaceous, bright
green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a stout yellow midrib and
primary veins; turning in the autumn yellow, orange, and brown; petioles
stout, reddish brown toward the base, about 1' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots broadly oval, coarsely serrate, mostly slightly
incisely lobed, 3'--4' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a thicker midrib
and veins. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in broad
many-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, the lobes
linear-lanceolate, entire or remotely serrate; stamens 10; anthers
yellow; styles 2 or 3. Fruit ripening in September or October, on
slender stems, in few-fruited drooping clusters, short-oblong,
3/8'--1/2' long, green tinged with red; calyx-lobes slightly enlarged,
reflexed and often deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh yellow, dry and
mealy; nutlets 2 or 3, about 1/4' long.

A tree, often 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--12' in diameter, stout
ascending or spreading branches forming a broad symmetrical head, and
stout glabrous orange-brown branchlets armed with stout or slender
nearly straight spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Low woods, northwestern Georgia and northern Alabama;
common in the flat woods near Rome, Floyd County, Georgia.


                       6. Crataegus arduennae Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 358]

Leaves obovate, acute, acuminate or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed
from near the middle to the entire cuneate base, and finely
crenulate-serrate above with glandular teeth, glabrous and deeply tinged
with red as they unfold, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at the
end of May or early in June, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green
and very lustrous above, pale below, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, and 1/2'--1'
wide, with a slender yellow midrib, and obscure primary veins mostly
within the parenchyma; petioles stout, occasionally sparingly glandular,
1/4'--5/8' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots mostly
elliptic, short-pointed, coarsely serrate, usually laterally lobed, and
often 2-1/2'--3' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a stout midrib and
prominent slender primary veins. Flowers 1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on long
slender pedicels, in broad many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, the lobes abruptly narrowed from the base, linear,
acuminate, tipped with small dark red glands, entire or slightly and
irregularly serrate; stamens 5--12; usually 10; anthers small, pale
yellow; styles 1 or 2. Fruit on slender pedicels, in drooping
many-fruited clusters, short-oblong, dull dark crimson, marked by large
pale dots, about 1/2' long, and 3/8'--1/2' in diameter; calyx only
slightly enlarged, the lobes reflexed and appressed; flesh thin and
yellow; nutlet 1, gradually narrowed from the middle to the obtuse ends,
grooved and irregularly ridged on the dorsal face, or 2 and then broad,
rounded at the ends, with a high wide rounded ridge, about 5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--12' in diameter, covered
with smooth light gray bark, spreading branches forming a round-topped
head, and slender slightly zigzag branchlets light orange-green when
they first appear, becoming dark purple and lustrous and ultimately
grayish brown, and armed with many slender straight or slightly curved
dark purple-brown shining spines 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Central and northern Missouri, northern Illinois,
northeastern Indiana (Allen County), southeastern Michigan, southern
Ontario, through Ohio to western New York (South Buffalo, Erie County),
and in eastern Pennsylvania (Berks County).


                       7. Crataegus algens Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 359]

Leaves obovate to oblong or elliptic, rounded or acute at apex,
gradually narrowed and concave-cuneate at the entire base, sharply
serrate above, villose on the upper side of the midrib and nearly full
grown when the flowers open at the end of May, and at maturity glabrous,
subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, pale below, 1-1/2'--2'
long, and 3/4'--1-1/4' wide, with a thin midrib and slender primary
veins; turning in the autumn to shades of orange, yellow, and brown;
petioles slender, rarely glandular with minute glands, about 1/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots oblong-obovate, rounded or
abruptly short-pointed at apex, coarsely serrate, and often 3' long and
1-1/2' wide. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on slender elongated pedicels, in
broad many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes slender, acuminate, entire or remotely serrate;
stamens 10; anthers yellow; styles 1-3. Fruit ripening in September and
October, on slender pedicels, in few-fruited hanging clusters,
subglobose to obovoid, 3/8'--1/2' in diameter, dull red, or green
flushed with red, 3/8'--1/2' long; calyx somewhat enlarged, with
reflexed persistent lobes; nutlets usually 1 or 2, prominently ridged on
the back, 1/4'--3/8' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--18 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 7'--8' in
diameter, stout ascending wide-spreading branches forming a wide
round-topped head, and stout glabrous bright chestnut-brown branchlets
becoming gray in their second year, and armed with stout nearly straight
spines 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Borders of woods and fields; western North Carolina to
northern Georgia and central Alabama (near Selma, Dallas County,
common), and to eastern Tennessee; one of the commonest species in the
neighborhood of Asheville, Buncombe County, North Carolina.


                       8. Crataegus Palmeri Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 360]

Leaves broadly oval to oblong, rounded, acute or short-pointed at apex,
gradually narrowed and cuneate at the entire base, and coarsely serrate
above with straight gland-tipped teeth, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open during the first week in May, and then very thin, dark
green and lustrous above, pale bluish green below, and at maturity
coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the
lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1-1/4'--1-3/4' wide, with a slender
yellow midrib and 4 or 5 pairs of very thin primary veins; petioles
stout, rose-colored in the autumn, about 3/8' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots oblong-ovate to elliptic, usually acute, coarsely
serrate, occasionally laterally lobed, glandular at base, 2-1/2'--3'
long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide. Flowers about 1/2' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in many-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, the
lobes slender, acuminate, tipped with small dark glands, entire or
slightly serrate; stamens 10; anthers pale yellow; styles 3, surrounded
at base by a thin ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening in October, on
slender elongated pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters,
subglobose, dull green tinged with red or cherry-red, marked by large
pale dots, about 1/3' in diameter; calyx sessile, with erect and
incurved lobes mostly persistent on the ripe fruit; nutlets 3, thin,
acute at the ends, slightly and irregularly ridged on the back with a
low grooved ridge, 1/4'--5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk often a foot in diameter,
covered with smooth pale bark, stout wide-spreading branches forming a
broad round-topped symmetrical head, and slender nearly straight
glabrous, bright chestnut-brown branchlets armed with thin straight dark
red-brown shining spines 3/4'--3' long.

Distribution. Southwestern Missouri, usually in low rich soil; common
near Carthage and Webb City, Jasper County, and near Noel, McDonald
County.


                        9. Crataegus erecta Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 361]

Leaves oval to obovate, acute and short-pointed at apex, cuneate and
entire at base, and finely glandular-serrate, when they unfold often
villose with a few short caducous pale hairs on the upper side of the
midrib, nearly fully grown when the flowers open early in May, and at
maturity thin and firm in texture, dark dull green on the upper surface,
pale on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a
slender midrib, and thin prominent primary veins; in the autumn turning
dull orange color; petioles slender, glandular with minute dark glands,
usually dark red after midsummer, 1/4'--1/2' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots often nearly orbicular, coarsely serrate with
broad nearly straight glandular teeth, and sometimes 3' long and 2-1/2'
wide. Flowers 1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad
loose many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, the
lobes narrow, elongated, acuminate, entire or occasionally obscurely and
irregularly serrate; stamens usually 10, occasionally 11--13; anthers
small, pale yellow; styles 3 or 4, surrounded at base by a narrow ring
of short pale hairs. Fruit on elongated pedicels, in few-fruited
drooping clusters, subglobose and usually a little longer than broad,
flattened at the ends, dark dull crimson marked by occasional
dark-colored dots, 1/4'--1/3' long; calyx-tube short, the lobes closely
appressed, gradually narrowed from a broad base and usually persistent
on the ripe fruit; nutlets 3 or 4, with a broad high grooved ridge,
3/16' long.

A tree, 25 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, thick ascending
branches forming a wide open rather symmetrical head, and bright
chestnut-brown or orange-brown ultimately dark brown spreading
branchlets armed with thin straight chestnut-brown spines 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands of the Mississippi River, St. Claire
County, Illinois (east St. Louis, near Fish Lake, and Kahokia); banks of
Desperes River, south St. Louis, St. Louis County, and Osage, Cole
County, Missouri.


                     10. Crataegus acutifolia Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 362]

Leaves oval to oblong-obovate, acute or acuminate or rarely rounded at
apex, cuneate at the usually entire base, finely crenulate-serrate often
only above the middle with glandular teeth, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open about the 10th of May, and then membranaceous, and lustrous
above, with occasional short scattered pale caducous hairs on the upper
side of the midrib, and at maturity thin and firm, dark green and
lustrous above, pale yellow-green below, about 1-1/2' long, and 1' wide,
with a slender light yellow midrib and about 4 or 5 pairs of thin
primary veins; petioles glandular when they first appear with minute
dark glands, 1/4'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
frequently divided at apex into 2 or 3 pairs of short acute lobes, and
often 3' long and 2' wide. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in many-flowered compact corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
the lobes lanceolate, acuminate, entire or obscurely and irregularly
glandular-serrate; stamens 10; anthers small, pale yellow; styles 2 or
3. Fruit ripening and falling at the end of September, on slender
pedicels 1/2'--3/4' long, in few-fruited drooping clusters,
short-oblong, full and rounded at the ends, bright scarlet, marked by
occasional dark dots, 1/2' long; calyx-tube prominent, with closely
appressed lobes often deciduous before the fruit ripens; nutlets 2 or 3,
with a broad rounded ridge, about 3/16' long.

A tree, often 30 deg. high, with a trunk 18' in diameter, stout
wide-spreading branches forming a symmetrical round-topped rather open
head, and stout bright chestnut-brown branchlets dark gray-brown in
their second year, and occasionally armed with scattered thin straight
chestnut-brown spines 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Open woods; banks of the Desperes River near Carondelet,
St. Louis County, Missouri; in St. Claire County, Illinois (north of
stock yards, East St. Louis, and near Kahokia).


                       11. Crataegus Bushii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 363]

Leaves obovate, broad and rounded or acute at apex, or elliptic and
acute, gradually narrowed from near the middle to the cuneate entire
base, and coarsely serrate above, when they unfold dark green on the
upper surface, pale on the lower surface, and villose with short white
hairs on both sides of the midrib and veins, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open at the end of April, and at maturity coriaceous, lustrous,
glabrous, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, and 1/2'--1' wide, with a stout yellow
midrib and few slender prominent primary veins; petioles villose early
in the season, becoming glabrous, usually about 1/2' in length; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots usually elliptic, acute, coarsely serrate,
frequently 3' long and 1-1/2' wide, with stouter and more broadly winged
petioles. Flowers 3/4'--1' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad
many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous,
the lobes elongated, linear-lanceolate, entire or occasionally slightly
dentate; stamens 20; anthers large, bright rose color; styles two or
three, surrounded at base by conspicuous tufts of white hairs. Fruit
ripening late in October or in November, on slender pedicels about 1/2'
long, in few-fruited drooping clusters, short-oblong, green tinged with
dull red, 1/3' long, with only slightly enlarged erect and incurved
calyx-lobes mostly deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh thin, green,
dry and hard; nutlets 2 or 3, with a high rounded ridge, 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered with
dark scaly bark, small spreading branches forming a broad open irregular
head, and nearly straight dull chestnut-brown branchlets gray-brown in
their second year, and unarmed or sparingly armed with stout straight
chestnut-brown spines 1-1/2'--1-3/4' long.

Distribution. Rich upland woods near Fulton, Hemstead County, southern
Arkansas; Chopin, Natchitoches Parish, near Winn, Winnfield Parish, and
Lake Charles, Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana; in the neighborhood of
Marshall, Harris County, Texas.


                       12. Crataegus Cocksii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 364]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, finely serrate above the middle with straight acuminate
teeth, glabrous, dark green and lustrous above, dull and paler below,
1'--1-1/4' long, and 1/4'--1/2' wide, with a slender midrib, and primary
veins mostly within the parenchyma; petioles slender, about 1/6' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-obovate, rounded or
abruptly short-pointed at apex, thicker, more coarsely serrate, often
1-1/2' long and 1' wide. Flowers 1/2'--3/4' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in compact few-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes oblong-ovate, gradually narrowed and
acuminate, entire, sparingly villose on the inner surface; stamens 20,
small, pale rose color; styles 2 or 3, surrounded at base by clusters of
white hairs. Fruit ripening in October, on slender pedicels about 1/3'
in length, in few-fruited clusters, short-oblong to slightly obovoid,
crimson, lustrous, 1/3'--1/2' long, with spreading calyx-lobes mostly
deciduous from the ripe fruit; nutlets 2 or 3, obovoid, acute at apex,
rounded at base, prominently ridged on the back, 1/3' long.

A slender tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 4'--6' in diameter,
with dark red-brown bark covered with small closely appressed scales,
smooth slender drooping branches forming a broad open head, and slender
bright red-brown pendulous branchlets becoming gray in their second
year, and armed with straight slender dark chestnut-brown lustrous
spines 1-1/4'--1-3/4' in length.

Distribution. Low rich woods at the marble quarry near Winnfield, Winn
Parish, Louisiana.

Distinct in the Crus-galli Group in its head of slender pendulous
branches.


                      13. Crataegus arborea Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 365]

Leaves obovate to oblanceolate, narrowed, acute or rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed and concave-cuneate at the long tapering entire base,
and finely serrate above the middle with minute straight teeth, nearly
fully grown when the flowers open the middle of April and then glabrous,
and at maturity subcoriaceous, bright green and lustrous above, pale
below, 1-3/4'--2' long, and about 3/4' wide; turning in the autumn
orange, yellow, and brown; petioles 1/3'--2/3' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots coarsely serrate, occasionally slightly lobed,
and often 3' long and 1-1/2' wide. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in broad many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx narrowly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes slender, elongated, acuminate, slightly
serrate; stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles usually 2. Fruit
ripening in September and October, globose to subglobose, 1/4'--1/3' in
diameter, red, the calyx enlarged, with elongated coarsely
glandular-serrate reflexed lobes; nutlets usually 2, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, spreading
or ascending branches forming a broad handsome head, and branchlets
orange-green in their first season, becoming reddish in their first
winter, and usually unarmed.

Distribution. In open woods usually in clay soil near Montgomery,
Montgomery County, Alabama.


                       14. Crataegus uniqua Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 366]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acute or occasionally rounded at apex, gradually
narrowed to the long cuneate base, and finely serrate above the middle
with straight or incurved glandular teeth, more than half grown and
sparingly villose on the upper side of the midrib when the flowers open
the middle of April, and at maturity glabrous, dark green and lustrous
above, paler below, 1'--1-1/2' long, and 1/2'--3/4' wide, with a thin
midrib, and slender primary veins mostly within the parenchyma; petioles
slender, glabrous, 1/3'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots broad-obovate, rounded or acute at apex, coarsely serrate,
2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide. Flowers 2/5'--1/2' in diameter, on
slender pedicels, in mostly 5--8-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, the lobes short and broad, acuminate, entire or
slightly dentate near the middle, sparingly villose on the inner
surface; stamens 20; anthers small, nearly white; styles 2 or 3. Fruit
on slender drooping pedicels, short-oblong, rounded at the ends, dull
red, about 1/2' long and 1/3' thick; calyx prominent, with reflexed
closely appressed persistent lobes; flesh thin, dry and hard; nutlets 2
or 3, broad and rounded at base, narrowed at apex, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a slender stem covered with close dark
slightly ridged bark, small wide-spreading branches forming a
flat-topped head, and slender slightly zigzag orange or red-brown
branchlets unarmed, or armed with few or many straight or slightly
curved dark chestnut-brown shining spines 1/2'--1' in length.

Distribution. Woods in low sandy soil; eastern Texas (near Marshall,
Harrison County, and Livingston, Polk County).


                     15. Crataegus Engelmannii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 367]

Leaves oblong-obovate or rarely elliptic, rounded or often short-pointed
and acute at apex, gradually narrowed or entire below, finely
crenulate-serrate usually only above the middle and generally only at
the apex, nearly fully grown and roughened on the upper surface by short
rigid pale hairs when the flowers open about the middle of May, and at
maturity coriaceous, dark green, lustrous and scabrate above, pale
below, and pilose on both surfaces of the slender midrib and obscure
primary veins and veinlets, 1'--1-1/2' long, and 1/2'--1' wide; petioles
glandular, villose when they first appear, soon glabrous, usually about
1/4' in length. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad
loose 8--11-flowered villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
villose or nearly glabrous, the lobes narrow, acuminate, entire,
glabrous on the outer surface, usually puberulous on the inner surface;
stamens 10; anthers small, rose color; styles 2 or 3. Fruit ripening
early in November, on slender pedicels, in drooping many-fruited
glabrous clusters, globose or short-oblong, bright orange-red, with a
yellow cheek, about 1/3' in diameter; calyx prominent, with large
spreading lobes usually deciduous before the fruit ripens; nutlets 2 or
3, thick, with a broad rounded ridge, 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in diameter, wide-spreading
usually horizontal branches forming a low flat-topped or rounded head,
and branchlets covered with long pale hairs when they first appear, soon
glabrous and bright red-brown, becoming gray or gray tinged with red
during their second year, and armed with numerous stout straight or
slightly curved spines 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. Dry limestone slopes and ridges; common near Allenton and
Pacific, St. Louis and Franklin counties, Missouri; near Eureka Springs,
Carroll County, Arkansas.


                      16. Crataegus montivaga Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 368]

Leaves obovate to oval, rhombic or suborbicular, rounded, acute or
acuminate or abruptly short-pointed at apex, concave-cuneate at base,
and sharply coarsely serrate usually to below the middle with straight
acuminate glandular teeth, covered above with short white hairs and
glabrous below when they unfold, and at maturity dark green, lustrous
and scabrate above, pale yellow-green below, 1'--1-1/4' long, and
3/4'--1' wide, with a slender midrib and prominent primary veins;
petioles slender, villose early in the season, becoming glabrous, about
1/4' in length. Flowers opening late in April, about 1/2' in diameter,
on villose pedicels 1/4'--1/2' long, in compact mostly 7--10-flowered
villose corymbs, their bracts and bractlets linear-obovate,
conspicuously glandular-serrate; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous or
with occasional hairs near the base, the lobes gradually narrowed from a
wide base, glandular-serrate, sometimes laciniate near the acuminate
apex, glabrous on the outer surface, villose on the inner surface;
stamens 10--15, usually 10; anthers pink; styles 2 or 3. Fruit ripening
late in September or in October, on erect nearly glabrous or villose
pedicels, short-oblong to ellipsoid, orange-red, about 1/3' long; the
calyx enlarged and conspicuous; flesh thin, yellow-green; nutlets 2 or
3, rounded at apex, with a low broad rounded ridge, about 1/4' long.

A bushy tree, rarely more than 12 deg.--15 deg. high, with a short trunk
10'--12' in diameter, erect and spreading branches, and slender nearly
straight branchlets orange-brown and covered with long scattered pale
hairs when they first appear, dull red-brown and glabrous at the end of
their first season, becoming gray the following year. Bark of the
branches smooth and dark brown, becoming slightly scaly on the trunk.

Distribution. Rocky banks of streams; western Texas (Comal, Kendall,
Bandera, Edwards, Brown and Calhoun Counties, and on the Davis
Mountains, Jeff Davis County); common on the banks of the Guadalupe and
other streams on the Edwards Plateau.

Interesting as the extreme southwestern representative of the Crus-galli
Group, and its only species in western Texas.


                      17. Crataegus denaria Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 369]

Leaves oval, oblong-obovate or elliptic, acute or acuminate at apex,
gradually narrowed from near the middle and cuneate and entire below,
and coarsely often doubly serrate above with straight teeth, when they
unfold tinged with red and slightly pilose above and glabrous below,
nearly fully grown when the flowers open toward the end of May, and at
maturity firm to subcoriaceous, bright green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 3/4'--1-1/4'
wide, with a slender midrib and few remote thin primary veins; turning
in the autumn orange, yellow, or brown; petioles stout, conspicuously
glandular, and about 1/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots broadly oval to ovate or obovate, occasionally incisely lobed,
2-1/2'--3' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide. Flowers 1/2'--2/3' in diameter, on
long slender pedicels, in broad lax many-flowered sparingly villose
corymbs; calyx narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes slender, elongated,
acuminate and glandular at apex, mostly entire or slightly serrate
below; stamens usually 10; styles 3--5. Fruit on long slender pedicels,
in drooping few-fruited clusters, globose to subglobose, 1/4'--5/16' in
diameter, orange-red, the calyx somewhat enlarged, with spreading or
closely appressed lobes; nutlets 3--5, slightly ridged on the back,
about 3/16' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 8' in diameter, spreading
branches, and branchlets sparingly villose with long matted white hairs
when they first appear, soon glabrous, and unarmed or armed with
occasional straight slender spines about 1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Banks of streams, eastern Mississippi; common in the
neighborhood of Columbus, Lowndes County.


                      18. Crataegus signata Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 370]

Leaves obovate to elliptic, rounded and often short-pointed or acute at
apex, gradually narrowed from near the middle and cuneate at the entire
base, and sharply glandular-serrate usually only above the middle, about
half grown when the flowers open early in April, and then gray-green and
coated above and on the lower side of the midrib and principal veins
with short pale hairs, and at maturity thin and firm in texture, dark
green, lustrous and slightly pilose above, paler and pubescent below on
the slender midrib and 2--5 pairs of primary veins, 1-1/2'--2' long, and
3/4'--1' wide; petioles slender, grooved above, glandular, usually about
1/3' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often broad-ovate
to elliptic, coarsely dentate or sometimes incisely lobed, frequently
2-1/2' long and 2' wide. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in few-flowered compact hairy corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, villose with long matted hairs, the lobes narrow, acute, entire
or irregularly glandular-serrate, usually glabrous on the outer surface,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 10; styles 3--5, surrounded at
base by a few pale hairs. Fruit ripening and falling toward the end of
October, in few-fruited drooping slightly villose clusters,
short-oblong, rounded at the ends, dark red, more or less pruinose,
marked by numerous pale dots, and about 1/2' long; calyx enlarged, with
elongated closely appressed lobes usually persistent on the ripe fruit;
flesh thin and yellow; nutlets 3--5, prominently ridged and grooved on
the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, usually 15 deg.--18 deg. high, with a tall trunk 4'--5' in diameter,
covered with ashy gray bark, often nearly black near the base of old
stems, and separating freely into thin plate-like scales, numerous
ascending or spreading branches forming a round-topped or oval compact
head, and stout chestnut-brown branchlets armed with stout, nearly
straight bright chestnut-brown spines 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Open glades and dry copses of the Pine-covered coast-plain
of southern Alabama.


                        19. Crataegus edita Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 371]

Leaves oblong-obovate or rarely elliptic, acute at the gradually
narrowed apex, gradually narrowed from near the middle to the cuneate
entire base, and coarsely and often doubly serrate above, when the
flowers open from the 15th to the 20th of April lustrous and scabrate on
the upper surface with short rigid pale hairs and puberulous on the
lower surface, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green, lustrous, and
slightly roughened above, pale yellow-green and scabrate below,
1-1/2'--2' long, and 1/2'--1' wide; petioles stout, villose, becoming
pubescent or puberulous, 1/3'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots often slightly divided into lateral lobes, more coarsely
serrate and sometimes 3' long, and 1-1/2' wide, with stout broadly
winged petioles. Flowers 1/2'--2/3' in diameter, on slender villose
pedicels, in villose few-flowered narrow corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, glabrous or slightly hairy toward the base, the lobes
linear-lanceolate, usually entire or obscurely glandular-serrate,
glabrous on the outer surface and puberulous on the inner surface;
stamens 20; anthers small, rose color; styles 2 or 3. Fruit ripening
early in October or in November, on stout glabrous or slightly villose
pedicels usually about 1/2' long, in drooping few-fruited clusters,
short-oblong, rounded at the ends, slightly pruinose, dull green tinged
with red, 1/4'--1/3' long, with a prominent calyx-tube and elongated
spreading lobes puberulous on the inner surface and often deciduous
before the ripening of the fruit; flesh very thin, green, dry and hard;
nutlets 2 or 3, with a broad low rounded ridge, 1/4' long.

A tree, in low moist ground sometimes 40 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg. in
diameter, free of branches for 18 deg.--20 deg., stout horizontal branches
forming a broad round symmetrical head, and nearly straight branchlets
villose when they first appear, soon glabrous, light chestnut-brown
becoming dark gray-brown in their second or third year, and armed with
stout or slender straight chestnut-brown spines 1'--2' long; or on the
dry soil of low hills much smaller and generally 20 deg.--25 deg. high.

Distribution. Low wet woods on the borders of streams, and on dry hills
in forests of Oak and Pine; near Marshall, Harris County, Texas;
Natchitoches, Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana.


                       20. Crataegus tersa Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 372]

Leaves oblong to obovate, rounded and obtuse at apex, gradually narrowed
to the concave-cuneate entire base, and coarsely serrate above with
acute or rounded teeth, when they unfold tinged with red, sparingly
villose above and tomentulose below, nearly fully grown when the flowers
open the middle of April, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green,
lustrous, and glabrous or scabrate above, pale and pubescent below,
1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a slender midrib and thin
primary veins; turning in the autumn yellow, orange, and brown; petioles
stout, at first hoary-tomentose, glabrous at maturity, about 1/2' in
length; leaves on the end of vigorous shoots, broad-obovate,
short-pointed at the rounded apex, often 2' long and 1-1/2' wide, with a
prominent midrib and primary veins. Flowers 5/8'--3/4' in diameter, on
short stout hairy pedicels, in usually 8--10-flowered very compact
corymbs densely clothed with long matted pale hairs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, villose, the lobes acuminate, glandular-serrate, villose on the
outer and slightly pilose on the inner surface; stamens 18--20; anthers
pale rose color, styles usually 2 or 3. Fruit ripening in October, on
stout glabrous stems, in compact drooping few-fruited clusters, globose
to subglobose or short-oblong, about 3/8' long, dark red; calyx
prominent, with enlarged erect or spreading glandular-serrate lobes;
flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 2 or 3, mostly obtuse and
rounded at the ends, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
spreading branches forming a broad flat-topped head, and stout
chestnut-brown branchlets at first pilose, becoming glabrous before
autumn, and usually unarmed.

Distribution. Low woods west of Opelousas, St. Landry Parish, Louisiana.


                   21. Crataegus berberifolia T. & G.

[Illustration: Fig. 373]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic, rounded or gradually narrowed at
apex, narrowed from above the middle to the cuneate entire base, and
serrate above with straight or incurved teeth, nearly fully grown when
the flowers open at the end of March or early in April and then
roughened above by short rigid white hairs, and whitish and pubescent
below, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green, lustrous and nearly
glabrous on the upper surface, pale and pubescent on the lower surface
especially on the thin midrib and slender primary veins, 1-1/2'--2'
long, and 3/4'--1' wide; petioles comparatively slender, at first
densely villose, becoming glabrous, usually about 1/2' in length.
Flowers 1/2'--2/3' in diameter, on slender villose pedicels, in compact
mostly 4--5-flowered villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
thickly coated with long matted pale hairs, the lobes slender,
acuminate, sparingly villose or nearly glabrous on the outer surface,
villose on the inner surface, entire or slightly serrate; stamens 20;
anthers yellow; styles 2 or 3, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of
pale hairs. Fruit ripening early in October, on slender pedicels, in
few-fruited drooping puberulous clusters, subglobose, orange with a red
cheek, about 1/2' in diameter; calyx-tube slightly enlarged, with
spreading or incurved lobes; flesh thin and yellow; nutlets 2 or 3,
slightly ridged on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered
with dark gray scaly bark, stout branches spreading into a broad
flat-topped head, and slender branchlets covered at first with matted
white hairs, becoming glabrous and light orange-brown at the end of
their first season, and pale gray-brown the following year, and unarmed
or armed with occasional slender nearly straight red-brown spines
1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Borders of prairies and low moist soil a few miles west of
Opelousas, St. Landry Parish, Louisiana.


                       22. Crataegus edura Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 374]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded and obtuse or occasionally acute at apex,
gradually narrowed from above the middle to the cuneate base, and
serrate only at the apex, nearly fully grown when the flowers open early
in April and then thin, dark green and puberulous above especially on
the midrib, very pale and villose below, and at maturity thick and
coriaceous, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, and 1-1/2'--1-3/4' wide, with a slender
midrib, and primary veins within the parenchyma; turning in the autumn
orange, yellow, or brown; petioles slender, light yellow, pilose,
1/8'--1/4' in length. Flowers 3/8'--1/2' in diameter, on short sparingly
villose pedicels, in compact hairy 5--12-flowered corymbs; calyx
narrowly obconic, glabrous or with a few hairs at the base, the lobes
narrow, acuminate, glabrous; stamens 16--20; anthers pale yellow or
nearly white; styles 2 or 3. Fruit ripening and falling in September, in
few-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose, orange or yellow with a red
cheek, about 5/16' in diameter; calyx-lobes little enlarged, closely
appressed, often deciduous; nutlets 2 or 3, rather obscurely ridged on
the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, branches
spreading out into a broad flat-topped head, and branchlets pilose when
they first appear, soon glabrous, becoming reddish brown, unarmed or
armed with chestnut-brown or gray spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Low woods near Opelousas, St. Landry Parish, Louisiana.


                      23. Crataegus crocina Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 375]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded or acute at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at the slender entire base, and sharply serrate above the middle
with straight or incurved glandular teeth, when they unfold more or less
pubescent, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green, lustrous and
glabrous or glabrate above, pale and covered below with short matted
pale hairs most abundant on the thin midrib and obscure primary veins,
1-1/4'--2' long, and 1/2'--1' wide; turning in the autumn orange,
yellow, or brown; petioles slender, puberulous, about 1/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots elliptic to oblong-obovate,
acuminate more coarsely serrate, often 2-1/2' long and 5/6' wide.
Flowers opening at the end of April when the leaves are fully grown,
1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on short villose pedicels, in compact
few-flowered villose corymbs; calyx narrowly obconic, coated with matted
white hairs, the lobes narrow, acute, entire or sparingly serrate,
glabrous on the outer surface, slightly villose on the inner surface
toward the apex; stamens 20; anthers yellow; styles usually 2 or 3.
Fruit ripening in October, ellipsoidal or short-oblong, nearly 1/2'
long, yellow, the calyx prominent, with elongated mostly recurved lobes;
nutlets usually 2, narrowed and acute at the ends, ridged on the back,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short trunk 4'--6' in diameter, spreading
branches forming a wide flat-topped head, and slender mostly unarmed
branchlets covered at first with matted pale hairs, and dark
orange-brown and puberulous in their first winter.

Distribution. Low woods near Opelousas, St. Landry Parish, Louisiana.


                        24. Crataegus fera Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 376]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded or rarely acute at apex, gradually
narrowed and concave-cuneate at the slender entire base, and sharply
serrate above the middle with straight or incurved teeth, fully grown
when the flowers open the middle of April and then thin, covered above
by short white hairs, and slightly villose along the midrib and veins
below, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green, scabrate and lustrous on
the upper surface, pale and puberulous on the lower surface on the
slender midrib and obscure primary veins, 2-1/2'--3' long, and about
3/4' wide; turning in the autumn orange, yellow, or brown; petioles
slender, pubescent early in the season, becoming puberulous, 3/8'--5/8'
in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots oblong-obovate, rounded
or acute and often short-pointed at apex, coarsely serrate, often 2-1/2'
long, and 1-1/4' wide. Flowers: 1/2' in diameter, on long slender
villose pedicels, in broad lax compound many-flowered corymbs covered
more or less thickly with white hairs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
slightly hairy near the base, glabrous above, the lobes narrow,
acuminate, entire or sparingly glandular-dentate, glabrous on the outer
surface and puberulous on the inner surface; stamens 16--20; anthers
light yellow; styles usually 2 or 3. Fruit ripening in September and
October, on long slender pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters,
globose or subglobose, bright red or scarlet, 3/8' in diameter; flesh
thin and mealy; calyx enlarged, with spreading or erect persistent
lobes; nutlets 2 or 3, with a high narrow ridge, 1/4'--5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--9' in diameter, spreading
branches forming a broad flat-topped head, and slender nearly straight
branchlets, villose at first, becoming glabrous, pale reddish brown,
ultimately ashy gray, and sometimes armed with slender straight spines
1'--1-1/4' long.

Distribution. Low open Oak and Hickory woods near Opelousas, St. Landry
Parish, and Natchitoches, Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana.


                       25. Crataegus Mohrii Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 377]

Leaves obovate or rhombic, acute or acuminate, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at the entire base, and coarsely, occasionally doubly serrate
above with straight or incurved teeth, when they unfold glabrous and
slightly villose along the midrib and the lower side of the principal
veins, nearly fully grown when the flowers open early in May, and at
maturity thin and firm or subcoriaceous, dark green and very lustrous
above, pale below, 1'--1-1/2' long, and 2/3'--1' wide, usually with 4
pairs of thin primary veins, a stout midrib sometimes puberulous on the
under side and bright red in the autumn; petioles frequently red at
maturity, 1/3'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
sometimes 3' long and 2' wide, mostly broad-elliptic, acute or
acuminate, coarsely doubly serrate, and frequently divided toward the
apex into short broad acute lobes; petioles, strait, glandular; petioles
broadly winged, and occasionally glandular with minute dark glands.
Flowers cup-shaped, about 3/4' in diameter, on slender elongated
pedicels, in loose thin-branched many-flowered glabrous or villose
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous or occasionally pilose
toward the base, the lobes linear-lanceolate, entire or finely
glandular-serrate; stamens 20; anthers small, light yellow; styles 3--5,
surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening about
the middle of October, gracefully drooping on elongated thin bright red
pedicels, in many-fruited clusters, subglobose to short-oblong, somewhat
flattened at apex, full and rounded at base, bright orange-red, about
1/3' in diameter; calyx prominent, with a short tube and usually erect
lobes often deciduous before the fruit ripens; nutlets usually 3, about
1/4' long.

A tree, from 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, covered with thin ashy gray or light red-brown bark, sometimes
armed with long slender or branched spines, spreading slightly pendulous
branches forming a rather open broad symmetrical head, and branchlets
furnished with thin nearly straight bright chestnut-brown shining spines
1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Western Georgia to central Alabama and eastern
Mississippi, and northward to middle Tennessee; abundant and of its
largest size in the low flat woods near Birmingham, Jefferson County,
Alabama, ascending into the poorer and drier soils of the neighboring
hillsides and low mountain slopes.




                             II. PUNCTATAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Fruit usually short-oblong.
    Anthers rose color or yellow; stamens 20; leaves obovate, often
          acutely lobed above the middle, their veins deeply impressed;
          fruit on stout pedicels, short-oblong to subglobose, flattened
          at the ends, dull red or bright yellow, marked by large pale
          dots.
                                                    26. C. punctata (A).
    Anthers rose color; stamens 10--20; leaves oblong-obovate or oval,
          their veins not deeply impressed, fruit on long slender
          pedicels, short-oblong to obovoid, rounded at the ends, dull
          brick-red, marked by large pale dots.
                                                    27. C. pausiaca (A).
  Fruit usually globose or subglobose.
    Stamens 20.
      Anthers pale yellow.
        Corymbs villose.
          Leaves obovate to oval or rarely rhombic, acute; fruit
                globose, or sometimes broader than high, dull red,
                marked by small pale dots.
                                                  28. C. collina (A, C).
          Leaves obovate, oval, or ovate, acute or acuminate, incisely
                lobed; fruit globose, dull red.
                                                    29. C. amnicola (C).
        Corymbs glabrous; leaves broadly oval to ovate, rounded or acute
              at apex, occasionally rounded at base, subcoriaceous;
              fruit subglobose to short-oblong, dull orange-red, marked
              by large pale dots.
                                                     30. C. fastosa (C).
      Anthers rose color.
        Leaves scabrate on the upper surface.
          Leaves ovate, oval or rarely obovate, acuminate; flowers in
                compact usually 6--8-flowered corymbs.
                                                  31. C. silvestris (A).
          Leaves obovate to rhombic, acute or rarely rounded at apex;
                flowers in wide usually 9--12-flowered corymbs.
                                                     32. C. verruculosa.
        Leaves glabrous on the upper surface.
          Corymbs slightly villose.
            Leaves obovate to rhombic, acute or rounded at apex; fruit
                  globose, dark dull red.
                                                     33. C. sordida (C).
            Leaves oval to obovate, acute or acuminate at apex; fruit
                  often rather longer than broad, bright canary-yellow.
                                                    34. C. brazoria (C).
          Corymbs densely villose; leaves obovate, acute, acuminate or
                rounded at apex; fruit subglobose, dark dull red.
                                                  35. C. dallasiana (C).
    Stamens 10.
      Anthers pale yellow; leaves obovate, acute or acuminate or rounded
            and short-pointed at apex; fruit subglobose, pubescent at
            the ends, dull orange-red.
                                                 36. C. Lettermanii (A).
      Anthers rose color; leaves oblong-obovate, acute or rounded at
            apex; fruit globose, bright scarlet, slightly pruinose.
                                                   37. C. pratensis (A).


                      26. Crataegus punctata Jacq.

[Illustration: Fig. 378]

Leaves obovate, pointed or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed to the
cuneate entire base, sharply and often doubly serrate above the middle
with minute teeth, and sometimes more or less incisely lobed, thickly
covered below with pale hairs and pilose above when hey unfold, about
half grown when the flowers open from the middle of May until early in
June and then pilose on the midrib and veins below and nearly glabrous
above, and at maturity thick and firm, pale gray-green and glabrous on
the upper surface, more or less villose on the lower surface, 2'--3'
long, and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad prominent midrib, and primary
veins deeply impressed on the upper surface; turning bright orange or
orange and scarlet in the autumn; petioles stout, at first villose or
tomentose, becoming pubescent or glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' in length; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots usually incisely lobed, and often 3'--4'
long and 1-1/2'--2' wide. Flowers 1/2'--3/4' in diameter, on slender
villose pedicels, in tomentose or villose many-flowered compact corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, villose or tomentose, the lobes narrow,
acute, nearly entire or minutely glandular-serrate, villose on the inner
surface; stamens 20; anthers rose color or yellow; styles 5, surrounded
at base by conspicuous tufts of white hairs. Fruit ripening and falling
in October, on elongated nearly glabrous pedicels, in drooping clusters,
short-oblong to subglobose, truncate at the ends dull red or bright
yellow (var. _aurea_ Ait.) and usually agreeing with the anthers in
color, marked by numerous small white dots, 1/2'--1' long; nutlets 5,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally a foot in diameter,
stout branches spreading nearly at right angles and forming a round or
flat-topped head, or sometimes ascending and forming a narrow open
irregular head, and branchlets coated at first with pale deciduous
pubescence, becoming light orange-brown or ashy gray, and armed with
slender straight light orange-brown or gray spines 2'--3' long.

Distribution. Common and generally distributed; rich hillsides; valley
of the Chateaugay River, Quebec, to the valley of the Detroit River,
Ontario, southward through western New England to Delaware, and along
the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia, ascending in North
Carolina and Tennessee to altitudes of nearly 6000 deg., and westward
through New York, Ohio and Indiana to southern Michigan, Indiana,
Illinois, southern Wisconsin, southeastern Minnesota, and in central
Iowa. A form (var. _canescens_ Britt.), densely hoary-tomentose on the
under surface of the leaves, and on the petioles and corymbs, occurs in
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and near Albany, Albany County, New York;
and a form (var. _microphylla_ Sarg.) with smaller leaves and compact
few-flowered corymbs has been found at Linesville, Crawford County,
Pennsylvania.


                      27. Crataegus pausiaca Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 379]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oval, rounded or acute at apex, gradually
narrowed from near the middle to the concave-cuneate entire base, and
finely doubly serrate above with straight glandular teeth, more than
half grown when the flowers open from the 20th to the end of May and
then membranaceous, dark yellow-green, and slightly villose above and
along the under side of the midrib and veins, and at maturity glabrous,
dark yellow-green above, paler below, 2'--2-1/2' long, and
1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, and 5 or 6 pairs of
primary veins extending very obliquely to the end of the leaf; petioles
slender, wing-margined above the middle, villose only early in the
season, 5/8'--1' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
elliptic to rhombic, long-pointed, slightly or deeply divided into broad
lateral lobes, coarsely serrate, often 3-1/2'--4' long and 2'--2-1/2'
wide. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on long slender hairy pedicels, in broad
many-flowered thin-branched villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, villose below with closely appressed white hairs, glabrous
above, the lobes abruptly narrowed from the base, slender, acuminate,
tipped with minute dark glands, entire or occasionally obscurely toothed
above the middle, glabrous on the outer surface, villose on the inner
surface; stamens 10--15, rarely 20; anthers dark rose color; styles 2 or
3, surrounded at base by a broad ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening
about the middle of October, on elongated slender slightly hairy
pedicels, in drooping many-fruited clusters, short-oblong to obovoid,
broad and rounded at the ends, dull brick-red, marked by large pale
dots, 5/16'--9/16' long, and about 3/8' thick; calyx small, with
spreading appressed lobes mostly deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh
thin, hard, slightly juicy, green or greenish yellow; nutlets 3 or 4,
thin, acute or obtuse at the ends, ridged on the back with a high broad
deeply grooved ridge, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk often a foot in
diameter, covered with dark brown scaly bark, stout wide-spreading
branches forming a broad symmetrical round or flat-topped head, slender
straight branchlets light orange-green and sparingly villose at first,
becoming light orange-brown during their first season, light or dark
gray-brown the following year, and armed with numerous stout slender
straight orange-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' in length, long
persistent on the branches and trunk, finally ashy gray, and becoming
sometimes a foot long, with long slender lateral spines.

Distribution. Dry limestone hills and low moist bottom-lands, Bucks,
Berks and Delaware counties, eastern Pennsylvania; at Chapin, Ontario
County, New York.


                      28. Crataegus collina Chapm.

[Illustration: Fig. 380]

Leaves obovate to oval or occasionally to rhombic, acute, gradually
narrowed or broadly cuneate at the entire base, and irregularly and
often doubly serrate above with glandular incurved or straight teeth,
when they unfold bright red and covered with soft pale hairs most
abundant on the under side of the midrib and principal veins, less than
one third grown when the flowers open at the end of April, and at
maturity subcoriaceous, yellow-green on the upper surface, paler on the
lower surface, glabrous with the exception of a few hairs on the under
side of the stout yellow midrib and 4 or 5 pairs of slender primary
veins, 1-1/2'--2' in length, and 1'--1-1/4' wide; petioles slender,
villose, soon glabrous, more or less winged toward the apex, 1/4'--1/2'
long; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots frequently divided into short
broad acute lateral lobes, more coarsely dentate and often 3' long and
2-1/2' wide, with a stout broadly winged petiole generally light red
like the lower side of the base of the midrib. Flowers 3/4' in diameter,
on long stout pedicels, in broad many-flowered villose corymbs;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, villose particularly toward the base, the
lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate, usually glabrous
on the outer surface, villose on the inner surface, finely
glandular-serrate with dark glands, bright red toward the apex; stamens
usually 20; anthers large, pale yellow; styles 5. Fruit ripening in
September, on stout elongated pedicels, in few-fruited erect or drooping
puberulous clusters, subglobose but sometimes rather broader than long,
dull red, marked by small pale dots, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx
enlarged, the lobes closely appressed, glandular-serrate, mostly
persistent; flesh yellow; nutlets 5, broad and rounded at the ends,
ridged and often grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, usually 15 deg.--20 deg. but occasionally 25 deg. high, with a tall straight
trunk often buttressed at base, frequently armed with numerous large
much-branched spines sometimes 6'--8' long, stout wide-spreading
branches forming a handsome flat-topped symmetrical head, and branchlets
tinged with red and villose with long matted silky white hairs when they
first appear, soon puberulous, and dull reddish brown, becoming gray in
their second year, and furnished with stout lustrous spines 2'--3' long.

Distribution. Hillsides in rich soil in the foothill region of the
southern Appalachian Mountains from southwestern Virginia to central
Georgia and westward to northeastern Mississippi and middle Tennessee;
in central Alabama; ascending to altitudes of 2500 deg. above the sea.


                      29. Crataegus amnicola Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 381]

Leaves obovate, oval or ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, gradually
narrowed and concave-cuneate at the entire base, coarsely sometimes
doubly serrate above with straight or incurved glandular teeth, and
incisely lobed above the middle with short acute or acuminate lobes,
deeply tinged with red and covered with short pale mostly caducous hairs
when they unfold, about half grown and sparingly villose on the midrib
and veins when the flowers open late in April or early in May, and at
maturity subcoriaceous, bright green, glabrous, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, and
1'--1-1/4' wide; turning in the autumn yellow, orange, red, and brown;
petioles slender, sparingly villose early in the season, becoming
glabrous, sometimes slightly glandular, 1/4'--1/3' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots sometimes 2' long and 1-1/2' wide. Flowers
about 5/8' in diameter, on elongated slender slightly villose pedicels,
in narrow many-flowered villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
glabrous or with a few scattered hairs at the base, the lobes narrow,
acuminate, glandular-serrate, glabrous; stamens 20; anthers nearly
white; styles 3--5. Fruit on slender elongated glabrous pedicels, in
drooping few-fruited clusters, subglobose, dull red, about 1/3' in
diameter; calyx enlarged, with elongated coarsely serrate reflexed
conspicuous lobes; flesh yellow, thin, and firm; nutlets 3--5, rounded
or slightly grooved on the back, nearly 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--12' in diameter,
spreading or ascending branches forming a large wide head, and
branchlets villose at first with long matted white hairs, soon glabrous,
becoming orange-brown and ultimately ashy gray, and unarmed, or armed
with stout spines 1-1/4'--2' long.

Distribution. Low moist woods and the borders of streams, southeastern
Tennessee, northwestern Georgia, and northeastern Alabama; common.


                       30. Crataegus fastosa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 382]

Leaves broadly oval to ovate, rounded or acute at apex, concave-cuneate
or rounded at the entire base, and coarsely doubly serrate above with
straight glandular teeth, when they unfold covered above with long pale
hairs and provided below with large tufts of snow-white tomentum in the
axils of the primary veins, when the flowers open from the 20th to the
25th of April dark yellow-green and nearly glabrous on the upper surface
and still tomentose in the axils of the veins below, and at maturity
subcoriaceous, glabrous, yellow-green and lustrous above, pale
yellow-green below, 1-3/4'--2' long, and 1'--2' wide, with a prominent
light yellow midrib deeply impressed on the upper side, and usually 3--5
pairs of primary veins; petioles slender, at first densely villose,
becoming puberulous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots occasionally lobed with broad acute lobes. Flowers about 3/4' in
diameter, on slender pedicels, in compact many-flowered glabrous
corymbs, with large conspicuous oblong-obovate and acute to lanceolate
coarsely glandular-serrate bracts and bractlets usually persistent until
after the petals fall; calyx broadly obconic, the lobes abruptly
narrowed at base, slender, acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate,
glabrous on the outer surface, villose on the inner surface; stamens 20;
anthers pale yellow; styles 5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of
pale tomentum. Fruit ripening from the middle to the end of October, on
thin reddish pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, dull orange-red, marked by large pale dots, 3/8' in
diameter; calyx enlarged, with spreading serrate lobes villose on the
upper side, mostly deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thin,
yellow-green; nutlets 3--5, thin, narrowed at the ends, obscurely ridged
on the back with a broad low often grooved ridge, about 5/16' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--12' in diameter, covered
with dark brown or nearly black scaly bark, small ascending branches
forming an irregular open head, and slender nearly straight branchlets,
dark orange-green tinged with red when they first appear, becoming
before autumn bright reddish brown and very lustrous, and dull reddish
brown the following year, and armed with numerous stout nearly straight
bright chestnut-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Low woods near Fulton, Hemstead County, Arkansas; not
common.


                     31. Crataegus silvestris Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 383]

Leaves ovate, oval or rarely obovate, acuminate, concave-cuneate or
rounded at the entire base, sharply doubly serrate above with straight
glandular teeth, and slightly divided above the middle into 3 or 4 pairs
of small acuminate lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at
the end of May and then roughened above by short white hairs, and
villose below on the slender midrib and veins, and at maturity
subcoriaceous, dark yellow-green lustrous and scabrate on the upper
surface, paler and still villose on the lower surface, 2-1/4'--2-1/2'
long, and 1-3/4'--2' wide; petioles stout, slightly hairy on the upper
side, occasionally glandular, and 3/5'--4/5' in length. Flowers 3/5' in
diameter, on slender villose pedicels, in compact villose usually
6--8-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes
slender, acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate, slightly villose on the
inner surface; stamens 20; anthers pink; styles usually 3. Fruit
ripening at the end of September, on slender reddish slightly hairy
pedicels, in few-fruited erect or spreading clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, truncate at base, rounded at apex, dull orange-red, about
1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent with a broad deep cavity, and
spreading coarsely serrate persistent lobes villose on the upper
surface; flesh thick, dry and mealy; nutlets 3, gradually narrowed and
rounded at the ends, ridged on the back with a high deeply grooved
ridge, about 1/3' long and 1/6'--1/5' wide.

A tree, 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with a tall trunk often 1 deg. in diameter, large
ascending and spreading branches forming an open head, and stout nearly
straight glabrous branchlets, light orange-green and marked by small
pale lenticels when they first appear, becoming light chestnut-brown and
lustrous in their first season, and dull red-brown the following year,
and armed with slender straight or slightly curved dark chestnut-brown
lustrous spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Woods in low moist soil, near London, Ontario.


                     32. Crataegus verruculosa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 384]

Leaves obovate to rhombic, acute or rarely rounded at apex, cuneate and
entire at base, and sharply often doubly serrate above with straight or
incurved glandular teeth, when they unfold dark red, covered above by
short pale hairs and below by long matted white hairs most abundant on
the midrib and veins, about half grown when the flowers open from the
1st to the 10th of May and then thin, dark yellow-green and scabrate on
the upper surface, and paler and pubescent on the lower surface, and at
maturity subcoriaceous, dark green, lustrous and nearly smooth above,
pale and still pubescent below on the stout midrib and conspicuous
primary veins extending very obliquely toward the end of the leaf,
1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide; petioles stout, wing-margined at
apex, at first villose, becoming pubescent or puberulous, 1/4'--1/2' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often broad-ovate to oval,
sharply doubly serrate with straight teeth, sometimes slightly lobed
above the middle with short acute lobes, and frequently 3' long and 2'
wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long slender villose pedicels, in
broad lax compound 6--12 usually 9-flowered villose corymbs; calyx-tube
broadly obconic, thickly covered with matted pale hairs, the lobes
gradually narrowed from a broad base, slender, acute, tinged with red at
apex, sparingly glandular-serrate, pubescent; stamens 20; anthers pale
rose color; styles 3--5 surrounded at base by a broad ring of long pale
hairs. Fruit ripening about the 1st of October, on stout pubescent
pedicels, in drooping few-fruited clusters, subglobose, somewhat
flattened and pubescent at the ends, dark red; calyx prominent, with
more or less deciduous lobes; nutlets 3--5, narrowed and acute at the
ends, rounded and very irregularly ridged and sometimes obscurely
grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 10'--12' in diameter, thick
spreading branches forming a broad compact round-topped symmetrical
head, and stout nearly straight branchlets thickly covered with matted
pale hairs when they first appear, becoming reddish or orange-brown,
nearly glabrous and roughened by minute tubercles at the end of their
first season, gray-brown the following year, and armed with numerous
straight stout or slender dark chestnut-brown very lustrous spines
3/4'--1' long.

Distribution. Springfield, Greene County, Missouri; not rare.


                       33. Crataegus sordida Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 385]

Leaves rhombic, acute, or occasionally obovate and rarely rounded at
apex, cuneate and entire below, serrate above with narrow straight or
incurved glandular teeth, and occasionally irregularly divided above the
middle into short acute lobes, about half grown when the flowers open
the first week of May and then membranaceous, bright green, lustrous and
glabrous with the exception of a few short caducous hairs on the upper
surface, particularly on the midrib and principal veins, and at maturity
subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, paler below, generally
about 1-1/2' long and 1-1/4' wide; petioles stout, slightly winged
toward the apex, at first villose, soon glabrous, about 1/2' long, often
bright red in the autumn; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots sometimes
oblong or oval, coarsely dentate, usually divided above the middle into
short acute lobes, 3'--4' long, 2'--2-1/2' wide, and decurrent on the
stout glandular petioles. Flowers 1'--1-1/4' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in few-flowered compact slightly villose corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, the lobes narrow, acuminate, villose on the inner
surface; petals dull white; stamens 20; anthers small, rose color;
styles 2 or 3, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale hairs. Fruit
ripening and falling the middle of September, on short pedicels, in
few-fruited drooping clusters, globose, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, dark
dull red; calyx prominent, with elongated coarsely serrate appressed or
incurved lobes; flesh thin and yellow; nutlets 2 or 3, broad, rounded
and ridged on the back with a low rounded ridge, 1/4' long.

A slender tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 5'--6' in diameter,
often armed with long-branched spines, small ascending branches forming
a narrow oval head, and slender nearly straight branchlets, dark
orange-green and villose with long scattered pale hairs sometimes
persistent until autumn, dull chestnut-brown in their second season, and
dark gray-brown the following year, and furnished with numerous thin
nearly straight bright chestnut-brown shining spines 1'--2-1/2' long, or
often unarmed.

Distribution. Low woods and the gravelly banks of streams in Shannon,
Carter, and Ripley Counties, southern Missouri.


                      34. Crataegus brazoria Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 386]

Leaves oval to obovate, acute or acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed,
cuneate and entire at base, and coarsely and irregularly
glandular-serrate above with straight spreading teeth, coated with hoary
tomentum and often bright red when they unfold, nearly fully grown and
covered with short soft pale hairs most abundant on the under side of
the thin midrib and 3 or 4 pairs of primary veins when the flowers open
from the middle to the end of March, and at maturity thin and firm in
texture, glabrous, dark green and lustrous above, paler below,
2'--2-1/2' long, and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide; petioles slender, early in the
season tomentose, becoming glabrous or puberulous, 1/2'--3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate or oblong, rounded or
broad-cuneate at base, coarsely dentate, 5' long, and 2-1/2' wide.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in broad slightly
villose 7 or 8-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated
with long matted pale hairs, the lobes narrow, acuminate, obscurely
glandular-serrate or nearly entire, villose on both surfaces; stamens
20; anthers small, dark red; styles 5, surrounded at base by a thin ring
of hoary tomentum. Fruit ripening after the 1st of October, in spreading
or drooping few-fruited clusters, subglobose and often rather longer
than broad, bright canary-yellow, marked by occasional dark dots,
1/3'--1/2' long; calyx prominent, the lobes usually deciduous before the
fruit ripens; flesh thin, light yellow, rather dry but sweet and edible;
nutlets 5, rounded and grooved on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
numerous ascending branches forming a handsome symmetrical round-topped
head, and branchlets covered when they first appear with matted pale
hairs, dull reddish brown and often puberulous in their second season,
and reddish brown the following year, and unarmed or occasionally armed
with long thin gray spines.

Distribution. Low rich woods near the banks of the Brazos River,
Columbia and Brazoria, Brazoria County, Texas.


                     35. Crataegus dallasiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 387]

Leaves oblong, acute, acuminate or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed
to the concave-cuneate entire base, coarsely doubly serrate above with
straight glandular teeth, and usually slightly lobed above the middle,
coated below with thick hoary tomentum and villose above as they unfold,
nearly fully grown and villose or tomentose below when the flowers open
early in April, and at maturity thin, dark yellow-green, glabrous and
lustrous on the upper surface, pale and pubescent on the lower surface
on the slender midrib and 3 or 4 pairs of thin arching veins,
1-3/4'--2-1/2' long, and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide; petioles slender,
wing-margined toward the apex, hoary-tomentose early in the season,
becoming glabrous, about 1/2' in length. Flowers about 5/8' in diameter,
on long slender hairy pedicels, in many-flowered densely villose
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, densely coated with long matted
pale hairs, the lobes slender, acuminate, tipped with a minute red
gland, sparingly and irregularly glandular-serrate, villose; stamens 20;
anthers light rose color; styles 5. Fruit ripening at midsummer, on
stout erect slightly hairy pedicels, in few-fruited clusters,
subglobose, dull dark red, 3/8'--1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, with
spreading lobes bright red on the upper side at the base; nutlets 5,
acute at the narrow ends, thin, rounded and grooved with a broad shallow
groove or irregularly ridged on the back, 1/4'--5/16' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 4'--6' in diameter, covered
with pale bark, small erect branches forming an open irregular head, and
slender somewhat zigzag branchlets thickly coated at first with hoary
tomentum, reddish brown and lustrous before autumn, ultimately ashy
gray, and armed with straight slender gray-spines 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Forest-covered bottom-lands of the small tributaries of
the Trinity River, Dallas County, Texas; not common.


                     36. Crataegus Lettermanii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 388]

Leaves obovate, acute or acuminate or rounded and short-pointed at apex,
gradually narrowed from near the middle and cuneate at the mostly entire
base, coarsely often doubly serrate above with straight or incurved
glandular teeth, and frequently slightly and irregularly divided above
the middle into 3 or 4 pairs of short acute lobes, strongly plicate when
they unfold and covered with a thick coat of pale tomentum, nearly half
grown, roughened above by short pale hairs and pubescent below when the
flowers open early in May, and at maturity thick, bright yellow-green
and scabrate above, pale and pubescent below on the stout midrib and 4
or 5 pairs of primary veins, about 2' long and 1-1/2' wide; petioles
stout, more or less winged above the middle, at first tomentose,
becoming pubescent or nearly glabrous, usually about 3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-oval, acute or acuminate,
more coarsely serrate, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide. Flowers
about 3/4' in diameter, on short villose pedicels in compact,
many-flowered thick-branched densely villose corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, tomentose, the lobes narrow, acuminate, finely
glandular-serrate, villose; stamens 10; anthers small, pale yellow;
styles 5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of hoary tomentum. Fruit
ripening early in October, on stout pubescent pedicels, in few-fruited
spreading or drooping clusters, subglobose or occasionally slightly
obovoid, rounded and puberulous at the ends, dull orange-red, marked by
large pale dots, about 1/2' in diameter; calyx broad, the lobes
enlarged, coarsely glandular-serrate, reflexed, often deciduous before
the fruit ripens; flesh thin; nutlets 5, prominently ridged on the back
with a high rounded ridge, 1/4' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, with thin dark
brown or nearly black bark separating freely into small plate-like
scales, and often armed with thin much-branched spines frequently 7'--8'
long, small erect branches forming a wide open head, and branchlets
coated when they first appear with hoary tomentum, dull red-brown,
villose or pubescent during their first season, and furnished with stout
straight bright red-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Low rich soil inundated during several weeks in winter,
among Oaks and Hickories; near Allenton, St. Louis County, Missouri.


                      37. Crataegus pratensis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 389]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed
below from near the middle to the cuneate entire base, sharply and often
doubly serrate usually only above the middle with straight or incurved
teeth tipped early in the season with a minute dark red caducous gland,
and often more or less deeply divided toward the apex into short broad
acute lobes, when they unfold bright bronze-yellow or dark red, and
covered with short pale hairs, almost smooth and nearly fully grown when
the flowers open at the end of May, and at maturity glabrous, thick,
dark green and lustrous above, pale below, 1-1/2'--2' long, and
1'--1-1/2' wide, with a thin midrib, and 4 or 5 pairs of primary veins
extending obliquely toward the end of the leaf, and raised and prominent
below; petioles slender, glabrous, usually about 1/2' in length; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots often oval or broad-ovate, frequently 3'
long and 2-1/2' wide. Flowers 1/3' in diameter, on long slender
pedicels, in broad loose many-flowered corymbs pubescent or puberulous
at first but soon glabrous; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated toward
the base with long matted pale hairs, the lobes narrow, acuminate,
coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer surface, villose on
the inner surface; stamens 10; anthers small, rose color; styles 2 or 3,
surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening
early in October and remaining on the branches until November, on
elongated pedicels, in loose drooping many-fruited clusters, globose,
bright scarlet, slightly pruinose, marked by occasional large pale dots,
about 1/3' in diameter; calyx prominent, with much enlarged coarsely
glandular-serrate lobes often deciduous before the fruit becomes
entirely ripe; flesh thin and yellow; nutlets 2 or 3, thick and broad,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 3'--7' in diameter,
often armed with long slender much-branched ashy gray spines, spreading
branches forming a round-topped symmetrical head, and branchlets
occasionally slightly villose when they first appear, soon glabrous,
light orange-brown in their first season, and reddish or grayish brown
the following year, and furnished with numerous thin straight or
slightly curved shining chestnut-brown spines 2'--3' long.

Distribution. Open woods near the banks of small streams in the prairie
region of Stark and Peoria Counties, Illinois.




                            III. AESTIVALES.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves glabrous with the exception of small axillary tufts of pale
        hairs on the lower surface, oblong-obovate; stamens 15--20;
        anthers pink or pale rose color.
                                                   38. C. aestivalis (C).
  Leaves hoary-tomentose below early in the season, becoming villose
        with rufous hairs most abundant on the midrib and veins; stamens
        20; anthers deep rose color.
    Leaves oblong-obovate, acute or broad and rounded at apex, often
          slightly lobed above the middle, lustrous above; pedicels
          villose-pubescent.
                                                      39. C. rufula (C).
    Leaves elliptic to oblong-cuneiform, narrowed at apex, dull above;
          pedicels glabrous.
                                                       40. C. opaca (C).


            38. Crataegus aestivalis Sarg. May Haw. Apple Haw.

                       _Mespilus aestivalis_ Walt.

[Illustration: Fig. 390]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded or acute at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, glabrous with the exception of small axillary tufts of
pale hairs, and coarsely crenately serrate above the middle with
gland-tipped teeth, beginning to unfold as the flowers open the middle
of March, and when the fruit ripens at the end of May thin, dark green
and lustrous above, yellow-green below, 1-1/4'--2' long, and 1/3'--3/4'
wide, with a slender yellow midrib and obscure primary veins; petioles
slender, narrow wing-margined to below the middle, rarely furnished with
occasional deciduous glands, about 1/4' in length; leaves at the ends of
vigorous shoots elliptic to oblong-obovate, acute and usually abruptly
short-pointed at apex, concave-cuneate at base, often lobed with one or
two lateral lobes. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on pedicels about 1/3'
long, in compact 2 or 3-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, short, entire,
without glands, acute or acuminate and often red at apex, persistent and
red on the fruit; stamens 15--20; anthers large, pink or pale rose
color; styles usually 3. Fruit on a short slender erect pedicel, about
1/3' long, usually solitary, short-oblong, scarlet, lustrous, about 1/3'
in length, the calyx persistent with erect lobes; flesh yellow, juicy,
acidulous; nutlets usually 3, acute at ends, rounded and slightly ridged
on the back, 1/4' long.

A slender tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall stem 6'--8' in diameter,
covered with pale flaky bark, erect or slightly spreading branches
forming a narrow head, and slender straight or slightly zigzag
branchlets chestnut-brown and lustrous during their first season, and
dull gray-brown the following year, and armed with stout straight gray
spines 1/2'--1-1/4' in length.

Distribution. Low river banks, the borders of swamps and in depressions
filled with water during most of the year; banks of the Ogeechee River
near Meldrim, Effingham County, and near Valdosta, Lowndes County,
Georgia; swamp of the Combahee River near Yemassee, Hampton County, and
near Aiken, Aiken County, South Carolina; pond holes eight or nine miles
west of Newbern, Craven County, North Carolina; passing into var.
_maloides_ Sarg. with young leaves tinged with red and villose along the
upper side of the midrib, those at the end of vigorous shoots sometimes
broad-obovate, rounded and divided at apex into 3 short rounded lobes,
longer acuminate calyx-lobes and dark red anthers. Wet prairies, Volusia
County, Florida; and into var. _cerasoides_ Sarg. differing in the
presence of short white hairs on the upper surface of the young leaves,
in the longer acuminate calyx-lobes slightly villose on the inner
surface and often minutely serrate near the middle, in the dark
rose-colored anthers, and the late ripening fruit up to 1/2' in
diameter, on drooping pedicels often 1/2' in length. An arborescent
shrub with a round-topped head 30 deg.--40 deg. across, numerous large erect and
spreading stems often 30 deg. high, covered with smooth pale bark separating
into thin plate-like scales, in falling disclosing the dull red inner
bark, and slender nearly straight glabrous branchlets armed with
straight slender spines 1'--1-1/2' in length. Fruit ripening late in
July and in August. Low, wet, often inundated prairies near Sewall,
Valusia County, Bradfordville, Leon County, Jasper, Hamilton County, and
Quincy, Gadsden County, Florida. A form of this variety growing in
Valusia County (f. _luculenta_ Sarg.) differs in the more numerous hairs
on the upper surface of the young leaves, in the rather smaller flowers,
smaller and less juicy fruit ripening at the end of June or early in
July, and in its often arborescent habit.


                       39. Crataegus rufula Sarg.

_Crataegus aestivalis_ Torr. & Gray in part, not _Mespilus aestivalis_ Walt.

[Illustration: Fig. 391]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed,
cuneate and entire at base, finely crenately glandular-serrate, and
often slightly lobed above the middle; with short rounded lobes, covered
above with soft pale hairs and whitish tomentose below when they unfold,
and at maturity thick, dark green, lustrous and glabrous or slightly
pubescent along the midrib on the upper surface, rufous-pubescent
especially on the midrib and veins on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2'
long, and 3/4'--1-1/4' wide, rarely not more than 1' long and 1/2' wide;
petioles slender, villose-pubescent with rufous hairs, occasionally
glandular, 1/4'--1/3' in length; leaves at the ends of vigorous shoots
oblong-obovate, rounded and short-pointed to elliptic and acuminate,
laterally lobed, or deeply 3-lobed at apex, often 2-1/2' long and 1-1/2'
wide. Flowers appearing from the 10th to the end of March, 3/4'--1' in
diameter, in mostly 3--5-flowered clusters, on villose-pubescent
pedicels about 1/3' in length; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous or
villose-pubescent sometimes in the same cluster, the lobes gradually
narrowed from a broad base, acuminate, entire or slightly
glandular-serrate nearly to apex, glabrous or slightly pubescent on the
outer surface; stamens 20; anthers dark rose color; styles 3--5,
surrounded at base by a ring of white tomentum. Fruit ripening at the
end of May, often solitary on glabrous erect pedicels 1/4'--1/2' long,
subglobose, scarlet, lustrous, about 1/2' in diameter, the calyx
persistent with erect lobes; nutlets only slightly grooved on the back,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
covered with rough deeply furrowed dark bark, paler and less deeply
furrowed on smaller and younger stems, stout ascending and spreading
branches forming a broad round-topped head, and slender slightly zigzag
branchlets covered when they first appear with pale tomentum, glabrous
or rusty tomentose until the early summer, becoming chestnut-brown,
lustrous and glabrous before autumn and dull gray in their second year,
and unarmed or armed with slender or stout straight spines 1/2'--1-1/2'
in length.

Distribution. Depressions filled with water except at midsummer, sandy
borders of ponds and streams and low wet prairies, Cottondale and Round
Lake, Jackson County, and Quincy, Gadsden County, Florida; near
Bainbridge, Decatur County, and Albany, Dougherty County, Georgia; near
Dothan, Houston County, Alabama; pond holes along the Neuse River near
Goldsboro, Wayne County, North Carolina.


                        40. Crataegus opaca Hook.

_Crataegus aestivalis_ Torr. & Gray in part, not _Mespilus aestivalis_ Walt.

[Illustration: Fig. 392]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-cuneiform, gradually narrowed and acute or
bluntly pointed at apex, cuneate at the often glandular base, finely
crenately serrate above the middle with minute glandular teeth, pilose
above and hoary-tomentose below when they unfold, and at maturity dull
dark green and glabrous or slightly hairy on the midrib on the upper
surface, pubescent on the lower surface with rusty brown hairs most
abundant on the midrib and veins, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1/2'--1' wide;
petioles slender, villose-pubescent, about 1/4' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots elliptic to oblong-ovate, often irregularly
laterally lobed, and 2-1/2'--3' long and wide. Flowers appearing in
February and March before or with the unfolding of the leaves, 1' in
diameter, on glabrous pedicels 1/2' long, in 3--5-flowered corymbs;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes narrowed from a wide
base, short, nearly triangular, acute and tipped at apex with a
conspicuous gland, entire or minutely serrate, glabrous, often deeply
tinged with red; stamens 20; anthers large, deep rose color; styles
3--5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of pale tomentum. Fruit
ripening early in May, in usually 2--3-fruited clusters,
depressed-globose, scarlet, lustrous, dotted with pale spots, 1/2'--2/3'
in diameter, with a small narrow cavity surrounded by the erect
calyx-lobes; nutlets 3--5, rounded at the ends, rounded and slightly
grooved on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall stem occasionally 1 deg. in diameter,
covered with deeply fissured bark, divided into dark red-brown
persistent scales, slender mostly erect branches forming a narrow
round-topped head, and slender branchlets villose-pubescent when they
first appear, soon glabrous, lustrous and bright chestnut-brown during
their first season, becoming dull gray in their second year, and armed
with stout straight chestnut-brown spines 1/2'--1' in length, or more
often unarmed; occasionally with several stems forming a large shrub.

Distribution. In deep depressions filled with water for most of the
year, low river banks and borders of swamps; near Mt. Vernon, Mobile
County, and near Selma, Dallas County, Alabama; southern Mississippi
(Meridian, Lauderdale County, and Hattiesburg, Forest County); eastern
Louisiana; sometimes in St. Tammany Parish covering large tracts almost
to the exclusion of other plants; western Louisiana from the coast to
nearly the northern border of the state, and eastern Texas to the valley
of the Trinity River; rare and local east of the Mississippi River;
common westward. The fruit is largely used in making preserves and
jellies.




                              IV. VIRIDES.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 20.
    Fruit not exceeding 1/3' in diameter.
      Anthers pale yellow.
        Corymbs, branchlets and leaves glabrous.
          Bark of the trunk pale gray, close and smooth.
            Leaves ovate to oblong-obovate, acute or acuminate, rarely
                  rounded at apex; fruit depressed-globose, bright
                  scarlet or orange.
                                                  41. C. viridis (A, C).
            Leaves ovate, acute, often broadly cuneate at base; fruit
                  subglobose, orange-red.
                                                       42. C. ovata (A).
            Leaves oval or ovate, acute, rounded or broadly cuneate at
                  base; fruit globose, yellow-green flushed with red.
                                                       43. C. vulsa (C).
          Bark of the trunk dark brown or nearly black; leaves
                subcoriaceous.
            Leaves oblong-ovate to semiorbicular, acute, often
                  short-pointed or rarely rounded at apex; fruit
                  short-oblong to obovoid or globose, dull orange color.
                                                    44. C. glabriuscula.
            Leaves oval to rhombic, acute or acuminate; fruit subglobose
                  to short-oblong, bright orange-red.
                                                      45. C. blanda (C).
        Corymbs and branchlets villose-pubescent; leaves ovate or
              obovate, acute or rounded at apex; fruit subglobose,
              orange-red.
                                                    46. C. velutina (C).
      Anthers deep rose color; leaves elliptic to oblong-ovate, acute,
            acuminate or rarely rounded at apex; fruit globose or
            subglobose, orange-red.
                                                 47. C. arborescens (C).
    Fruit 1/2'--3/4' in diameter.
      Anthers yellow.
        Leaves cuneate at base; calyx-tube glabrous.
          Leaves lanceolate to oblong-obovate, acuminate; fruit
                short-oblong, dull brick red covered with a glaucous
                bloom.
                                                      48. C. nitida (A).
          Leaves obovate to oval or rhombic, acute or rarely rounded at
                apex; fruit subglobose to short-oblong, dark crimson.
                                                       49. C. mitis (A).
        Leaves, broad and rounded at base, ovate, acute; calyx-tube
              villose; fruit subglobose to short-oblong, dark red.
                                                  50. C. atrorubens (A).
      Anthers rose color; corymbs villose; fruit red.
        Leaves obovate, oval or ovate, acute, scabrate above; fruit
              globose to subglobose, anthers deep rose color.
                                                      51. C. ingens (C).
        Leaves broadly obovate, oval or ovate, acute or acuminate,
              smooth above; fruit globose or depressed-globose; anthers
              pale rose color.
                                                      52. C. penita (C).
  Stamens usually 10; occasionally 12--20; anthers bright red; leaves
        oblong-obovate to oval, usually acute or acuminate; fruit
        subglobose to short-oblong, bright orange-red.
                                                 53. C. micracantha (C).


                        41. Crataegus viridis L.

                        _Crataegus Davisii_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 393]

Leaves ovate to oblong-obovate or oval, acute or acuminate or rarely
rounded at apex, gradually narrowed to the cuneate base, finely serrate
above with incurved glandular teeth, and sometimes slightly 3-lobed
toward the apex, tinged with red and slightly hairy above when they
unfold, nearly fully grown when the flowers open in April and May, and
at maturity membranaceous to subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous on
the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, with large axillary tufts
of pale hairs, 1'--2' long, and 1/2'--1' wide, with a thick midrib and
conspicuous primary veins; often turning brilliant scarlet late in the
autumn before falling; petioles slender, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots often deeply laterally lobed with narrow
acuminate lobes, and 2-1/2'--4' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide. Flowers 3/4'
in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in many-flowered corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes lanceolate, entire;
stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles 2--5, usually 5, surrounded at
base by conspicuous tufts of pale hairs. Fruit ripening in the autumn
and mostly persistent on the branches through the winter, on long
slender pedicels, in drooping many-fruited clusters, depressed-globose,
bright scarlet or orange, 1/8'--1/4' in diameter; calyx little enlarged,
the lobes often deciduous from the ripe fruit; nutlets usually 5,
narrowed and rounded at the ends, rounded and slightly grooved or ridged
on the back, 1/16'--1/8' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--35 deg. high, with a straight often fluted trunk 8 deg.--12 deg. tall,
and 18'--20' in diameter, covered with close gray or pale orange-colored
bark, small branches forming a round rather compact head, and slender
glabrous branchlets ashy gray to light red-brown in their first winter,
and unarmed or occasionally armed with slender sharp pale spines
3/4'--1' long.

Distribution. On the often inundated borders of streams and swamps,
rarely in drier ground on low slopes; southeastern Virginia (banks of
the Blackwater River near Zuni, Isle of Wight County), North Carolina
(Salisbury, Rowan County), South Carolina (near Aiken, Aiken County),
eastern Georgia (near Augusta, Richmond County, and Macon, Bibb County),
western Florida (River Junction, Gadsden County, and Tallahassee, Leon
County to the swamps of the lower Apalachicola River), and westward
through central and southern Alabama, southern Mississippi, and
Louisiana to the valley of the San Antonio River (Sutherland Springs,
Wilson County), Texas, and to central and western Arkansas, eastern
Oklahoma and southeastern Missouri (Butler County), and northward in the
region adjacent to the Mississippi River from Louisiana to northeastern
Missouri, and to Pike County, Illinois, ranging eastward in Mississippi
to Tishomingo County in the northeastern corner of the state, to
northwestern Georgia, southeastern Tennessee, and to Richland County,
Illinois; rare and local in the Atlantic and east Gulf states; common
and often forming great thickets in western Louisiana, the coast region
of eastern Texas, southern Arkansas, and in the region adjacent to the
Mississippi River.


                        42. Crataegus ovata Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 394]

Leaves ovate, acute, broadly or acutely concave-cuneate at the entire
base, coarsely often doubly serrate above with glandular teeth, and
occasionally slightly divided into short lateral lobes, nearly fully
grown when the flowers open early in May and then dark green, very
smooth and glabrous above with the exception of a few short scattered
hairs near the base of the midrib, paler below, with small persistent
axillary tufts of white hairs, and at maturity membranaceous, 2'--2-1/2'
long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib and primary
veins; petioles slender, rose-colored in the autumn, about 3/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots rounded or truncate at the
broad base, coarsely serrate, and sometimes 3' long and wide. Flowers
about 1/2' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in broad loose
many-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes
broad acute, entire or coarsely glandular-serrate toward the apex,
glabrous; styles 5. Fruit ripening in October, on elongated pedicels, in
long drooping clusters, subglobose or a little longer than broad,
orange-red, 1/4'--5/16' long; calyx enlarged, with elongated closely
appressed lobes sometimes deciduous from the ripe fruit; nutlets 5,
acute at the ends, rounded or slightly ridged on the back, about 3/16'
long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
covered with smooth gray bark, slender glabrous branchlets light reddish
brown and lustrous during their first year, becoming grayish brown in
their second season, and unarmed or armed with occasional dark purple
slender slightly curved shining spines 1' long.

Distribution. Low moist soil on the banks of the River Desperes, South
St. Louis, St. Louis County, and near Alba, Jasper County, Missouri.


                       43. Crataegus vulsa Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 395]

Leaves oval or ovate, acute, broad and rounded or broad-cuneate at the
entire base, irregularly and often doubly serrate above with straight or
incurved gland-tipped teeth, and often divided into several short acute
lateral lobes, when they unfold dark bronze-red, and pilose with
scattered caducous hairs, and furnished below with tufts of pale often
persistent hairs in the axils of the principal veins, nearly fully grown
when the flowers open late in April, and at maturity thin, bright green
on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, about 2' long and
1-1/2' wide, with a slender midrib and 4 or 5 pairs of thin pale yellow
primary veins; turning in the autumn yellow or brown; petioles slender,
somewhat villose at first, soon becoming glabrous, about 3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broadly ovate, acute or acuminate,
broad and rounded or occasionally truncate or broadly cuneate at base,
more coarsely serrate and more deeply lobed, often 3' long and 2-1/2'
wide, with a stout winged glandular petiole. Flowers 3/4' in diameter,
on slender pedicels, in compact 3--10-flowered corymbs, with linear
acuminate glandular red bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base,
acuminate, entire or occasionally obscurely serrate toward the apex,
glabrous; stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles 3--5, surrounded at
base by a thin ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening at the end of
September or early in October, on slender pedicels, in few-fruited
drooping clusters, globose, yellow-green flushed with red, 1/3' in
diameter; calyx prominent, with closely appressed lobes; flesh
yellow-green; nutlets 3--5, thin, rounded, sometimes slightly ridged and
grooved on the back, about 3/16' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 5'--6' in diameter,
covered with thin fissured bark separating into light gray scales tinged
with brown, and often armed with long compound spines, ascending or
spreading branches forming an oval usually compact symmetrical head, and
slender nearly straight glabrous chestnut-brown branchlets becoming
gray, and armed with thin nearly straight bright chestnut-brown shining
spines 1'--1-1/2' long; sometimes a shrub, with numerous stems.

Distribution. Rich moist soil in the neighborhood of streams;
northwestern Georgia and northeastern Alabama.


                    44. Crataegus glabriuscula Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 396]

Leaves oblong-ovate to semiorbicular, acute or often short-pointed or
rarely rounded at apex, gradually narrowed from below the middle to the
slender entire base, coarsely and often doubly serrate usually only
above the middle with broad straight gland-tipped teeth, and sometimes
divided toward the apex into 2 or 3 short acute lobes, nearly fully
grown when the flowers open the 1st of April, and then membranaceous and
slightly pilose above with scattered hairs most abundant along the base
of the midrib, and at maturity subcoriaceous, hard and firm, dark green
and lustrous on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2'
long, and 3/4'--1' wide, with a thin light yellow midrib, and primary
veins extending obliquely toward the end of the leaf, conspicuous
secondary veins and reticulate veinlets; petioles slender,
wing-margined, 1/3' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
often ovate, broadly cuneate at base, much more coarsely serrate, more
frequently lobed, 2'--2-1/2' long and wide. Flowers about 1/2' in
diameter, on long slender pedicels, in few-flowered rather compact
corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes short,
gradually narrowed from a broad base, entire, villose on the inner
surface; stamens 20, anthers nearly white; styles 5. Fruit ripening in
September and often persistent until late into the winter, on long
slender pedicels, in compact many-fruited drooping clusters,
short-oblong to obovoid or nearly globose, dull orange color, marked by
minute dark dots, about 1/4' long; calyx enlarged, conspicuous, with
spreading or closely appressed lobes dull red on the upper side at base,
often deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh very thin, yellow, dry
and hard; nutlets 5, rounded and sometimes obscurely grooved on the
back, about 3/16' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk often a foot in
diameter, covered with thin dark brown scaly bark, long ascending
branches forming a narrow head, and slender nearly straight branchlets,
unarmed or armed with occasional slender straight chestnut-brown
lustrous spines 3/4'--1' long.

Distribution. Bottom-lands of the Trinity River and its branches near
Dallas, Dallas County, Texas, in forests of Elms and Nettle-trees.


                       45. Crataegus blanda Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 397]

Leaves oval to rhombic, acute or acuminate, and occasionally slightly
lobed toward the apex, broadly cuneate or concave-cuneate at the entire
base, coarsely crenately serrate above the middle with gland-tipped
teeth, coated with soft pale hairs when they unfold, fully grown when
the flowers open about the 1st of May, and then membranaceous, dark
green and lustrous above and glabrous below with the exception of large
axillary tufts of snow-white tomentum, and at maturity subcoriaceous,
yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/3' wide, with a slender midrib,
and 2 or 3 pairs of thin primary veins extending obliquely toward the
end of the leaf; petioles slender, at first villose along the upper
side, soon becoming glabrous, 3/4'--1' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots often broadly ovate, rounded at base, more deeply lobed
above the middle, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide. Flowers 1' in
diameter, on slender elongated pedicels, in broad many-flowered corymbs,
with linear entire bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate,
entire or obscurely dentate, glabrous; stamens 20; anthers
canary-yellow; styles 5. Fruit ripening about the middle of October, on
slender pedicels, in many-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, bright orange-red, 1/4' in diameter; calyx prominent, with
spreading lobes usually deciduous from the ripe fruit; nutlets 5, thin,
narrowed at the ends, deeply grooved on the back, 1/4' long.

An unarmed tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 10'--12' in diameter,
covered with dark brown or nearly black bark divided by shallow fissures
and broken on the surface into small plate-like scales, stout ascending
branches forming a broad irregular head, and nearly straight glabrous
branchlets dark orange-green at first, becoming dull red-brown during
their first season and darker brown the following year.

Distribution. Dry uplands and low rolling hills near Fulton, Hempstead
County, Arkansas.


                      46. Crataegus velutina Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 398]

Leaves ovate to obovate, acute or rounded at apex, gradually narrowed
and cuneate at the entire base, and sharply often doubly serrate with
straight glandular teeth, more than half grown when the flowers open at
the end of April and then covered above by short white hairs and below
with hoary pubescence, and often furnished with axillary tufts of white
tomentum, and at maturity glabrous, smooth and lustrous on the upper
surface and covered on the lower surface with matted pale hairs,
1-3/4'--2' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a thin midrib and primary
veins; petioles slender, thickly covered early in the season with matted
hairs, becoming glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots ovate, rounded or broad-cuneate at base, coarsely
serrate, usually slightly lobed above the middle, and often 2-1/2'--3'
long and 1-1/2' wide. Flowers 1/2' in diameter on slender villose
pedicels, in usually 7--12-flowered hairy corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, villose, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, short,
acute, entire, slightly villose; stamens 20; anthers yellow; styles 5.
Fruit on long slender glabrous or nearly glabrous drooping stems in
few-fruited clusters, subglobose, orange-red, marked by small pale dots,
about 1/4' in diameter; calyx prominent, with a deep narrow cavity
pointed in the bottom, and closely appressed lobes; flesh thin, dry and
mealy; nutlets 5, acute at base, rounded at apex, ridged on the back
with a low grooved ridge, about 1/6' long and 1/8' wide.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered with
dark rough scaly bark, and slender slightly zigzag branchlets,
hoary-tomentose when they first appear, light reddish brown, marked by
pale lenticels and glabrous or sometimes pubescent near the end in their
first autumn, and ashy gray the following year, and armed with slender
nearly straight chestnut-brown spines 1'--1-1/2' in length.

Distribution. Uplands in dry sandy soil, Fulton, Hempstead County, near
Texarkana, Bowie County, Arkansas; and in the valley of the lower Brazos
River (near Columbia, Brazoria County), Texas.


                     47. Crataegus arborescens Ell.

[Illustration: Fig. 399]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-obovate, acute, acuminate or rarely rounded
and abruptly short-pointed and slightly lobed at apex, gradually
narrowed cuneate and entire at base, and coarsely doubly serrate above
the middle with incurved glandular teeth, villose on the upper side of
the midrib with short white hairs when they unfold, and at maturity
thin, glabrous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler and
often furnished on the lower surface with small axillary tufts of pale
hairs, 1'--2' long, and 3/4'--1' wide, with a slender midrib and primary
veins; petioles slender, glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end
of vigorous shoots oval to oblong-ovate or elliptic, acuminate, abruptly
or gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, more or less deeply lobed
with acuminate lateral lobes, often 2-1/2' long and 1-1/4' wide, their
petioles stout, and glabrous early in the season. Flowers 1/2' in
diameter, on slender pedicels, in wide many-flowered compound corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous or slightly pilose, the lobes
slender, acuminate, entire, glabrous or slightly villose on the inner
surface, deciduous from the ripe fruit; stamens 20; anthers deep rose
color; styles usually 5. Fruit on short pedicels in many-fruited
drooping clusters, globose or subglobose, orange-red, 1/4'--1/3' in
diameter; nutlets 5, pointed at the ends, slightly ridged on the back,
about 1/6' long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 12'--18' in diameter covered
with close pale gray bark, spreading and erect branches forming a broad
rather open irregular head, and slender glabrous red-brown branchlets,
ashy gray in their second season, and unarmed or armed with straight
slender chestnut-brown spines.

Distribution. River banks, low wet woods and borders of swamps;
Georgia-coast region, near Dorchester, Liberty County, in the
neighborhood of Savannah, and on the Ogeechee River at Fort Argyle,
Chatham County (type station); near Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia.


                       48. Crataegus nitida Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 400]

Leaves lanceolate to oblong-obovate, acuminate, abruptly or gradually
narrowed and cuneate at the entire base, coarsely serrate above with
straight or incurved glandular teeth, and often more or less divided
into 2 or 3 pairs of broad acute lobes, dark red and slightly villose
along the upper side of the midrib with scattered caducous hairs when
they unfold, nearly fully grown when the flowers open early in May, and
at maturity thick and coriaceous, dark green and very lustrous on the
upper surface, pale and dull on the lower surface, 2'--3' long, and
1'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib usually red on the lower side,
and few thin prominent primary veins generally extending to the point of
the lobes; turning in the autumn rich orange color through shades of
bronze and orange-red; petioles stout, glandular, villose while young on
the upper side, soon becoming glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots more deeply lobed and frequently 5' long and
2-1/2' wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in
broad compound many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes slender, elongated, acuminate, entire or
sparingly glandular-serrate; stamens 15--20; anthers pale yellow; styles
2--5. Fruit ripening at the end of October, on slender elongated
pedicels, in many-fruited drooping clusters, short-oblong, full and
rounded at the ends, pruinose with a glaucous bloom, marked by small
dark dots, 1/2'--5/8' long, and about 1/3' in diameter; calyx only
slightly enlarged, the lobes dark red at the base on the upper side,
usually erect, often deciduous before the fruit ripens; nutlets 2--5,
rounded and ridged on the back with a broad low rounded ridge,
light-colored, 1/4' long.

A tree, often 30 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk sometimes 18' in
diameter, covered with close dark bark broken into thick plate-like
scales, stout spreading lower branches and erect upper branches forming
a broad often irregular head, and slender glabrous branchlets bright
orange-brown and lustrous during their first and second seasons,
becoming pale reddish brown in their third year, and ultimately ashy
gray, and unarmed or armed with occasional straight thin bright
chestnut-brown lustrous spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Bottoms of the Mississippi River, St. Clair County,
Illinois; common.


                        49. Crataegus mitis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 401]

Leaves obovate to oval or rhombic, acute or rarely rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed and concave-cuneate at the entire base, and coarsely
serrate above with straight glandular teeth, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open during the first week of May, and then light yellow-green
above, paler below, and glabrous with the exception of a few short hairs
on the upper side of the midrib, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark
green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale yellow-green on the lower
surface, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent
midrib and slender primary veins; petioles stout, wing-margined at apex,
occasionally glandular with minute glands, 1-1/3'--1-1/2' in length.
Flowers 1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in compact
8--15-flowered glabrous corymbs, with red glandular bracts and
bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes glabrous,
abruptly narrowed from a broad base, acuminate, finely glandular-serrate
below the middle with minute stipitate red glands; stamens 20; anthers
yellow; styles 2--4, usually 3. Fruit ripening the middle of October, on
slender pedicels, in many-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, rounded at the ends, dark crimson, marked by occasional
large dark dots, 1/2'--5/8' long, about 1/2' in diameter; calyx only
slightly enlarged, the lobes serrate, closely appressed, often deciduous
from the ripe fruit; flesh thick, pale orange color, and juicy; nutlets
usually 3, thick, full and rounded at the ends, prominently ridged on
the back, with a broad high rounded deeply grooved ridge, about 1/4'
long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
covered with dark scaly bark, large spreading branches forming a broad
round-topped head, and glabrous branchlets dull light reddish brown
during their first season, becoming dark brown or ashy gray, and armed
with stout straight or slightly curved dull red-brown or purplish spines
usually about 1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Low moist rich soil on the bottoms of the Mississippi
River near the village of Kahokia, St. Clair County, Illinois.


                     50. Crataegus atrorubens Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 402]

Leaves ovate, acute, usually rounded or sometimes cuneate or truncate at
the broad entire base, coarsely and usually doubly serrate above, and
often divided into 2 or 3 pairs of short acute lobes, about half grown
when the flowers open late in April or early in May and then slightly
roughened above by short scattered white hairs, and furnished below with
conspicuous axillary tufts of pale tomentum, and at maturity thin,
glabrous, dark dull green and smooth on the upper surface, light
yellow-green on the lower surface, about 2' long and 1-1/2' wide, or on
vigorous shoots frequently 3' long, and 2-1/2' wide, with a thin midrib
and 4 or 5 pairs of slender primary veins; petioles slender, nearly
terete, more or less densely villose early in the season, soon becoming
glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers about 5/8' in diameter, on
slender elongated villose pedicels, in broad loose glabrous or villose
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, densely villose throughout or only
at base with pale tomentum, the lobes short, acute, finely
glandular-serrate, villose particularly on the inner surface; stamens
20; styles 4 or 5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum.
Fruit ripening and falling early in October, on slender pedicels, in
drooping few-fruited clusters, subglobose to short-oblong, rounded at
the ends, dark red; calyx somewhat enlarged, with spreading lobes
usually deciduous before the fruit ripens; nutlets 4 or 5, thin, rounded
and sometimes obscurely grooved on the back, about 3/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
covered with dark red-brown scaly bark, thin erect and spreading
branches forming a compact rather narrow head, and slender glabrous
branchlets marked by occasional dark lenticels, dark green more or less
tinged with red when they first appear, soon becoming dark
chestnut-brown and very lustrous, and bright reddish brown in their
second year, and usually unarmed.

Distribution. St. Louis County, Missouri, and rich bottom-lands of the
Mississippi River, St. Clair County, Illinois; not common.


                       51. Crataegus ingens Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 403]

Leaves obovate-oval or ovate, broadly or acutely cuneate at the entire
base, crenately serrate above, and often slightly lobed toward the acute
apex, about half grown when the flowers open at the end of April or
early in May and then roughened above by short rigid hairs and villose
below along the midrib, and the remote slender veins extending obliquely
to the point of the lobes, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green and
scabrate on the upper surface, paler and nearly glabrous on the lower
surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide; turning in the autumn
yellow, orange, red, or brown; petioles stout, narrowly wing-margined to
the middle, pubescent while young, becoming glabrous, about 3/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots more deeply lobed and often
3'--3-1/2' long, and 2' wide, with a stout broad-winged petiole
sometimes 1-1/2' long. Flowers 1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on slender hairy
pedicels, in many-flowered compact hairy corymbs; calyx narrowly
obconic, coated, especially toward the base with matted pale hairs, the
lobes slender, elongated, acute, glandular with bright red glands,
glabrous on the outer, sparingly villose on the inner surface; stamens
20; anthers deep rose color; styles 3--5. Fruit ripening in October, on
stout puberulous pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, globose to
subglobose, red, about 3/8' in diameter; calyx little enlarged, with
reflexed appressed nearly glabrous lobes; nutlets 3--5, rounded or
slightly grooved and ridged on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter, spreading
branches forming a wide round-topped head, and unarmed branchlets
covered at first with matted pale hairs, soon becoming glabrous, dark
chestnut-brown.

Distribution. Moist woods and the low banks of streams; southeastern
Tennessee and northwestern Georgia.


                       52. Crataegus penita Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 404]

Leaves broad-obovate, oval, or ovate, acute or acuminate at apex,
broadly or acutely concave-cuneate at the entire base, sharply often
doubly serrate above with glandular mostly straight teeth, and often
slightly lobed above the middle, deeply tinged with red and covered with
pale hairs when they unfold, nearly fully grown when the flowers open
about the 1st of May and then smooth above, and glabrous below with the
exception of axillary tufts of pale hairs, and at maturity
subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on
the lower surface, 1-3/4'--2' long, and 1'--1-3/4' wide, with a
prominent midrib and slender primary veins; turning orange, yellow, and
brown in the autumn; petioles slender, covered while young like the
upper side of the base of the midrib with pale deciduous hairs,
1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often rounded
or subcordate at base, more or less deeply lobed, and 2-1/2'--3' long
and broad, with a stout broadly winged glandular petiole. Flowers about
5/8' in diameter, on elongated glabrous or sparingly hairy pedicels, in
compact few-flowered nearly glabrous corymbs; calyx broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, slender,
acuminate, entire, or furnished with occasional minute glandular teeth,
slightly villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers white faintly
tinged with pink; styles 3--5. Fruit ripening in October, on elongated
slender pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, globose or
depressed-globose, red, about 1/4' in diameter; calyx enlarged, with
spreading or reflexed lobes villose on the upper side; nutlets 3--5,
narrowed and acute at the ends, rounded and broadly grooved on the back,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short trunk sometimes 10' in diameter,
stout ascending or spreading branches forming a wide head, unarmed
branchlets puberulous while young, soon glabrous, becoming light reddish
brown.

Distribution. Low moist woods and the banks of streams; southeastern
Tennessee.


                     53. Crataegus micracantha Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 405]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oval, acute, acuminate, or rarely rounded at
apex, gradually or abruptly narrowed from above or from below the middle
to the cuneate entire base, coarsely crenulate-serrate, and occasionally
3-lobed above with short broad acute lateral lobes, when they unfold
villose on the upper and hoary-tomentose on the lower surface, more than
half grown when the flowers open about the middle of May and then
membranaceous and slightly villose above with short scattered pale
hairs, and at maturity thin but firm in texture, dark yellow-green,
lustrous and smooth above, paler and tomentose below on the slender
midrib and 3 or 4 pairs of very obscure primary veins, 2'--2-1/2' long,
and 1'--1-1/4' wide; petioles slender, tomentose early in the season,
becoming glabrous or pubescent, 1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots often broadly rhombic to obovate, acuminate, frequently
deeply 3-lobed or divided into 2 or 3 pairs of short lateral lobes,
usually 2-1/2'--3' long. Flowers cup-shaped, 1/4' in diameter, on long
slender pedicels thickly coated with matted white hairs, in broad lax
many-flowered compound hairy corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
villose, the lobes linear, acuminate, entire, slightly villose, tipped
with minute dark glands; stamens usually 10, occasionally 12, 15, or 20;
anthers small, deep bright red; styles 5. Fruit ripening the middle of
October, on slender pubescent pedicels, in drooping many-fruited
clusters, subglobose to short-oblong, full and rounded at the ends,
bright orange-red, lustrous, marked by occasional large pale dots, about
1/4' long; calyx prominent, with a short villose tube, and spreading
erect hairy lobes often deciduous from the ripe fruit; nutlets 5, thin,
acute at the narrow ends, rounded and sometimes slightly grooved on the
back, about 3/16' long.

An unarmed tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--12' in
diameter, covered with light or dark brown bark separating freely into
thin narrow scales, stout spreading branches forming a broad flat-topped
handsome head, and slender nearly straight branchlets coated until after
the flowering time with thick hoary tomentum, bright red-brown and
puberulous during their first season, becoming light or dark dull
reddish brown the following year.

Distribution. Common in low woods in rich moist soil near Fulton,
Hempstead County, Arkansas.




                              V. PRUINOSAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 20.
    Anthers rose color.
      Leaves elliptic; fruit subglobose, green and pruinose when fully
            grown, becoming dark purple-red and very lustrous; anthers
            large, deep rose color.
                                                 54. C. pruinosa (A, C).
      Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate; fruit short-oblong, dull
            russet-green; anthers small, light rose color.
                                                   55. C. georgiana (C).
    Anthers white; leaves ovate, acute, cordate at base; fruit broader
          than high, scarlet, pruinose, becoming lustrous.
                                                  56. C. callicarpa (A).
  Stamens 10; anthers dark rose color; leaves broad-ovate, acuminate;
        fruit subglobose, green more or less tinged with red, pruinose.
                                                   57. C. disjuncta (A).


                     54. Crataegus pruinosa K. Koch.

[Illustration: Fig. 406]

Leaves elliptic, acute, broadly or acutely cuneate at the entire base,
irregularly and often doubly serrate above with glandular straight or
incurved teeth, and divided in 3 or 4 pairs of short acute or acuminate
lateral lobes, when they unfold bright red and glabrous with the
exception of a few short caducous hairs on the upper side of the base of
the midrib, nearly fully grown when the flowers open from the middle to
the end of May and then membranaceous and bluish green, and at maturity
subcoriaceous, dark blue-green and often glaucous above, pale below,
1'--1-1/2' long, and 3/4'--1' wide, with a slender midrib, and 3 or 4
pairs of thin primary veins running to the point of the lobes; late in
the autumn turning dull orange color; petioles slender, glandular,
slightly winged at the apex, often bright red in early spring and in the
autumn, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
broad-ovate, often rounded at base, more coarsely serrate and more
deeply lobed, frequently 2-1/2' long and wide, with stouter and more
broadly winged petioles. Flowers 3/4'--1' in diameter, on long slender
pedicels, in few-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a wide base, long-pointed,
finely glandular-serrate below the middle; stamens 20; anthers large,
deep rose color; styles 5, surrounded at base by a thick ring of hoary
tomentum. Fruit on long thin light green ultimately bright red pedicels,
in few-fruited drooping clusters, 5-angled, apple green and covered with
a glaucous bloom until nearly fully ripe, at maturity late in October
subglobose but rather broader than high, barely angled, 1/2'--5/8' in
diameter, dark purple-red, marked by many small dull dots, very
lustrous; calyx prominent, with a long well-developed tube, and enlarged
usually erect lobes often deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh
thick, light yellow; nutlets 5, light-colored, acute at apex, narrowed
and rounded at base, deeply grooved on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a stem a few inches in diameter, spreading
horizontal branches forming a broad open irregular head, and slender
glabrous branchlets bright chestnut-brown during their first season,
later becoming dark reddish brown, and armed with numerous stout
straight light chestnut-brown spines 1'--1-1/2' long; often shrubby,
with several intricately branched stems.

Distribution. Slopes of low hills often in limestone soil; southwestern
Vermont, westward through New York to southern Ontario (neighborhood of
Toronto), and through Ohio and Indiana to central and northern Illinois,
and southward through eastern Pennsylvania to northern Delaware.


                      55. Crataegus georgiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 407]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded or broad-cuneate at
base, finely and often doubly serrate with straight or incurved
gland-tipped teeth, and divided into numerous short acute lateral lobes,
glabrous with the exception of a few pale caducous hairs on the upper
surface and bronze-yellow when they unfold, nearly half grown when the
flowers open about the 20th of April and then thin, dark yellow-green
above and pale below, and at maturity thin but firm in texture, dark
blue-green on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2'
long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a slender yellow midrib and 3 or 4 pairs
of thin primary veins; petioles slender, often short-winged at the apex,
usually about 3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often
3' long and 2' wide, sometimes deltoid and usually much more deeply
lobed. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in usually
5--7-flowered compact glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate,
entire or obscurely and irregularly serrate, glabrous; stamens 20;
anthers small; light rose color; styles 5; surrounded at the base by a
narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening and falling early in
October, on slender pedicels, in drooping few-fruited clusters,
short-oblong, full and rounded at the ends, often obscurely 5-angled,
dull russet-green, 3/8'--1/2' long; calyx-lobes only slightly enlarged,
mostly deciduous before the fruit ripens, leaving a well-defined ring at
the summit of the short calyx-tube; flesh thin, light green; nutlets 5,
thin, rounded and irregularly grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 10'--12' in diameter,
stout wide-spreading branches forming a broad symmetrical round-topped
head, and slender lustrous chestnut-brown branchlets armed with straight
or slightly curved thin spines rarely more than 1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Low rich river-bottoms and meadows in the neighborhood of
Rome, Floyd County, Georgia.


                     56. Crataegus callicarpa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 408]

Leaves ovate, acute, cordate at base, coarsely often doubly serrate with
long straight glandular teeth, and slightly divided into 3 or 4 pairs of
short broad acuminate lateral lobes, not more than a quarter grown when
the flowers open late in April and then very thin, yellow-green and
slightly villose above and on the midrib below, and at maturity thin,
glabrous, dark yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale
yellow-green on the lower surface, 4'--4-1/2' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide,
with a stout midrib, and 3 or 4 pairs of prominent primary veins
connected by conspicuous cross veinlets; petioles stout, slightly
wing-margined at apex, sparingly glandular, 1'--1-1/4' in length; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots thicker, with shorter glandular petioles
rose-colored toward the base. Flowers 1' in diameter, on short stout
pedicels, in small compact 5--10-flowered corymbs, with lanceolate to
linear-obovate glandular bracts and bractlets usually persistent until
the flowers open; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes
separated by wide sinuses, short, broad, acuminate, coarsely
glandular-serrate, slightly villose on the inner surface; stamens 20;
anthers white; styles 5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of pale
tomentum. Fruit ripening early in October on short stout spreading
pedicels in 2 or 3-fruited clusters, broader than high, distinctly
5-angled, rounded at the wide apex, truncate at base, with a deep
depression at the insertion of the pedicel, scarlet, pruinose, becoming
lustrous, marked by numerous large pale dots, 3/4'--4/5' broad, and
about 3/4' high; calyx-lobes deciduous; flesh thin, light yellow
slightly tinged with red, remaining on the ground through the winter
without becoming soft; nutlets 5, thin, acute at apex, rounded at base,
rounded and slightly grooved or ridged with a low grooved ridge on the
back, 1/5'--1/4' long and wide.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall stem 5'--6' in diameter covered with
dark scaly bark, and stout nearly straight branchlets dark orange-green
when they first appear, becoming light chestnut-brown, lustrous and
marked by small pale lenticels in their first season, and dull reddish
brown the following year, and armed with stout straight or slightly
curved purplish spines 1'--1-1/2' in length.

Distribution. Rich hillsides, near Shrewsbury, St. Louis County,
Missouri.


                      57. Crataegus disjuncta Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 409]

Leaves broad-ovate, acuminate, full and rounded or concave cuneate at
the entire base, sharply often doubly serrate above with straight or
incurved glandular teeth, and slightly and irregularly divided above the
middle into narrow acuminate spreading lobes, thin, glabrous, dark
blue-green above, pale below, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 2-1/4'--2-1/2' wide,
with a slender yellow midrib, and 4 or 5 pairs of thin primary veins
extending obliquely to the point of the lobes; petioles slender,
wing-margined at apex, glandular, 1'--1-1/4' in length. Flowers opening
the first of May, 2/3' in diameter, on long stout pedicels, in glabrous
compact 3--6 usually 5-flowered glabrous corymbs, with conspicuous
glandular early deciduous bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes slender, acuminate, glabrous, entire or
sparingly glandular-serrate; stamens 10; anthers large, dark rose color;
styles 4 or 5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum.
Fruit on stout rigid pedicels, in drooping or spreading clusters,
subglobose, usually rather broader than high, angled, green more or less
tinged with red, pruinose, 1/2'--3/4' in diameter; calyx prominent, with
a short tube and much enlarged spreading or erect lobes usually
deciduous at midsummer; flesh thin, greenish yellow; nutlets usually 4,
rounded at the ends, deeply grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--18 deg. high, with a tall slender trunk, covered with dark
slightly scaly bark, small erect and spreading branches forming an open
irregular head, and stout slightly zigzag glabrous branchlets dark
olive-green tinged with red when they first appear, dark dull reddish
brown or purple and marked by small pale lenticels at the end of their
first season, becoming light grayish brown in their second year, and
armed with numerous stout nearly straight dark purple lustrous spines
2-1/2'--3' in length.

Distribution. Gravelly banks of small streams near Monteer, Shannon
County, and at Carl Junction, Jasper County, Missouri.




                             VI. SILVICOLAE.


                           _Medioximae_ Sarg.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Fruit on short erect pedicels; leaves rounded or occasionally slightly
        cordate at base.
                                                  58. C. drymophila (C).
  Fruit on elongated drooping pedicels.
    Leaves truncate, cordate or rounded at base; anthers, pale rose.
                                                     59. C. diffusa (A).
    Leaves cuneate or rounded at base; anthers, dark purple.
                                                   60. C. luxuriosa (A).


                     58. Crataegus drymophila Sarg.

                      _Crataegus silvicola_ Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 410]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded at the entire base,
sharply and often doubly serrate above with gland-tipped teeth, and
slightly and irregularly divided into short acute lateral lobes, when
they unfold dark red and coated with short soft pale hairs most abundant
on the upper surface, about half grown when the flowers open at the end
of April and then nearly glabrous, and at maturity thin, dark
yellow-green and smooth or scabrate above, pale and glabrous below, or
occasionally villose along the under side of the slender midrib, and of
3 or 4 pairs of thin primary veins extending to the point of the lobes,
about 2' long and 1-1/2'--1-3/4' wide; petioles slender, glandular,
about 1' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often deltoid,
truncate or cordate at base, more coarsely serrate, more deeply lobed,
and often 2-1/2' long and wide. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on
slender pedicels, in compact few-flowered thin-branched glabrous
corymbs, with linear glandular bright red caducous bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed,
acuminate, glabrous, entire or glandular-serrate; stamens 10; anthers
large, dark rose color; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring
of pale hairs. Fruit ripening at the end of September and soon falling,
on short pedicels, in erect few-fruited clusters, subglobose and often a
little broader than long, red or greenish yellow, with a rosy cheek,
about 1/2' in diameter; calyx little enlarged, with spreading lobes
usually deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh thin and yellow;
nutlets 3--5, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, covered with close or slightly fissured bark broken into small
gray or red-brown scales, and often armed with long stout branched gray
spines, ascending or spreading branches forming a narrow irregular or
round-topped head, and slender branchlets dark green tinged with red and
covered with long pale scattered white hairs when they first appear,
soon becoming glabrous, bright red-brown during their first year, and
ultimately ashy gray, and armed with few or many thin straight or
somewhat curved bright chestnut-brown spines 1-1/2'--2' long; or in dry
soil of upland forests usually a shrub, with numerous stems.

Distribution. Low moist flat woods; northern Alabama and northwestern
and central Georgia, and occasionally on the drier uplands of the
surrounding country; common; central Mississippi (Pelahatchee, Rankin
County; Jackson, Hinds County, and in Franklin County); eastern
Louisiana (Holtsville, St. Tammany Parish, anthers pink, _R. S. Cocks_).


                       59. Crataegus diffusa Sarg.

                       _Crataegus Beckwithae_ Sarg.
                      _Crataegus Robbinsiana_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 411]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded, truncate or cordate
at the entire base, often doubly serrate above with straight glandular
teeth, and more or less deeply divided into 4 or 5 pairs of spreading
acuminate lateral lobes, deeply-tinged with red, glabrous below and
covered above with short white hairs when they unfold, nearly fully
grown when the flowers open from the middle to the 20th of May and then
thin, pale yellow-green and hairy above and pale below, and at maturity
thin and firm, smooth, dark green and glabrous on the upper surface,
pale on the lower surface, 1-1/4'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a
slender yellow midrib, and thin primary veins extending obliquely to the
point of the lobes; often turning orange color tinged with red in the
autumn; petioles slender, slightly wing-margined at apex, glandular with
minute stipitate dark glands, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots broad-ovate, usually long-pointed, cordate or rarely
truncate at base, more coarsely serrate, more deeply lobed, and
frequently 2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout reddish
conspicuously glandular petiole 2/5'--3/5' in length. Flowers 1/2'--3/5'
in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels, in 6--10-flowered corymbs,
with linear glandular bracts and bractlets mostly deciduous before the
flowers open; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes gradually
narrowed from a wide base, acuminate at the gland-tipped apex, entire or
slightly and irregularly toothed near the middle; stamens 7--10; anthers
light rose color; styles 4 or 5, surrounded at base by a ring of pale
tomentum. Fruit ripening from the first to the middle of October, on
slender pedicels, in few-fruited erect clusters, depressed-globose,
rather broader than high, dull red and slightly pruinose, becoming
lustrous, and about 1/2' in diameter; calyx little enlarged, with
spreading appressed lobes bright red on the upper side below the middle
and mostly persistent on the ripe fruit; flesh thin, hard, greenish
white; nutlets 4 or 5, broad and rounded at base, narrowed and rounded
at apex, ridged on the back with a high ridge, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
covered with light gray closely appressed scales, comparatively small
erect branches forming an open head, and slender slightly zigzag
branchlets marked by numerous dark lenticels, green tinged with red and
glabrous when they first appear, bright chestnut-brown and lustrous
during their first winter, and pale gray-brown the following year, and
armed with numerous slender or occasionally stout nearly straight bright
red-brown shining spines 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long; usually smaller and
sometimes a shrub.

Distribution. Valley of the Connecticut River (Walpole, Cheshire County,
New Hampshire, and Westminster and Putney, Windham County, Vermont),
western Vermont (near Burlington, Chittenden County); eastern, central
and western New York; common.


                      60. Crataegus luxuriosa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 412]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate, gradually narrowed and cuneate or
rounded at the often unsymmetrical base, finely often doubly serrate
with straight glandular teeth, and slightly divided usually only above
the middle into 3 or 4 pairs of small acute lobes, about half grown when
the flowers open late in May and then thin, dark yellow-green and
roughened above by short white hairs and paler below, and at maturity
thin, dark yellow-green and scabrate on the upper surface, pale bluish
green on the lower surface, 2-1/4'--2-1/2' long, and 1-3/4'--2' wide,
with a slender midrib and obscure primary veins; petioles slender,
slightly wing-margined at apex, occasionally glandular with minute
persistent glands, 1'--1-1/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots broad-ovate, rounded at base, coarsely serrate, laterally lobed
with numerous short broad lobes, often 3' long and 2-1/2' wide. Flowers
3/4' in diameter, on short slender pedicels, in compact mostly
6--12-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, the lobes long,
slender, acuminate, entire or occasionally slightly dentate near the
middle, glabrous on the outer surface, slightly villose on the inner
surface; stamens 8--10; anthers bright purple; styles 3--5. Fruit
ripening and beginning to fall early in October, on short stout
pedicels, in drooping usually 1--3-fruited clusters, subglobose to
slightly obovoid, scarlet, lustrous, marked by pale dots, 1/2'--3/4' in
diameter; calyx little enlarged, with a deep narrow cavity and spreading
and incurved usually persistent lobes dark red on the upper side below
the middle; flesh thick, yellow-green and acid; nutlets 3--5, usually 4,
gradually narrowed and rounded at the ends, ridged on the back with a
broad high grooved ridge, about 1/4' long.

An oval-headed tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk sometimes 8'--10'
in diameter, covered with dark gray scaly bark, and stout zigzag often
contorted branchlets dark orange-green and marked by large pale
lenticels when they first appear, becoming light chestnut-brown and
lustrous in their first season and dull red-brown the following year,
and armed with few stout slightly curved chestnut-brown shining spines
1'--1-1/2' long, persistent and becoming branched on old stems.

Distribution. Rich hillsides, Kittanning, Armstrong County, and on the
flood plain of the Allegheny River at Whiskey Hollow across the river
from Kittanning, and Linesville, Crawford County, Pennsylvania.




                            VII. TENUIFOLIAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 5--10.
    Corymbs villose.
      Leaves oblong-ovate; stamens usually 5; anthers pink; fruit
            obovoid to short-oblong.
                                                  61. C. apiomorpha (A).
      Leaves oblong-obovate; stamens 10; anthers reddish purple; fruit
            obovoid to subglobose.
                                                  62. C. paucispina (A).
    Corymbs glabrous; leaves oval or ovate; stamens usually 5; anthers
          dark reddish purple; fruit short-oblong.
                                                   63. C. pentandra (A).
  Stamens usually 20.
    Corymbs villose.
      Leaves broad-ovate to obovate or rarely oval; fruit short-oblong
            to obovoid.
                                                     64. C. lucorum (A).
      Leaves rhombic to broad-ovate or rarely obovate; fruit
            ellipsoidal.
                                                      65. C. lacera (C).
    Corymbs glabrous.
      Leaves ovate; anthers pale rose color; fruit subglobose to
            broad-obovoid, dark red.
                                                     66. C. depilis (A).
      Leaves ovate; stamens 15--20; anthers dark rose color; fruit
            subglobose.
                                                    67. C. basilica (A).


                     61. Crataegus apiomorpha Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 413]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate, rounded or rarely cuneate at the entire
often unsymmetrical base, finely doubly serrate above with slender
glandular teeth, and slightly divided above the middle into 4 or 5 pairs
of triangular acute lobes, about half grown when the flowers open early
in May and then membranaceous, light yellow-green and tinged with red or
bronze color, and covered above with short white hairs and pale and
glabrous below, and at maturity thick and firm in texture, dark
blue-green and smooth and lustrous or sometimes dull and scabrate on the
upper surface, pale blue-green on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2-1/4'
long, and 1-1/8'--1-1/2' wide, with a stout midrib, and primary veins
arching obliquely to the point of the lobes; petioles slender, slightly
winged at the apex, often sparingly glandular, 3/8'--1' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often 3' long. Flowers 1/2'--3/4'
in diameter, on short villose or glabrous pedicels, in compact
many-flowered usually hairy corymbs, their bracts and bractlets linear
to oblong-obovate, glandular-serrate with stipitate dark red or purple
glands, turning red before falling, mostly persistent until after the
flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes abruptly
narrowed at base, slender, acuminate, entire or sparingly glandular;
stamens 5--10, usually 5; anthers pink; styles 3--5, surrounded at base
by tufts of pale hairs. Fruit ripening early in September and soon
falling, on slender pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, obovoid
or rarely short-oblong, bright reddish purple, marked by small scattered
pale dots, 3/8'--5/8' long, and 1/4'--1/3' in diameter; calyx much
enlarged, with spreading lobes, their tips mostly deciduous from the
ripe fruit; flesh thin, yellow, juicy, pleasantly acid; nutlets 3--5,
thin, rounded and ridged on the back with a low ridge, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk 6' in diameter and 3 deg.--6 deg. long,
covered with dark gray bark separating into thin plates, in falling
disclosing the yellow inner bark, numerous ascending branches forming an
oblong or pyramidal crown, and slender branchlets dark dull red-brown
during their first season, becoming dark gray-brown the following year,
and unarmed, or armed with slender nearly straight dull red-brown
ultimately ashy gray spines 1'--1-1/2' long; or often shrubby, with
numerous stems spreading into small clumps.

Distribution. Dry open places, borders of woods, and the margins of the
high banks of streams; common and generally distributed in northeastern
Illinois.


                     62. Crataegus paucispina Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 414]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acuminate, rounded, concave-cuneate to truncate
or subcordate at the entire base, sharply doubly serrate above with
straight glandular teeth, and deeply divided into 4 or 5 pairs of acute
lateral lobes spreading or pointing toward the apex of the leaf, about
half grown when the flowers open early in May and then light
yellow-green and slightly roughened above by short white hairs and paler
and glabrous below, and at maturity membranaceous, dark blue-green and
scabrate on the upper surface, pale blue-green on the lower surface,
2-1/2'--3' long, and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib,
and thin primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the lobes;
petioles slender, usually without glands, tinged with purple in the
autumn, 3/4'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers 5/8'--3/4' in diameter, on
slender hairy pedicels, in broad 12--20-flowered slightly villose
corymbs, their bracts and bractlets linear to oblong-obovate, glandular,
red, mostly persistent until after the flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes narrow, acuminate, glandular-serrate with
small dark red stipitate glands, glabrous on the outer, pubescent on the
inner surface; stamens 10; anthers bright reddish purple; styles 4 or 5,
surrounded at base by tufts of pale hairs. Fruit ripening during the
first half of September and soon falling, on slender glabrous pedicels,
in drooping clusters, obovoid to subglobose, crimson or purplish, marked
by numerous small pale dots, slightly pruinose, 1/2'--5/8' long, and
about 1/2' in diameter; calyx small, with reflexed and appressed or
erect and incurved serrate lobes dark red on the upper side below the
middle, often deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thin, yellow, juicy,
acid and edible; nutlets 4 or 5, thin, narrowed and acute at the ends,
rounded and slightly grooved or obscurely ridged on the back, about 1/4'
long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--6' in diameter and often 6 deg.
long, covered with dark gray or nearly black bark separating into thin
plate-like scales, numerous branches forming a round-topped head, and
slender glabrous branchlets dark yellow-green when they first appear,
becoming dark reddish brown at the end of their first season,
olive-green in their second year, and ultimately dark gray-brown, and
armed with small straight light red-brown shining spines 1/2'--3/4'
long.

Distribution. Woods and river banks in dry clay soil; northeastern
Illinois; common.


                      63. Crataegus pentandra Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 415]

Leaves oval or ovate, acuminate, broadly cuneate or rarely rounded at
the entire base, divided above the middle into numerous short acute or
acuminate lobes, and coarsely and often doubly serrate with straight or
incurved teeth tipped with small dark glands, nearly fully grown and
very thin when the flowers open at the end of May, and at maturity
membranaceous, dark green and roughened above by short rigid pale hairs,
pale and glabrous below, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a
slender yellow midrib, and thin primary veins extending to the point of
the lobes; petioles slender, often winged toward the apex, glandular
with minute dark glands, usually about 1' in length; leaves at the end
of vigorous shoots more deeply lobed, and often 4' long and 3' wide.
Flowers 5/8'--3/4' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in compact
few-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous,
dark red, the lobes linear-lanceolate, entire or finely
glandular-serrate; stamens usually 5, occasionally 6--10; anthers large,
dark red-purple; styles 3, surrounded at base by a thin ring of hoary
tomentum. Fruit ripening about the middle of September and soon falling,
on stout pedicels, in drooping narrow clusters, short-oblong, full and
rounded at the ends, dark crimson, lustrous, marked by minute pale dots,
usually about 5/8' long and 1/2' in diameter; calyx enlarged and
persistent, the lobes elongated, strongly incurved, often deciduous
before the fruit ripens; flesh thick, dry and mealy; nutlets 3, narrowed
and acute at the ends, prominently ridged on the back with a high broad
ridge, 1/3' long.

A tree, rarely more than 15 deg. high, with a straight trunk 5'--6' in
diameter, covered with thin bark separating into papery lustrous pale
scales, stout branches forming a broad open irregular head, and slender
glabrous branchlets bright chestnut-brown during their first season,
becoming ashy gray the following year, and armed with many thick
straight or curved bright chestnut-brown or red-brown spines 1'--1-1/2'
long.

Distribution. Low hills and limestone ridges; western and southern
Vermont; southern Connecticut (rocky shore of Alewive Creek, Waterford,
New London County), and eastern and central New York (Whitesboro, Oneida
County).


                       64. Crataegus lucorum Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 416]

Leaves broad-ovate to obovate or rarely oval, broad-cuneate or rounded
at the entire base, coarsely serrate above with straight teeth tipped
with large persistent bright red glands, and deeply divided above the
middle into 3 or 4 pairs of wide acute or acuminate lobes, rather more
than a third grown when the flowers open early in May and then light
yellow-bronze color, covered on the upper surface with short soft pale
hairs and glabrous on the lower surface, and at maturity membranaceous,
smooth, dark dull green and glabrous above, pale yellow-green below,
about 2' long and 1-1/4' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, and 3 or 4
pairs of thin primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the
lobes; petioles slender, glandular, often somewhat winged toward the
apex, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots usually
ovate and rounded at the broad base, more deeply lobed, and sometimes 3'
long and broad. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on thin pedicels, in narrow
compact few-flowered small villose corymbs; calyx broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes narrow, acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers small, dark purple;
styles 4 or 5. Fruit ripening about the middle of September and soon
falling, on short stout pedicels, in erect few-fruited slightly villose
clusters, obovoid until nearly fully grown and then short-oblong or
somewhat obovoid, full and rounded at the ends, crimson, lustrous,
marked by small pale dots, 1/2'--5/8' long; calyx enlarged, the lobes
elongated, coarsely glandular-serrate, villose above, closely appressed,
often deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh thick, yellow, dry and
mealy; nutlets 4 or 5, thin, rounded, and sometimes obscurely ridged on
the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
covered with close dark red-brown bark, slender ascending branches
forming a narrow open head, and thin branchlets dark green and somewhat
villose when they first appear, becoming dull orange-brown in their
first summer and ultimately dark gray-brown, and armed with straight or
slightly curved bright red-brown lustrous spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Rich moist soil along the margins of Oak-groves on the
banks of sloughs; Barrington, Cook County, Illinois; near Ithaca,
Thompkins County, New York.


                       65. Crataegus lacera Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 417]

Leaves rhombic to broad-ovate or rarely obovate, acute at apex, broadly
cuneate and entire at base, coarsely often doubly serrate above with
straight glandular teeth, and divided above the middle into numerous
acute lobes, when they unfold coated below with thick hoary tomentum and
villose above, nearly fully grown when the flowers open about the 20th
of April and then glabrous on the lower surface and covered on the upper
surface with short scattered pale hairs, and at maturity glabrous, light
yellow-green, paler below than above, thin, about 1-1/2' long and 1-1/4'
wide, with a slender yellow midrib and few remote primary veins;
petioles slender, villose, becoming glabrous or puberulous, slightly
winged at the apex, often red toward the base, 1/4'--1/3' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, often deeply 3-lobed,
coarsely serrate, 3'--4' long and broad. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on
slender villose pedicels, in sparingly villose few-flowered corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes linear-lanceolate,
elongated, coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer surface,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers small, rose color;
styles 4 or 5. Fruit ripening toward the end of October, on short stout
glabrous pedicels, in erect few-fruited clusters, ellipsoidal, rounded
at the ends, bright cherry-red, lustrous, marked by occasional large
dark dots, about 1/2' long; calyx only slightly enlarged, with small
nearly triangular villose spreading lobes mostly deciduous before the
fruit ripens; flesh thick, orange color; nutlets 3--5, thin, narrowed at
the ends, only slightly ridged on the rounded back, 5/16' long.

A slender tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 4'--5' in diameter,
covered with pale scaly bark, small short branches forming a narrow
head, and slender branchlets dark olive-green and villose when they
first appear, becoming light red-brown and glabrous during their first
summer, and ultimately dull light gray, and armed with thin straight
bright chestnut-brown lustrous spines 3/4'--1-3/4' long.

Distribution. Low rich forest-glades near Fulton, Hempstead County,
Arkansas.


                       66. Crataegus depilis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 418]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, rounded or broad-cuneate and often
unsymmetrical at the entire base, sharply doubly serrate above with
straight glandular teeth, and often divided into 4 or 5 pairs of short
acute lobes, when they unfold deeply tinged with red and covered above
with fine short caducous hairs, nearly half grown when the flowers open
during the second week of May, and at maturity membranaceous, glabrous,
smooth, yellowish to bluish green on the upper surface, pale on the
lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a slender
midrib and 5 or 6 pairs of thin primary veins; turning yellowish and
brown or russet color in the autumn; petioles slender, glabrous,
sparingly glandular with minute glands, 3/4'--1' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots often 2-1/2' long and 1-1/2' wide. Flowers
3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad glabrous 8--12-flowered
corymbs, with linear or oblong glandular bracts and bractlets; calyx
narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes lanceolate, glandular-serrate,
deeply tinged with purple; stamens 20; anthers pale rose color; styles 4
or 5. Fruit ripening early in September and soon falling, on slender
pedicels, in drooping few-fruited clusters, subglobose to broad-obovoid,
dark red to reddish purple, lustrous, 1/2'--3/4' long, and 3/8'--5/8' in
diameter; calyx only slightly enlarged, the lobes reflexed,
glandular-serrate, and red on the upper side toward the base; flesh
thick, yellow, sweet, juicy and slightly acid; nutlets 4 or 5, full and
rounded at apex, narrowed and acute at base, and prominently but
irregularly ridged on the back with a high sometimes grooved ridge,
1/4'--5/16' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--8' in diameter and 6 deg.--9 deg. long,
covered with dark gray or gray-brown flaky bark, spreading branches
forming an oblong or rounded open head, and slender glabrous branchlets
bright red-brown and very lustrous during their first summer, becoming
light gray-brown the following year, and armed with stout or slender
nearly straight spines 3/4'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Rich clay or gravelly soil in pastures and on the borders
of woods; northeastern Illinois (Lake, Cook and Mill Counties).


                      67. Crataegus basilica Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 419]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, broad-cuneate or rounded at the entire
or crenate base, sharply and often doubly serrate above with straight
slender glandular teeth, and divided into numerous short acute lateral
lobes, more than half grown when the flowers open early in May and then
roughened above by short pale hairs and glabrous below, and at maturity
thin but firm in texture, bright green and scabrate above, paler below,
2-1/2'--3' long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, and
thin veins arching to the point of the lobes; turning yellow and brown
in the autumn; petioles slender, slightly winged at apex, 1'--1-1/2' in
length. Flowers 1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on elongated slender pedicels,
in 5--15-flowered glabrous compact corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes slender, acuminate, glabrous, entire or occasionally
serrate; stamens 15--20; anthers dark rose color; styles 3--5. Fruit
ripening and falling early in September, on slender pedicels, in
few-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose, scarlet, covered with a
glaucous bloom, 1/2'--5/8' in diameter; flesh soft, sweet, and edible;
nutlets 3--5, narrowed and acute at the ends, prominently ridged on the
back with a high broadly grooved ridge, 1/4'--5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a trunk 7'--8' in diameter, covered
with dark gray or brown scaly bark, ascending or slightly spreading
branches forming a narrow irregular head, and stout glabrous branchlets
dark chestnut-brown in their first season becoming dark gray, and armed
with numerous slender bright chestnut-brown lustrous ultimately gray
spines 2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. Open woods and the borders of fields and roads, western
North Carolina, usually at altitudes of 2000 deg.--3000 deg. above the sea.




                             VIII. MOLLES.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 20.
    Anthers pale yellow or white (_rose color in 71_).
      Leaves broad and rounded, truncate or cordate at base; fruit
            subglobose to short-oblong or obovoid, red, crimson or
            scarlet.
        Mature leaves glabrous on the upper surface.
          Leaves thin.
            Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, scarlet, ripening in
                  August and September.
                                                      68. C. mollis (A).
            Fruit obovoid to short-oblong, dark red, ripening in
                  October.
                                                        69. C. sera (A).
          Leaves subcoriaceous; fruit short-oblong to obovoid, crimson,
                ripening in October and November.
                                                   70. C. arkansana (C).
        Mature leaves scabrate on the upper surface; fruit
              depressed-globose, red, ripening in August and September.
                                                     71. C. gravida (A).
      Leaves broad-cuneate or rounded at base, acute or acuminate,
            scabrate on the upper surface at maturity.
        Fruit red.
          Leaves villose below at maturity on midrib and veins, those at
                the end of vigorous shoots cuneate at base; flowers in
                usually 7--12-flowered corymbs; fruit short-oblong,
                orange-red.
                                                      72. C. invisa (C).
          Leaves hoary-tomentose below at maturity, those at the end of
                vigorous shoots rounded, cordate or abruptly cuneate at
                the broad base; flowers in 15--20-flowered corymbs;
                fruit ellipsoidal, ovoid, short-oblong or subglobose,
                crimson.
                                                     73. C. limaria (C).
        Fruit bright canary yellow, subglobose; leaves villose below at
              maturity elliptic to ovate, oval or slightly obovate.
                                                74. C. viburnifolia (C).
      Leaves narrowed at base.
        Mature leaves glabrous on the upper surface; fruit short-oblong
              to subglobose.
          Leaves oblong-obovate or oval.
                                                 75. C. Berlandieri (C).
          Leaves elliptic to ovate or slightly obovate.
                                                76. C. meridionalis (C).
        Mature leaves scabrate on the upper surface; fruit subglobose to
              short-oblong, red.
          Leaves ovate to oval; flowers in 3--10-flowered corymbs;
                calyx-lobes glabrous.
                                                   77. C. Treleasei (C).
          Leaves ovate; flowers in many-flowered corymbs; calyx-lobes
                villose.
                                                      78. C. canadensis.
    Anthers rose color.
      Leaves broad at base.
        Mature leaves smooth on the upper surface.
          Leaves thick, ovate, acute at apex; fruit short-oblong to
                obovoid, bright cherry red.
                                                     79. C. corusca (A).
          Leaves thin, broad-ovate to suborbicular, rounded at apex;
                fruit subglobose to ovoid, bright yellow.
                                                   80. C. Kelloggii (A).
        Mature leaves scabrate on the upper surface, oblong-obovate;
              fruit short-oblong, crimson.
                                                      81. C. induta (C).
      Leaves narrowed at base; fruit red.
        Leaves yellow-green.
          Mature leaves glabrous on the upper surface; fruit
                short-oblong to obovoid.
                                                      82. C. texana (C).
          Mature leaves scabrate on the upper surface.
            Fruit subglobose to short-oblong.
                                                    83. C. quercina (C).
            Fruit obovoid.
                                                  84. C. pyriformis (C).
        Leaves blue-green, subcoriaceous, ovate to suborbicular,
              scabrate on the upper surface; fruit subglobose to
              short-oblong, red.
                                                  85. C. lanuginosa (C).
  Stamens 10.
    Anthers yellow.
      Leaves broad at base.
        Leaves smooth on the upper surface.
          Leaves ovate or rarely oval, dark yellow-green above; fruit
                subglobose, crimson, ripening late in August.
                                                  86. C. arnoldiana (A).
          Leaves ovate, blue-green above; fruit obovoid to short-oblong,
                scarlet, ripening in September.
                                              87. C. champlainensis (A).
        Leaves scabrate on the upper surface, ovate, acute, rounded or
              abruptly cuneate at base; anthers nearly white; fruit
              short-oblong, bright orange-red.
                                               88. C. pennsylvanica (A).
      Leaves cuneate at base, scabrate on the upper surface, ovate,
            acute; fruit obovoid, orange-red.
                                                   89. C. submollis (A).
    Anthers rose color.
      Leaves broad at the rounded, abruptly cuneate or cordate base.
        Leaves scabrate on the upper surface.
          Leaves oval, rounded or cuneate at base; flowers in wide
                many-flowered corymbs; fruit short-oblong, crimson.
                                               90. C. Ellwangeriana (A).
          Leaves oblong-ovate; flowers in compact few-flowered corymbs;
                fruit obovoid to short-oblong, scarlet.
                                                 91. C. Robesoniana (A).
        Leaves smooth on the upper surface at maturity, ovate, usually
              broad-cuneate at base; fruit obovoid to short-oblong,
              crimson.
                                                     92. C. anomala (A).
      Leaves cuneate at base, smooth on the upper surface at maturity;
            fruit subglobose, orange-red.
                                                   93. C. noelensis (C).


                 68. Crataegus mollis Scheele. Red Haw.

[Illustration: Fig. 420]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute, usually cordate or rounded at the wide base,
coarsely and generally doubly serrate with straight glandular teeth, and
more or less deeply divided into 4 or 5 pairs of acute or rounded
lateral lobes, covered above with short pale hairs and hoary-tomentose
below when they unfold, about half grown when the flowers open early in
May and then membranaceous, light yellow-green and hairy above and
pubescent or tomentose below, and at maturity firm in texture, dark
yellow-green and slightly rugose on the upper surface and paler and
pubescent or puberulous on the lower surface along the stout midrib, and
4 or 5 pairs of primary veins extending to the point of the lobes,
3'--4' long and broad; petioles stout, terete, at first tomentose,
ultimately pubescent or nearly glabrous, often slightly glandular with
small dark caducous glands, 1'--1-1/4' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots more deeply lobed, with a deeper basal sinus, and
frequently 5'--6' long and broad. Flowers 1' in diameter, on stout
densely villose pedicels, in broad many-flowered tomentose corymbs, with
conspicuous bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
hoary-tomentose, the lobes narrow, acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate
with bright red glands, villose on the outer, tomentose on the inner
surface; stamens 20; anthers large, light yellow; styles 4 or 5,
surrounded at base by a broad ring of hoary tomentum. Fruit ripening
late in August and early in September, on stout pedicels, in drooping
few-fruited villose clusters, short-oblong to subglobose, rounded at the
ends, more or less pubescent, scarlet marked by occasional large dark
dots; 3/4'--1' in diameter; calyx prominent, hairy, with large erect and
incurved lobes usually deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh thick,
yellow, subacid, dry and mealy; nutlets 4 or 5, thin, rounded and
obscurely ridged on the back, light brown, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 40 deg. high, with a tall trunk often 18' in diameter,
heavy wide-spreading smooth ashy gray branches forming a broad
round-topped and often symmetrical head, and stout branchlets covered at
first with a thick coat of long white matted hairs, villose during their
first season, becoming glabrous in their second year, and armed with
occasional straight thick bright chestnut-brown shining spines 1'--2'
long.

Distribution. Low rich soil usually on the bottom-lands of streams;
northern Ohio and southwestern Ontario (Point Edward) to northern
Missouri, eastern South Dakota, eastern Nebraska, and eastern Kansas;
common; near Nashville, Davidson County, Tennessee.


                        69. Crataegus sera Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 421]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acute or acuminate, rounded, truncate or slightly
cordate at the broad base, irregularly divided into 4 or 5 pairs of
short acute lateral lobes, and sharply and sometimes doubly serrate
nearly to the base with straight glandular teeth, unfolding about the
1st of May with the opening of the flowers and then covered above with
short soft white hairs and tomentose below, and at maturity
membranaceous, dark yellow-green and glabrous on the upper surface,
pubescent on the lower surface, 2'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3' wide, with a
slender midrib, and thin remote primary veins extending to the point of
the lobes; petioles slender, tomentose, becoming pubescent, 1'--1-1/2'
in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots more deeply lobed, and
often 4'--5' long and 3'--4' wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on stout
densely villose pedicels, in compact many-flowered tomentose corymbs;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, coated with broad matted pale hairs, the
lobes broad, acute or acuminate, glandular-serrate with large dark
glands, tomentose on the outer surface and villose on the inner surface;
stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles 4 or 5, usually 5. Fruit
ripening about the 1st of October, on stout puberulous or villose
pedicels, in drooping or erect few-fruited clusters, obovoid or
short-oblong, dull dark red, marked by small pale dots, usually slightly
villose or pubescent at the ends, 2/3' long, and 1/2' in diameter; calyx
enlarged, with erect, coarsely glandular-serrate, incurved lobes often
deciduous before the ripening of the fruit; flesh thick, dry and mealy;
nutlets usually 5, thin, light brown, irregularly grooved on the back
with a broad shallow groove, 1/4' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
thick branches forming a broad round-topped symmetrical head, and
branchlets hoary-tomentose at first, becoming light red-brown and
puberulous and ultimately pale orange-brown, and armed with occasional
straight or slightly curved chestnut-brown lustrous spines
1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length.

Distribution. Walpole Island, Lamberton County, southwestern Ontario;
Belle Isle in the Detroit River, near Port Huron, St. Clair County, and
in the neighborhood of Grand Rapids, Kent County, Michigan; northeastern
Illinois (Cook, Will, Lake and Dupage Counties), and in the neighborhood
of Milwaukee, Milwaukee County, Wisconsin.


                      70. Crataegus arkansana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 422]

Leaves oblong-ovate or oval, acute, rounded, broadly cuneate or truncate
at base, usually divided above the middle into 3 or 4 pairs of short
broad acute lobes, and serrate sometimes to the base with short straight
glandular teeth, when the flowers open about the middle of May nearly
one third grown and coated with soft white hairs, and at maturity thick
and leathery, dull dark green and glabrous on the upper surface, pale
yellow-green on the lower surface, 2'--3' long, and 1-3/4'--2' wide,
with a stout light yellow midrib and primary veins slightly villose
below, conspicuous secondary veins and reticulate veinlets; late in
October and in November turning bright clear yellow; petioles stout,
deeply grooved, more or less winged toward the apex, glandular with
minute usually deciduous dark glands, at first tomentose, ultimately
glabrous or puberulous, turning dark red after midsummer, 1'--1-1/2' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, rounded or
truncate at base, often 4' long and 3' wide. Flowers nearly 1' in
diameter, on short stout pedicels, in broad rather compact many-flowered
villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated with long matted
pale hairs, the lobes short, acute, coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrous
or slightly villose; stamens 20; anthers large, pale yellow; styles 5.
Fruit ripening at the end of October and falling gradually at the end of
several weeks, on stout villose pedicels, in few-fruited drooping
clusters, short-oblong or rarely obovoid, rounded and slightly tomentose
at the ends, bright crimson, very lustrous, marked by few large dark
dots, 3/4'--1' long, about 3/4' in diameter; calyx little enlarged, with
small linear-lanceolate coarsely glandular-serrate erect and persistent
lobes; flesh thick, yellow, subacid; nutlets 5, small in comparison to
the size of the fruit, thin, rounded or slightly and irregularly ridged
on the back, 1/3' long.

A tree, 20 deg. high, with a tall straight stem, thick slightly ascending
wide-spreading branches forming a broad open irregular head, and stout
branchlets dark green and covered early in the season with long pale
hairs, becoming orange-brown, glabrous, and very lustrous in their first
winter, and unarmed or armed with occasional straight light
chestnut-brown shining spines, 1/3'--1/2' in length.

Distribution. Bottom-lands of the White River near Newport, Jackson
County, Arkansas; hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts, and
unsurpassed late in the autumn in the beauty of its large brilliant
abundant fruits long persistent on the branches.


                      71. Crataegus gravida Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 423]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute, rounded or truncate at base, coarsely and
often doubly serrate with incurved glandular teeth, and slightly
incisely lobed, roughened above by short pale hairs and hoary-tomentose
below when they unfold, nearly half grown when the flowers open about
the 1st of May, and at maturity thin, firm, dark green, lustrous and
scabrate above, paler and pubescent or puberulous below, particularly on
the slender midrib and veins, 1-3/4'--2-1/2' long, and 1-1/2' wide;
turning in the autumn yellow, orange and brown; petioles slender,
tomentose early in the season, becoming pubescent or nearly glabrous,
about 1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
oblong-ovate to nearly orbicular, round or cuneate at the broad base,
more coarsely serrate, more deeply lobed, and often 2-1/2'--3' long and
wide, their petioles 3/4'--1' long. Flowers about 5/8' in diameter, on
short hoary-tomentose pedicels, in narrow crowded many-flowered
hoary-tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, covered with matted
pale hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed, acuminate, glandular-serrate,
villose; stamens 20; anthers dark rose; styles 5. Fruit ripening in
August and September, on elongated tomentose pedicels, in few-fruited
drooping clusters, depressed-globose, red; calyx enlarged, the lobes
conspicuously serrate, puberulous on the upper surface, reflexed and
closely appressed, sometimes deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thin,
yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 5, thin, narrow and rounded at base,
acute at apex, rounded and obscurely grooved on the back, about 5/16'
long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter, heavy
wide-spreading branches forming a broad round-topped head, and stout
branchlets covered at first with a thick coat of matted pale hairs,
orange-red and puberulous at the end of their first season, glabrous and
reddish brown the following year, and armed with slender nearly straight
spines about 1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Limestone hills in the neighborhood of Nashville, Davidson
County, Tennessee.


                       72. Crataegus invisa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 424]

Leaves ovate to oval, acute or acuminate at apex, cuneate or rounded at
base, coarsely often doubly serrate with broad straight glandular teeth,
and slightly divided usually only above the middle into 3 or 4 pairs of
small acuminate lobes, densely tomentose below and villose above when
they unfold, about one third grown when the flowers open at the end of
March and then thin, dark yellow-green and roughened on the upper
surface by short hairs and coated below with long matted white hairs,
and at maturity thin, yellow-green, scabrate and lustrous above, hairy
below especially on the midrib and veins, 2-1/2'--3' long, and
2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender, slightly wing-margined at apex,
covered with pale hairs early in the season, becoming nearly glabrous,
and 1-1/2'--2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
broad-ovate, acuminate, abruptly cuneate at the wide base, more coarsely
serrate, deeply divided into acute lateral lobes, and often 3-1/2'--4'
long and 3'--3-1/2' wide; petioles slender, villose, 1-1/2'--2' in
length. Flowers opening at the end of March, about 3/4' in diameter, on
slender pedicels thickly coated like the wide calyx-tube with long
matted white hairs, in broad mostly 7--12-flowered corymbs; calyx-lobes
gradually narrowed from the base, short, broad, acuminate, laciniately
glandular-serrate, thickly covered with long white hairs on the outer
surface, villose above the middle on the inner surface; stamens 20;
anthers white; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a ring of long white
hairs. Fruit ripening at the end of October, on long slender slightly
hairy pedicels, in erect or spreading few-fruited clusters,
short-oblong, full and rounded and slightly hairy at the ends,
orange-red, marked by large pale dots, and about 1/2' in diameter; calyx
little enlarged, with spreading lobes dark red on the upper side below
the middle and villose toward the apex; flesh thin, yellow, dry and
mealy; nutlets 3--5, rounded at the ends, broader at apex than at base,
rounded and only slightly grooved on the back, 1/5' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk covered with dark brown
bark broken into small closely appressed plate-like scales, large
spreading branches forming a wide irregular head, and stout slightly
zigzag branchlets clothed when they first appear with hoary tomentum,
dull gray-brown, marked by small pale lenticels and slightly pubescent
at the end of their first season and dark gray the following year, and
unarmed or armed with occasional slender straight chestnut-brown spines
1'--1-1/4' long.

Distribution. In dense woods on the rich bottom-lands of Red River near
Fulton, Hempstead County, and near Texarkana, Miller County, Arkansas.


                       73. Crataegus limaria Sarg.

                      _Crataegus Mackensenii_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 425]

Leaves ovate, acute, concave-cuneate or rounded at base, coarsely often
doubly serrate with broad straight glandular teeth, and slightly divided
into 3 or 4 pairs of small acute lateral lobes, not more than a quarter
grown when the flowers open early in April and then thin, yellow-green
and covered above with short white hairs and thickly coated below with
hoary tomentum, and at maturity light green and scabrate on the upper
surface, pale and tomentose on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long, and
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a stout midrib and thin primary veins; petioles
slender, slightly wing-margined at apex, covered when they first appear
with long matted white hairs, villose through the season, and 1'--1-1/2'
in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, rounded or
cordate at the wide base, more deeply lobed, and often 4' long and
broad. Flowers opening early in April, 4/5'--1' in diameter, on long
slender pedicels coated with matted white hairs, in compact
15--20-flowered villose corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, thickly
covered with white hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed from the base,
wide, acuminate, laciniately glandular-serrate, villose; stamens 20;
anthers white; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale
tomentum. Fruit ripening in October, on long stout erect or spreading
hairy pedicels, in few-fruited clusters, ellipsoidal to ovoid or
short-oblong, rounded at apex, truncate at base, crimson, lustrous,
marked by large pale dots, villose especially at the ends, 1/2'--3/5' in
diameter; calyx prominent, with a long villose tube, and erect villose
persistent lobes dark red on the upper side below the middle, their tips
slightly spreading or incurved; flesh thick, yellow, dry and mealy;
nutlets 3--5, narrowed and rounded at apex, rounded at the broad base,
slightly grooved on the back, 1/5'--1/4' long.

A tree, often 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--12' in diameter, covered
with dark scaly bark, stout ascending branches forming a narrow
irregular head, and slender zigzag branchlets thickly coated when they
first appear with long-white hairs, light orange-brown, lustrous,
pubescent and marked by pale lenticels at the end of their first season,
dull gray-brown and glabrous the following year, and armed with slender
straight or slightly curved purple ultimately ashy gray spines
2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. In dense woods on the rich bottom-lands of the Red River
near Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas; river banks; western Texas
(Guadalupe River, near Victoria, Victoria County; Cibolo River,
Sutherland Springs, Wilson County; San Antonio River, Bexar County; _C.
Mackensenii_ Sarg.).


                    74. Crataegus viburnifolia Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 426]

Leaves elliptic to ovate, oval or slightly obovate, acute or rounded at
apex, concave-cuneate at the entire base, coarsely often doubly serrate
above with straight glandular teeth, and slightly and irregularly
divided above the middle into 2 or 3 pairs of small acute lobes, half
grown when the flowers open about the 20th of March and then thin,
yellow-green and roughened above by short white hairs and
hoary-tomentose below, and at maturity thick, deep green, very lustrous
and scabrate on the upper surface, coated on the lower surface with pale
hairs, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib
and primary veins; petioles slightly wing-margined at apex, densely
hoary-tomentose early in the season, becoming glabrous, 2/5'--1-1/2' in
length. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on long slender tomentose
pedicels, in wide lax mostly 5--12-flowered corymbs, with large
lanceolate to spatulate foliaceous bracts and bractlets slightly serrate
above the middle, and generally persistent until after the petals fall;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, thickly coated with matted white hairs, the
lobes gradually narrowed from the base, long, slender, acuminate,
laciniately glandular-serrate, slightly villose on the outer surface,
densely villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers white; styles
4 or 5. Fruit ripening early in October, on long slender drooping
slightly hairy pedicels, in few-fruited clusters, subglobose, bright
canary yellow, about 1' in diameter; calyx little enlarged, with
spreading lobes; flesh thick, light yellow, soft and succulent; nutlets
4 or 5, gradually narrowed and rounded at the ends, irregularly ridged
on the back with a broad grooved ridge, 1/3' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
covered with gray scaly bark, large ascending and spreading branches
forming an open irregular head, and stout nearly straight unarmed
branchlets thickly coated with hoary tomentum when they first appear,
becoming purple, lustrous and nearly glabrous at the end of their first
season and dark brown or gray-brown the following year.

Distribution. Borders of woods in low ground, valley of the Brazos River
near Columbia, Brazoria County, and in low woods on the Colorado River,
at Wharton, Wharton County, Texas.


                     75. Crataegus Berlandieri Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 427]

Leaves oblong-obovate or oval, acute or acuminate, gradually narrowed,
cuneate and entire below the middle, coarsely and often doubly serrate
with broad straight or incurved glandular teeth, and unequally divided
above into numerous acute or acuminate lobes, when the flowers open from
the middle to the end of March coated on the upper surface with short
pale caducous hairs and on the lower surface with thick hoary tomentum,
and at maturity thin and firm in texture, glabrous, dark green, and
lustrous above, pale and pubescent below, and usually about 3' long and
2' wide, with a slender midrib, remote primary veins extending to the
point of the lobes, conspicuous secondary veins, and reticulate
veinlets; petioles more or less winged toward the apex, tomentose early
in the season, becoming pubescent, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots often 5' long and 3' wide, with rounded, acute
lobes. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long stout hoary-tomentose pedicels,
in broad loose many-flowered tomentose corymbs, with oblong-obovate to
lanceolate finely glandular-serrate villose conspicuous bracts and
bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, covered with thick pale tomentum,
the lobes broad, acute, very coarsely glandular-serrate, tomentose on
the outer surface and villose on the inner surface; stamens 20, anthers
yellow; styles 5, surrounded at base by tufts of white hairs. Fruit
ripening after the middle of October, on slender elongated pedicels, in
loose dropping clusters, short-oblong to subglobose, scarlet, about 1/2'
long; calyx much enlarged, with coarsely serrate erect and persistent
villose lobes; flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 5, rounded and
occasionally obscurely grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
covered with thin dark brown furrowed bark, spreading branches forming a
broad open head, and branchlets hoary-tomentose at first, soon
puberulous, dull reddish brown or yellow-brown by midsummer, becoming
ashy gray late in the autumn, and armed with few straight gray spines
about 1' in length.

Distribution. Low rich woods on the bottom-lands of the Brazos River at
Columbia and Brazoria, Brazoria County, Texas.


                    76. Crataegus meridionalis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 428]

Leaves elliptic to ovate or slightly obovate, acuminate, cuneate at the
entire base, and coarsely often doubly serrate above with broad straight
glandular teeth, coated below with hoary tomentum and covered above with
short white hairs when they unfold, more than half grown when the
flowers open from the first to the middle of April, and at maturity
thin, yellow-green and scabrate on the upper surface, paler and
villose-pubescent on the lower surface, especially on the slender midrib
and primary veins, 2'--3-1/2' long, and 1'--2' wide; petioles slender,
slightly wing-margined at apex, densely villose-pubescent with white
hairs early in the season, becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous,
1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate
to broad-elliptic, more coarsely serrate, occasionally slightly divided
into short broad lateral lobes, often 4' long and 2-1/2' wide, with a
stout midrib and petioles broadly wing-margined at apex, and about 1/2'
in length. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on stout pedicels thickly covered
like the narrow obconic calyx-tube with matted silvery white hairs, in
broad compact many-flowered villose corymbs, with conspicuous
glandular-serrate villose bracts and bractlets mostly persistent until
after the flowers open; calyx-lobes narrow, acuminate, laciniately
glandular-serrate, slightly villose-pubescent when the buds open;
stamens 20; anthers white; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a broad
ring of white tomentum. Fruit ripening from the middle to the end of
September, on elongated slender puberulous pedicels, in few-fruited
drooping red-stemmed clusters, short-oblong to subglobose, rounded at
the ends, scarlet, 1/2' to 2/3' in diameter, the calyx persistent, much
enlarged, with erect or spreading conspicuous lobes; nutlets 3--5,
rounded at base, acute at apex, ridged on the back with a high rounded
ridge, about 1/3' long.

A tree, often 25 deg. high, with a trunk 8' in diameter, covered with dark
bark slightly divided by shallow fissures into broad thin plates,
spreading ashy gray branches forming a round-topped head, and slender
zigzag branchlets, covered when they first appear with long white hairs,
soon glabrous, orange-brown or reddish brown during their first season
and dull gray the following year, and armed with numerous straight
slender purple spines 1'--2' in length.

Distribution. Limestone soil, in upland woods and glades; common in the
limestone belt of central Alabama, from the neighborhood of Gallion,
Hale County to western Mississippi (Starkville, Oktibbeha County, and
Brookville, Noxubee County).


                      77. Crataegus Treleasei Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 429]

Leaves ovate to elliptic, acute, concave-cuneate or rounded at the
narrow base, sharply doubly serrate above with straight glandular teeth,
and slightly divided into 3 or 4 pairs of narrow acuminate lateral
lobes, unfolding with the opening of the flowers at the end of April or
early in May and then light yellow-green tinged with bronze color,
lustrous and covered above with short shining caducous white hairs and
hoary-tomentose below, and at maturity thin, light yellow-green and
scabrate on the upper surface, paler and pubescent on the lower surface,
especially on the slender midrib, and 4 or 5 pairs of thin primary veins
extending obliquely to the point of the lobes, 1-3/4'--2-1/4' long, and
1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles slender, more or less wing-margined at apex,
villose early in the season, pubescent in the autumn, 1/2'--3/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, acute, cuneate
at the wide base, often 2-1/2'--3' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles
stout, wing-margined at apex 3/4'--1' long. Flowers 1' in diameter, on
short stout pedicels covered with matted pale hairs, in 3--10-flowered
compact compound or rarely simple villose corymbs; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, covered with matted pale hairs, the lobes glabrous, narrowed
from the base, with wide rounded sinuses between them, slender,
acuminate, tipped with a small red gland, and glandular-serrate with
stipitate red glands; stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles 4 or 5,
usually 5. Fruit ripening at the end of September, on stout erect
villose pedicels, in few-fruited clusters, subglobose, often broader
than high, crimson, lustrous, marked by numerous large pale dots,
pubescent at the ends, and 1/2'--3/4' in diameter; calyx prominent, with
a short villose tube, and reflexed appressed villose lobes often
deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thick, light yellow, dry and mealy;
nutlets 4 or 5, thin, full and rounded at apex, narrowed and acute at
base, grooved with a broad shallow groove and sometimes irregularly
ridged on the back, about 5/16' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes 6' in diameter,
slender branches forming a narrow open head, and thin nearly straight
branchlets thickly covered at first with long lustrous white hairs, dull
light reddish brown and puberulous at the end of their first season,
becoming dark gray-brown, and armed with stout straight or slightly
curved dark purple shining spines usually about 1-1/4' long, or unarmed.

Distribution. Banks of small streams in moist soil from Doe Run to
Bismarck, St. Francois County, Missouri.


                     78. Crataegus canadensis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 430]

Leaves ovate, short-pointed, slightly lobed usually only above the
middle with short broad acute lobes, and coarsely and frequently doubly
serrate to the broad-cuneate base with spreading glandular teeth, coated
above in early spring with soft white hairs, and below with dense hoary
tomentum, about a third grown when the flowers open at the end of May,
and at maturity thin and firm in texture, blue-green and scabrate on the
upper surface, pale and pubescent on the lower surface on the midrib and
primary veins, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1-1/2' to nearly 3' wide; petioles
slender, glandular, often more or less winged above, at first tomentose,
becoming nearly glabrous, 3/4'--1' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots broad-ovate, truncate or slightly cordate at the broad
base, more deeply lobed, often 2-1/2'--3' long and wide, the petioles
wing-margined at apex often glandular, and 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers
about 3/4' in diameter, in broad loose tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube
broadly obconic, villose with long matted hairs, the lobes lanceolate,
villose, and glandular with large red stipitate glands; stamens 20;
anthers small, nearly white; styles 5, surrounded at base by a thin ring
of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening early in October and falling gradually
until after midwinter, on stout pedicels, in erect slightly villose
few-fruited clusters, short-oblong to subglobose, crimson, lustrous,
marked by large scattered pale dots, slightly hairy toward the ends,
1/2'--5/8' long, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, the lobes
gradually narrowed from a broad base, elongated, glandular, villose,
spreading or reflexed, often deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh
thin, pale yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 5, thin, rounded and
irregularly ridged on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, stout spreading
branches forming a broad round-topped symmetrical head, and stout zigzag
branchlets dark green and covered with matted pale hairs when they first
appear, soon becoming light orange-brown and very lustrous, and armed
with numerous stout straight or slightly curved dark chestnut-brown
shining spines 2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. Limestone ridges near the St. Lawrence River at
Chateaugay, Caughnawaga, and La Tortue in the Province of Quebec.


                       79. Crataegus corusca Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 431]

Leaves ovate, acute, truncate, rounded or slightly cordate at the broad
base, regularly divided into 4 or 5 pairs of short acute lateral lobes,
and doubly serrate with straight glandular teeth, when they unfold
covered above with short soft pale hairs and glabrous below, about a
third grown when the flowers open the middle of May, and at maturity
thin but firm and rigid in texture, glabrous, dark yellow-green, bright
and lustrous above, pale yellow-green below, 2'--2-1/2' long and wide,
with a slender pale midrib and primary veins; petioles slender, villose
early in the season, soon becoming glabrous and dark red below the
middle, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
frequently divided into narrow acute lateral lobes, and often 3-1/2'--4'
long and wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on stout villose pedicels, in
compact narrow many-flowered corymbs covered with matted pale hairs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, or villose toward the base, the
lobes narrowed from a broad base, acute, coarsely glandular-serrate,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers small, pale pink;
styles 4 or 5. Fruit beginning to ripen and fall about the middle of
September and continuing to fall until the end of October, on stout
pedicels, in glabrous few-fruited clusters, short-oblong to obovoid,
bright cherry-red, lustrous, marked by dark scattered pale dots,
5/8'--3/4' long, and 1/2'--5/8' in diameter; calyx little enlarged, the
lobes slightly glandular-serrate, usually deciduous before the fruit
ripens; flesh thick, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 4 or 5,
dark-colored, rounded on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
wide-spreading branches forming a handsome symmetrical head, and stout
branchlets dark green and coated with matted pale hairs when they first
appear, soon becoming light red-brown, light orange-brown and lustrous
in their second year, and armed with thick nearly straight bright
chestnut-brown spines often 3' in length.

Distribution. Sandy shores of Lake Zurich, Lake County, Illinois.


                      80. Crataegus Kelloggii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 432]

Leaves broad-ovate to suborbicular, rounded and often short-pointed at
apex, rounded, broadly cuneate or truncate at the entire base, coarsely
serrate above with straight gland-tipped teeth, and divided usually only
above the middle into several short broad acute or acuminate lobes,
about half grown when the flowers open during the last week of April and
then thin, yellow-green, covered above with short pale hairs and
pubescent below on the midrib and veins, and at maturity thin but firm
in texture, dark yellow-green, glabrous and smooth on the upper surface,
pale and glabrous on the lower surface with the exception of a few hairs
near the base of the thin yellow midrib and of the 4 or 5 pairs of
slender prominent primary veins arching to the point of the lobes,
2'--2-1/2' long, 1-3/4'--2-1/2' wide, and often broader than long;
petioles slender, slightly winged at apex, villose while young with long
matted white hairs, becoming glabrous, 3/4'--1' in length. Flowers 5/8'
in diameter, on slender hairy pedicels, in compact 5--10-flowered
villose corymbs, with oblong-obovate to linear acuminate glandular
bracts and bractlets mostly persistent until the flowers open;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, slightly hairy at base, glabrous above, the
lobes slender, acuminate, glandular with minute dark red stipitate
glands, or entire, glabrous on the outer surface, sparingly villose on
the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers pale rose color; styles 5. Fruit
ripening at the end of September and soon falling, on long slender
glabrous pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose to
short-ovoid, bright yellow, marked by many small pale dots, 3/4'--1' in
diameter; calyx small, with spreading reflexed lobes slightly villose
toward the apex and often deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thin,
yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 5, rounded and very slightly grooved on
the back, about 3/8' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 4'--5' in diameter, covered
with nearly black deeply furrowed bark, erect branches, and nearly
straight branchlets dark green tinged with red and slightly villose when
they first appear, bright red-brown and lustrous at the end of their
first season, becoming dark dull reddish brown the following year, and
unarmed, or armed with slender nearly straight bright chestnut-brown
shining spines usually about 1' long.

Distribution. Banks of the Desperes River, South St. Louis, St. Louis
County, Missouri; not common.


                81. Crataegus induta Sarg. Turkey Apple.

[Illustration: Fig. 433]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acute, cuneate, rounded or rarely truncate at the
broad entire base, coarsely doubly serrate above with glandular teeth,
and slightly and irregularly divided into broad acute lateral lobes,
about a third grown when the flowers open from the middle to the end of
April and then thin, light yellow-green and roughened above by short
lustrous white hairs and hoary-tomentose below, and at maturity thin,
dark yellow-green and scabrate on the upper surface, pale and tomentose
or pubescent on the lower surface, particularly on the stout midrib and
4 or 5 pairs of prominent primary veins, 3'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3'
wide; petioles slender, more or less wing-margined at the apex,
glandular, hoary-tomentose early in the season, becoming sparingly
villose in the autumn, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers 3/4' in
diameter, on slender tomentose pedicels, in broad many-flowered
hoary-tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, thickly coated
with long densely matted white hairs, the lobes small, acuminate,
glandular-serrate, villose; stamens 20; anthers small, rose color;
styles 5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of snow-white hairs. Fruit
ripening the middle of October, on stout villose pedicels, in
few-fruited clusters, short-oblong, rounded and villose at the ends,
crimson or reddish yellow, lustrous, marked by small pale dots, 3/4'--2'
in diameter; calyx prominent, with a short tomentose tube and much
enlarged coarsely glandular-serrate hairy erect incurved lobes often
deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thick, orange-colored, with an
astringent subacid flavor; nutlets 5, thin, rounded and slightly grooved
on the back, 5/16'--3/8' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk often a foot in diameter,
covered with thick dark brown furrowed bark, large spreading and
ascending branches forming an open irregular head, and stout branchlets
covered at first with long matted white hairs, light orange-brown,
lustrous and puberulous at the end of their first season, becoming ashy
gray or light grayish brown the following year, and armed with many
stout nearly straight dark purple shining spines usually about 2-1/2'
long.

Distribution. Dry upland woods, near Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas;
common.


                       82. Crataegus texana Buckl.

[Illustration: Fig. 434]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute or rarely rounded at apex, broadly
concave-cuneate at base, coarsely doubly glandular-serrate above, and
usually divided above the middle into 4 or 5 pairs of broad acute lobes,
covered above when they unfold with short soft pale hairs and below with
a thick coat of hoary tomentum, more than half grown when the flowers
open late in March, and at maturity thick and firm, dark green and
lustrous above, pale and pubescent or tomentose below, particularly on
the stout midrib, primary veins, prominent secondary veins and
reticulate veinlets, 3'--4' long, 2-1/2'--3' wide; petioles stout,
deeply grooved, more or less winged above, at first tomentose, becoming
nearly glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots sometimes truncate or slightly cordate at the broad base, more
deeply lobed, and frequently 3' long and wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter,
on elongated slender densely villose pedicels, in broad open
many-flowered tomentose corymbs, with oblong or oblong-obovate acute
conspicuous villose bracts and bractlets often 1-1/2' in length;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, coated with pale tomentum, the lobes
foliaceous, gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate, coarsely
glandular-serrate, and villose with long matted pale hairs; stamens 20;
anthers large, dark red; styles 5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring
of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening toward the end of October, in drooping
many-fruited tomentose ultimately glabrous clusters, obovoid and
tomentose until nearly grown, becoming when fully ripe short-oblong or
slightly obovoid, rounded at the ends, bright scarlet, marked by
occasional large pale dots, puberulous at apex, 3/4'--1' long; calyx
enlarged, with glandular-serrate usually erect lobes, dark red at base
on the upper side, often deciduous before the ripening of the fruit;
flesh thick, yellow, sweet, and edible; nutlets 5, slightly grooved on
the back, 1/4'--1/3' long.

A tree, often 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
thick branches ascending while the tree is young, forming an open
irregular crown, and spreading in old age into a broad symmetrical
round-topped head, and branchlets dark bronze-green and covered with
long matted white hairs when they first appear, becoming dull reddish
brown and ultimately pale ashy gray, and armed with occasional thin
nearly straight bright chestnut-brown lustrous spines usually about 2'
long, or often unarmed.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands, Texas coast region; valley of the lower
Brazos River to those of the Navidad (Canardo, Jackson County),
Guadalupe (Victoria, Victoria County), and Cibolo (Sutherland Springs,
Wilson County).


                      83. Crataegus quercina Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 435]

Leaves elliptic to obovate, usually acute or occasionally rounded at
apex, obtusely or acutely cuneate at the entire base, irregularly doubly
serrate above with slender glandular teeth, and often divided above the
midrib into narrow acuminate lobes, when they unfold conspicuously
plicate, often dark red and coated above with long soft pale hairs and
covered below with a thick coat of silvery white shining tomentum, about
a third grown when the flowers open from the middle to the end of March,
and at maturity thin but firm in texture, dark green, lustrous and
scabrate above, pale and pubescent or tomentose below, and 2'--2-1/2'
long and wide, with a slender midrib, 4 or 5 pairs of thin primary
veins, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles stout, tomentose,
about 1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate,
rounded or obtusely cuneate at the wide base, usually deeply divided
into numerous acuminate lateral lobes, often 3' long and 2-1/2' wide.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long slender tomentose pedicels, in broad
many-flowered lax hoary-tomentose corymbs, with oblong-obovate
glandular-serrate villose bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, hoary-tomentose, the lobes short, acute, coarsely
glandular-serrate, tomentose; stamens 20; anthers small, dark red;
styles 5, surrounded at base by tufts of long snow-white hairs. Fruit
ripening after the middle of October, on slender nearly glabrous
pedicels, in few-fruited tomentose spreading clusters, subglobose but
often rather longer than broad, rounded at the ends, tomentose until
nearly fully grown, glabrous at maturity, dark red, marked by numerous
large pale dots, about 1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, with short
spreading often deciduous lobes; flesh thin, light yellow, hard and dry,
generally shrivelling before the fruit falls; nutlets 5, rounded and
ridged on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, remarkable for the lustre of its white tomentum, occasionally
25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 6'--8' in diameter, covered with light gray
scaly bark, becoming near the base of old trees deeply furrowed and
nearly black, ascending branches forming a broad symmetrical head, and
branchlets coated when they first appear with hoary tomentum, becoming
light red-brown and more or less villose during their first season,
glabrous and rather darker in their second year, and armed with numerous
straight or slightly curved chestnut-brown shining spines usually
1'--1-1/4' long.

Distribution. Sandy bottom-lands in open Live Oak-forests on the Brazos
River, near Columbia, Brazoria County, Texas.


                     84. Crataegus pyriformis Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 436]

Leaves oval to broad-ovate, acute and often short-pointed at apex,
gradually narrowed and concave-cuneate at the entire base, sharply and
sometimes doubly serrate above with straight glandular teeth, and often
slightly and irregularly lobed above the middle, fully grown when the
flowers open about the 10th of May and then thin, light yellow-green,
roughened above by short rigid pale hairs and pubescent below,
particularly on the slender midrib and 5 or 6 pairs of remote primary
veins, and at maturity thin and firm, lustrous and scabrate on the upper
surface, pale and pubescent on the lower surface, and generally about 3'
long and 2' wide; petioles slender, winged at apex, tomentose,
ultimately pubescent, 1'--1-1/4' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots usually ovate, coarsely serrate, more deeply lobed, and
frequently 4'--5' long and 3'--4' wide. Flowers 1' in diameter, on long
slender tomentose pedicels, in broad many-flowered lax corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, villose, the lobes narrow, acuminate,
glandular-serrate, and covered more or less thickly with pale hairs;
stamens 20; anthers pale rose color; styles 4 or 5, usually 5,
surrounded at base by a broad ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening in
October, on long slender pubescent pedicels, in drooping few-fruited
clusters, obovoid, rounded at the ends, bright cherry-red, lustrous,
marked by occasional large pale dots, about 5/8' long and 1/2' in
diameter; calyx prominent, with linear glandular-serrate closely
appressed lobes often deciduous before the fruit ripens; flesh thin,
light yellow, juicy; nutlets 4 or usually 5, rounded, and deeply grooved
on the back, dark brown, 5/8' long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter, spreading
branches forming a broad symmetrical head, and slender branchlets light
green and villose when they first appear with long matted pale hairs,
dull red-brown and pubescent in their first season, becoming glabrous
the following year, and armed with occasional thin nearly straight
bright chestnut-brown shining spines usually about 1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands of the streams of Shannon County,
southern Missouri.


                     85. Crataegus lanuginosa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 437]

Leaves ovate to suborbicular, acute or rounded and short-pointed at
apex, broadly cuneate or rounded at the entire base, coarsely and
sharply doubly serrate above with glandular teeth, and often irregularly
divided above the middle into short broad acute lateral lobes, less than
half grown when the flowers open during the last week of April and then
dark green and villose above and covered below with a thick coat of
hoary tomentum, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark blue-green, lustrous
and scabrate on the upper surface, yellow-green and tomentose on the
lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a thick
midrib, and 3--5 pairs of stout primary veins extending obliquely to the
point of the lobes; petioles stout, tomentose, 1/2'--3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often broad-ovate, very coarsely
glandular-serrate, rounded or truncate at base, and frequently 3' long
and wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on short stout pedicels covered with
long matted pale hairs, in compact many-flowered hoary-tomentose
corymbs, with large glandular-serrate conspicuous bracts and bractlets
persistent until the flowers open; calyx-tube broadly obconic, hairy,
the lobes short, broad, acute, glandular with minute stipitate glands,
densely villose on the outer surface and slightly villose on the inner
surface; stamens 20; anthers rose color; styles 5, surrounded at base by
large tufts of snow-white hairs. Fruit ripening at the end of October,
on short tomentose erect pedicels, in few-fruited clusters, subglobose
to short-oblong, rounded and slightly hairy at the ends, 1/2' in
diameter; calyx enlarged, with villose coarsely serrate usually erect
spreading or incurved persistent lobes bright red on the upper side near
the base; flesh thin, orange color, dry and mealy; nutlets 5, thin,
rounded and very irregularly ridged on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a stout trunk covered with pale bark,
spreading and erect branches, and stout zigzag branchlets light green
and villose early in the season, dull red-brown and sparingly villose or
pubescent at the end of their first year, becoming dark or light
gray-brown, and armed with many long straight purple shining ultimately
ashy gray spines 1-1/4'--3-1/2' in length.

Distribution. Southwestern Missouri; common near Webb City, Jasper
County; well distinguished by the distinctly blue color of the small
leaves, the dark crimson hard fruits and by the remarkable development
of the spines unusual in the species of this group.


                     86. Crataegus arnoldiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 438]

Leaves broad-ovate or rarely oval, acute, regularly divided above the
middle into numerous short acute lobes, and coarsely doubly serrate with
straight glandular teeth except at the rounded truncate or occasionally
cuneate base, coated with dense matted pale hairs when they unfold,
about half grown when the flowers open at the end of May or early in
June and then roughened above by stout stiff hairs and soft-pubescent
below, and at maturity thin, smooth, very dark green and lustrous above,
paler below, and slightly villose on the under side of the slender
midrib, and of the thin prominent primary veins extending to the point
of the lobes, 2'--3' long and wide; petioles slender, densely villose
early in the season, becoming puberulous, 3/4'--1-1/2' in length; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots acute or acuminate, round or obtusely
cuneate at base, more deeply lobed, often 3'--4' long and 3' wide.
Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad
many-flowered tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, densely
tomentose, the lobes narrow, elongated, acuminate, glandular-serrate,
villose on both surfaces; stamens 10; anthers, large, pale yellow;
styles 3--5, usually 3 or 4, surrounded at base by a broad ring of thick
hoary tomentum. Fruit ripening about the middle of August and mostly
falling before the first of September, on stout pedicels, in erect
spreading or rarely drooping few-fruited villose clusters, subglobose
but rather longer than broad, bright crimson marked by many large pale
dots, villose, particularly toward the ends, with long scattered white
hairs, 3/4' long; calyx little enlarged, with elongated coarsely
glandular-serrate spreading lobes often deciduous before the fruit
ripens; flesh thick, bright yellow, subacid; nutlets 3 or 4,
light-colored, prominently ridged on the back with a high rounded ridge,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short trunk 10'--12' in diameter, stout
ascending branches forming a broad open irregular head, and slender
conspicuously zigzag branchlets clothed early in the season with long
matted pale hairs, becoming dark orange-brown and very lustrous before
midsummer, glabrous or puberulous during their first winter, bright
orange-brown or gray-brown during their second year, and armed with many
stout straight or slightly curved bright chestnut-brown shining spines
2-1/2'--3' long.

Distribution. Thickets on a dry bank in the Arnold Arboretum, valley of
the Mystic River at West Medford, Middlesex County, Massachusetts, and
near Lyme, New London County, Connecticut.

Often cultivated in the parks and gardens in the neighborhood of Boston;
very conspicuous and easily recognized in winter by its ascending
remarkably zigzag branchlets.


                   87. Crataegus champlainensis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 439]

Leaves ovate, acute, rounded, truncate, slightly cordate or
broad-cuneate at base, usually divided into 2 or 3 pairs of short narrow
acute lobes, and coarsely often doubly serrate with glandular teeth,
roughened above by short pale hairs and villose below when they unfold,
nearly fully grown when the flowers open early in June, and at maturity
thick and firm in texture, conspicuously blue-green and glabrous above,
light yellow-green and somewhat pubescent below on the slender midrib
and remote primary veins, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles
slender, more or less tomentose early in the season, usually becoming
glabrous and light red below the middle before autumn, and 3/4'--1' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, rounded or
slightly cordate at base, more deeply lobed, and often 3'--4' long and
wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on short slender densely villose
pedicels, in compact few-flowered densely villose corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, coated with thick hoary tomentum, the lobes
lanceolate, finely glandular-serrate, tomentose on the outer surface
usually only below the middle, villose on the inner surface; stamens 10;
anthers small, light yellow; styles 5, surrounded at base by tufts of
pale hairs. Fruit ripening early in September and usually remaining on
the branches during the remainder of the year, on short slightly
pubescent pedicels, in compact erect villose clusters, obovoid to
short-oblong, bright scarlet, marked by scattered pale dots, more or
less villose or pubescent toward the ends; calyx prominent, persistent,
with a long tube, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base,
acuminate, finely glandular-serrate, villose, dark red on the upper side
below the middle, spreading or erect; flesh thick, yellow, dry and
mealy; nutlets 5, ridged on the back with a broad ridge, 5/16' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered
with deeply fissured bark separating into thin loose plate-like scales,
stout wide-spreading branches forming a broad round-topped often
symmetrical head, and slender somewhat zigzag branchlets coated early in
the season with hoary tomentum, soon becoming glabrous and light
chestnut-brown and lustrous, and armed with straight or slightly curved
chestnut-brown spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Limestone ridges; valley of the St. Lawrence River near
Montreal, Province of Quebec, southward through the Champlain valley to
eastern New York and westward through New York, and southern Ontario to
the neighborhood of Toronto.


                    88. Crataegus pennsylvanica Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 440]

Leaves ovate, acuminate, rounded or abruptly cuneate at base, coarsely
often doubly serrate with straight glandular teeth, and slightly divided
into 3 or 4 pairs of short broad acuminate lobes, slightly tinged with
red when they unfold, more than half grown when the flowers open the
middle of May and then thin, dark yellow-green and roughened above by
short white hairs and villose on the prominent midrib and primary veins
below, and at maturity thin, dark yellow-green and scabrate on the upper
surface, paler, scabrate and still somewhat villose on the midrib and
veins below, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long, and 2'--2-3/4' wide; petioles slender,
slightly wing-margined at apex, villose through the season, occasionally
glandular, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots rounded or truncate at base, coarsely serrate, more deeply lobed,
and often 4'--4-1/2' long and broad, with a stout midrib, prominent
primary veins, a conspicuously glandular petiole, and large foliaceous
lunate coarsely glandular-serrate persistent stipules. Flowers 3/4'--1'
in diameter, on slender densely villose pedicels in broad lax hairy
mostly 8--15-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, covered with
long white hairs, the lobes long, slender, acuminate, laciniately
glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer surface, villose on the inner
surface; stamens 8--12; anthers faintly tinged with pink; styles 3--5.
Fruit ripening and falling early in October, on short stout drooping
slightly hairy pedicels, in 4--12-fruited clusters, short-obovoid, full
and rounded at apex, bright orange-red marked by small pale dots,
puberulous at the ends, 3/4'--1' in diameter; calyx little enlarged,
with small spreading lobes dark red on the upper side, their tips often
deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thick, orange-yellow, somewhat
acidulous, edible, sometimes made into jelly; nutlets 3--5, rounded at
apex, acute at base, rounded and slightly grooved or ridged on the back,
about 1/3' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk often 18' in diameter,
covered with dark gray scaly bark, large spreading branches forming a
wide symmetrical round-topped head, and stout slightly zigzag branchlets
dark orange-green and more or less tinged with red when they first
appear, becoming dark chestnut-brown, marked by large dark lenticels and
more or less pubescent in their first season, dark red-brown the
following year, and armed with stout straight or slightly curved
chestnut-brown spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Meadows in low moist soil near Pittsburgh, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.


                      89. Crataegus submollis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 441]

Leaves ovate, acute, gradually narrowed and cuneate at the nearly entire
base, coarsely doubly serrate above with straight glandular teeth, and
divided into 3 or 4 pairs of short acute lobes, half grown at the end of
May or early in June when the flowers open and then roughened above by
short stiff pale hairs and soft-pubescent below, particularly on the
midrib and veins, and at maturity thin, dark yellow-green and scabrate
above, pale below, 3'--3-1/2' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a thick
yellow midrib and remote primary veins puberulous on the lower side;
petioles stout, nearly terete, more or less winged at apex, tomentose
early in the season, becoming puberulous, often bright red toward the
base, 1'--2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
broad-ovate, cuneate, rounded, truncate, or occasionally slightly
cordate at base, often 4' long and 3'--3-1/2' wide. Flowers 1' in
diameter, on long slender villose pedicels, in broad many-flowered
tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, covered with a thick
coat of long matted white hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed from a
broad base, acute, glandular with large red stipitate glands, glabrous
or villose on the outer surface; stamens 10; anthers small, pale yellow;
styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of long white hairs.
Fruit ripening and falling during the first half of September, on
elongated slender slightly villose pedicels, in broad gracefully
drooping many-fruited clusters, obovoid, bright orange-red, lustrous,
marked by large scattered pale dots, puberulous toward the base, about
3/4' long; calyx much enlarged, with erect coarsely glandular-serrate
persistent lobes; flesh yellow, thin, subacid, dry and mealy; nutlets
usually 5, rounded and slightly ridged on the back, about 1/3' in
length.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk occasionally a foot in
diameter, ascending or spreading ashy gray branches forming a broad
handsome head, and branchlets dark green and coated with hoary tomentum
when they first appear, light or dark orange-brown and slightly
tomentose at midsummer, becoming glabrous, lustrous, and light red-brown
or dark orange-brown, and armed with numerous thin straight or somewhat
curved bright chestnut-brown shining spines 2-1/2'--3' in length.

Distribution. Rich damp hillsides and the borders of woods and roads;
valley of the St. Lawrence River from the Isle of Orleans westward; Hull
County, Province of Quebec; near Ottawa, Ontario; valley of the
Penobscot River and Gerrish Island, Maine to the coast of eastern
Massachusetts.


                    90. Crataegus Ellwangeriana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 442]

Leaves oval, acute, rounded or broad-cuneate at the entire base,
irregularly divided usually only above the middle into numerous short
acute lobes, and coarsely and often doubly serrate above with straight
or incurved glandular teeth, about half grown when the flowers open the
middle of May, and then roughened above by short pale hairs and villose
below on the slender midrib and primary veins, and at maturity thin,
light green and scabrate on the upper surface, pale and nearly glabrous
on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long, and 2'--3' wide; petioles
slender, villose early in the season, finally glabrous, 1-1/2'--2' in
length; stipules oblong-obovate, acute, villose, coarsely
glandular-serrate, 1/2' long, those of the upper leaves mostly
persistent until after the ripening of the fruit. Flowers 1' in
diameter, on short stout hairy pedicels, in many-flowered densely
villose corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, villose, the lobes long,
lanceolate, glandular with small pale stalked glands, villose on both
surfaces; stamens 10, sometimes 8; anthers small, rose color; styles
3--5. Fruit ripening and falling at the end of September, on slender
glabrous pedicels, in drooping villose many-fruited crowded clusters,
short-oblong, full and rounded at the ends, bright crimson, lustrous,
covered at the ends with scattered pale hairs, 1' long, and 1/2'--3/4'
in diameter; calyx little enlarged, the lobes elongated,
glandular-serrate above the middle, villose on the inner surface,
spreading, or erect and incurved; flesh thin, yellow, juicy and acid;
nutlets 3--5, thick, pale brown, deeply and often doubly and irregularly
grooved on the back, 1/4'--1/3' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk often a foot in diameter,
covered with pale gray scaly bark, stout ascending branches forming a
broad symmetrical head, and slender zigzag branchlets dark green and
clothed at first with long matted pale hairs, becoming in their first
summer light chestnut-brown and slightly villose, dark chestnut-brown
and very lustrous in their second year, and armed with stout straight or
somewhat curved dark chestnut-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Western New York (common) to western Pennsylvania, and
through southern Ontario to southern Michigan.


                     91. Crataegus Robesoniana Sarg.

                      _Crataegus spissiflora_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 443]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded broadly cuneate
or rarely cordate at the entire base, sharply doubly serrate above with
slender straight gland-tipped teeth, and deeply divided into numerous
broad acute or acuminate lateral lobes, villose above and densely
tomentose below when they unfold, about half grown when the flowers open
at the end of May and then roughened above by short rigid white hairs
and pubescent below on the midrib and veins, and at maturity dark
yellow-green and scabrate on the upper surface, glabrous on the lower
surface, 3'--3-1/2' long, and 2-1/2'--3' wide, with a slender midrib,
and 4 or 5 pairs of prominent veins extending obliquely to the point of
the lobes; petioles slender, more or less wing-margined at apex,
slightly grooved, sparingly glandular, villose early in the season,
becoming glabrous and rose color in the autumn, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots cordate or rarely cuneate
at base, deeply lobed, often 4' long and 3-1/2' wide, with a stout
conspicuous glandular petiole. Flowers 2/3' in diameter, on short
slender villose pedicels, in small very compact few, usually
4--6-flowered, thin-branched villose corymbs, with oblong-obovate
acuminate glandular bracts and bractlets mostly deciduous before the
flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated with long matted white
hairs, the lobes slender, acuminate, finely glandular-serrate, glabrous
on the outer surface, villose on the inner surface; stamens 10; anthers
dark rose color; styles 4 or 5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of
pale tomentum. Fruit ripening at the end of September or early in
October, on short reddish pubescent pedicels, in compact drooping
clusters, oblong-obovoid to short-oblong, scarlet, lustrous, marked by
small pale dots, about 3/4' long, and 1/2' in diameter; calyx little
enlarged, with spreading sharply serrate lobes often deciduous from the
ripe fruit; flesh thick, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 4 or 5, thin,
acute at the ends, rounded or only slightly grooved on the back, about
5/8' in length.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk often 1 deg. in diameter, covered with
smooth pale gray bark, and stout spreading branches forming a
round-topped head, and stout slightly zigzag dark red-brown branchlets
sparingly villose early in the season, soon glabrous, bright red-brown,
very lustrous and marked by small pale lenticels at the end of their
first season, becoming dark gray or gray-brown the following year, and
armed with few stout spreading bright chestnut-brown shining ultimately
gray spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Western Massachusetts through central and western New York
to the neighborhood of Toronto, southern Ontario.


                       92. Crataegus anomala Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 444]

Leaves ovate, acute, divided above the middle into 5 or 6 pairs of short
acute or acuminate lobes, and coarsely doubly serrate with spreading
glandular teeth except toward the broad-cuneate or occasionally rounded
base, when they unfold conspicuously plicate, covered above with short
appressed pale hairs, and villose below, especially on the slender
midrib, and thin remote primary veins arching to the point of the lobes,
about a third grown when the flowers open at the end of May, and at
maturity membranaceous, light yellow-green, smooth and glabrous above,
paler and villose below, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--3' wide; petioles
stout, glandular on the upper side with scattered dark glands, 3/4'--1'
in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots, rounded or truncate at
base, and often 4'--4-1/2' long and 2-1/2'--3' wide. Flowers
saucer-shaped, 1/2' in diameter when fully expanded, on elongated
slender hairy pedicels, in broad loose many-flowered villose corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated with long matted pale hairs, the
lobes long, acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate, pubescent on the
outer surface and tomentose on the inner surface; stamens usually 10,
occasionally 7 or 8; anthers large, bright red; styles 4 or 5,
surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening in
October, on long slender slightly pubescent pedicels, in loose
many-fruited sparingly villose clusters, obovoid to oblong, gradually
narrowed to the rounded base, crimson, lustrous, marked by large pale
dots, slightly villose, particularly toward the full and rounded apex,
3/4'--7/8' long, 1/2'--5/8' in diameter; calyx large and prominent, with
elongated acuminate lobes abruptly narrowed from a broad base, dark red
on the upper side, tomentose on the lower, finely glandular-serrate,
spreading or closely appressed, often deciduous before the ripening of
the fruit; flesh thin, light yellow, somewhat juicy; nutlets 4 or 5,
thin, prominently and irregularly ridged on the back, 1/4'--5/16' long.

A bushy tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a short trunk 6' in diameter,
covered with pale gray-brown scaly bark, stout ascending branches, and
slender somewhat zigzag branchlets at first dark green and villose with
long matted white hairs, puberulous and light orange-brown during their
first season, becoming glabrous and orange-brown or bright red, and
armed with numerous stout straight or slightly curved bright
chestnut-brown spines 1-1/4'--2' long.

Distribution. Low limestone ridges near the banks of the St. Lawrence
River in the Caughnawaga Indian Reservation opposite Lachine in the
Province of Quebec; western Vermont (Clarendon, Rutland County); Crown
Point, Essex County, and Fort Ann, Washington County, New York.


                      93. Crataegus noelensis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 445]

Leaves ovate to oval, acute, acuminate or rarely rounded at apex,
acutely or broadly cuneate at base, and coarsely doubly serrate with
straight teeth, covered above with short white hairs and densely
villose-pubescent below when they unfold, more than half grown when the
flowers open at the end of April, and at maturity dark yellow-green,
smooth and glabrous on the upper surface, villose-pubescent on the lower
surface, 2'--3' long, and 1-1/4'--2-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib
and thin conspicuous primary veins; petioles slender, slightly
wing-margined at apex, hoary-tomentose early in the season, becoming
glabrous, 1'--1-1/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
ovate, acuminate, rounded or cuneate at the broad base, more coarsely
serrate, usually laterally lobed with short broad acuminate lobes,
3'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3' wide. Flowers 3/4' to nearly 1' in diameter,
on short pedicels densely covered like the narrow obconic calyx-tube and
the compact 5--10-flowered corymb with long matted white hairs;
calyx-lobes slender, long-acuminate, minutely glandular-serrate,
slightly villose; stamens 5--10, usually 10; anthers rose color; styles
3--5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of pale tomentum. Fruit
ripening in September, on slender drooping pubescent pedicels,
subglobose, orange-red, 1/2'--2/3' in diameter, the calyx prominent with
a short tube and spreading closely appressed lobes; flesh thin, soft and
yellow; nutlets 3--5, rounded at base, narrowed and rounded at apex,
slightly grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--18 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 1 deg. in diameter, spreading
branches forming a broad flat or round-topped head, and stout zigzag
branchlets coated when they first appear with matted white hairs,
reddish brown, pubescent or puberulous during their first season and
gray the following year, and armed with few or many slender straight
purple lustrous spines 1'--2-1/2' in length, sometimes persistent and
compound on old trunks.

Distribution. Rich alluvial soil; in the neighborhood of Noel, McDonald
County, Missouri; common.




                             IX. COCCINEAE.


                           _Flabellatae_ Sarg.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 20; leaves yellow-green and scabrate above.
    Leaves ovate; anthers deep rose-purple; fruit obovoid to
          short-oblong, bright red, often slightly pruinose.
                                             94. C. neo-londinensis (A).
    Leaves oblong-ovate; anthers pink; fruit obovoid, crimson, lustrous.
                                                      95. C. Hillii (A).
  Stamens 10--20, usually 10; anthers pinkish purple, leaves
        broad-ovate, dull dark green and scabrate above; fruit
        short-oblong to slightly obovoid, dull red or crimson.
                                                   96. C. assurgens (A).
  Stamens usually 10.
    Fruit on short stout pedicels; leaves yellow-green and glabrous
          above.
      Leaves oval, drooping, conspicuously concave; anthers purple;
            fruit short-oblong, dark dull red, villose at the ends.
                                                    97. C. Pringlei (A).
      Leaves oval to oblong-ovate; anthers dark reddish purple; fruit
            short-oblong, crimson, lustrous.
                                                    98. C. lobulata (A).
    Fruit on long slender pedicels; leaves broad-ovate to obovate or
          rhombic, dark rich green and scabrate above; anthers rose
          color; fruit short-oblong, bright scarlet, lustrous.
                                                 99. C. pedicellata (A).
  Stamens usually 5--7, rarely 10.
    Fruit obovoid to ellipsoidal; leaves oval or ovate, conspicuously
          yellow-green; anthers dark reddish purple; fruit crimson,
          lustrous.
                                                 100. C. Holmesiana (A).
    Fruit short-oblong; leaves oblong-ovate, deep yellow-green, nearly
          smooth above; anthers pink; fruit yellowish red, glaucous.
                                                   101. C. acclivis (A).
    Fruit subglobose to obovoid.
      Leaves glabrous above; anthers dark rose color.
        Leaves broad-ovate, thin, light yellow-green and lustrous above;
              fruit bright red or scarlet.
                                                    102. C. delecta (A).
        Leaves oblong-ovate, subcoriaceous, dark dull green; fruit
              bright cherry-red, pruinose.
                                                    103. C. Eamesii (A).
      Leaves scabrate above, oblong-ovate, thin, dark yellow-green;
            anthers pale rose color; fruit crimson.
                                                    104. C. sertata (A).


                   94. Crataegus neo-londinensis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 446]

Leaves ovate, acute or acuminate, rounded, truncate or broadly
concave-cuneate at the wide entire or glandular base, sharply often
doubly serrate above with straight glandular teeth, and divided into
numerous short narrow acuminate lateral lobes, about half grown when the
flowers open the middle of May and then very thin, light yellow-green
and roughened above by short white rigid hairs and paler and sparingly
hairy below, and at maturity membranaceous, dull yellow-green and
scabrate on the upper surface, pale green and glabrous below, or
occasionally slightly hairy on the under side of the stout yellow
midrib, and of the thin remote primary veins arching to the point of the
lobes, 3'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3-1/2' wide; petioles slender, nearly
terete, glandular, at first slightly hairy, becoming glabrous and
purplish toward the base, 1'--2' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots only slightly larger. Flowers 1'--1-1/8' in diameter, on
slender sparingly villose pedicels, in lax slightly drooping usually
5--12-flowered villose or nearly glabrous corymbs, with linear often
slightly falcate glandular bracts and bractlets, persistent until after
the flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, covered with short matted
pale hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate,
coarsely glandular-serrate below the middle, glabrous on the outer,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 17--21, usually 20; anthers deep
rose-purple; styles 4 or 5, usually 5, surrounded at base by a narrow
ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening and beginning to fall early in
September, on stout villose or glabrous pedicels, in large drooping
few-fruited clusters, obovoid or short-oblong, bright red, often
slightly pruinose, marked by numerous minute pale dots, 5/8'--3/4' long,
1/2'--5/8' in diameter; calyx enlarged, prominent, with spreading or
erect and incurved coarsely serrate persistent lobes, their upper
surface bright red below the middle and covered above with soft white
hairs; flesh thick, orange-yellow, soft, juicy and acidulous; nutlets 4
or 5, thin, narrowed at the ends, acute at base, rounded at apex,
rounded and sometimes broadly grooved on the back, about 5/16' long.

A tree, often 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered
with light grayish brown slightly fissured bark, large spreading and
drooping branches forming an open head often 20 deg. across, and slender
branchlets olive-green and slightly hairy when they first appear, dull
red-brown and marked by many large pale lenticels during their first
season, becoming light gray and rather lustrous, and armed with stout
straight dark purple shining ultimately gray spines often 2' long.

Distribution. Borders of woods near the shores of Fisher's Island Sound,
Mumford's Point, Groton, and near Lyme, New London County, Connecticut.


                       95. Crataegus Hillii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 447]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate, rounded or rarely cuneate at the broad
entire base, coarsely doubly serrate above with straight glandular
teeth, and divided into numerous short acuminate lateral lobes, when
they unfold coated above with short lustrous white hairs and densely
tomentose below, particularly on the midrib and veins, about one fourth
grown when the flowers open the middle of May and then roughened above
by short hairs and villose below, and at maturity thin, light
yellow-green and scabrate on the upper surface, pale yellow-green on the
lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a slender
midrib often slightly hairy near the base, and 4 or 5 pairs of thin
primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the lobes; petioles
slender, densely villose early in the season, slightly hairy in the
autumn, and 5/8'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
often truncate or slightly cordate at base, deeply lobed with broad
triangular lobes, and 3-1/2'--4' long and wide, with a stout
rose-colored glandular petiole, and hairy lunate glandular-serrate
stipules. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on slender densely villose
pedicels, in broad many-flowered hairy compound corymbs, their large
linear to oblong bracts and bractlets occasionally persistent until
midsummer; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, thickly covered with long
spreading white hairs, the lobes abruptly narrowed at base, broad,
acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer surface,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers pink; styles 4 or 5,
surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening
from the middle to the end of September, on slender puberulous pedicels,
in drooping few-fruited clusters, obovoid, broad and rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed to the rounded base, crimson, lustrous, marked by
small pale dots, 1/2'--5/8' long, 3/8'--1/2' in diameter; calyx only
slightly enlarged, with closely appressed coarsely serrate lobes often
deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh yellow, thin, acidulous, juicy;
nutlets 4 or 5, thin, gradually narrowed and acute at the ends,
irregularly ridged and sometimes grooved on the back, about 3/8' long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in diameter and 6 deg.
or 7 deg. long, covered with close light gray bark tinged with red and
divided by shallow fissures into small plates, stout ascending branches
forming an open irregular often round-topped head, and slender nearly
straight branchlets densely villose when they first appear, dark orange
color tinged with red and sparingly villose when the flowers open,
becoming bright red-brown and lustrous at the end of their first season
and dark dull reddish brown the following year, and sparingly armed with
slender nearly straight red-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Open woods near the borders of streams in moist rich soil;
northeastern Illinois (Thatcher's Park, Glendon Park, and River Forest,
Cook County); not common.


                      96. Crataegus assurgens Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 448]

Leaves broad-ovate, acuminate, rounded or rarely cuneate at the wide
entire base, sharply doubly serrate above with straight gland-tipped
teeth, and slightly divided, into 3 or 4 pairs of small acuminate lobes,
about one third grown when the flowers open the middle of May and then
roughened above by short white hairs and glabrous or sparingly villose
below, with persistent hairs on the slender yellow midrib, and on the
veins arching obliquely to the point of the lobes, and at maturity
membranaceous, dull dark green and scabrate on the upper surface, light
yellow-green on the lower surface, 2-3/4'--3-1/2' long, and
2-1/4'--2-3/4' wide; petioles slender, villose early in the season,
becoming pubescent, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots often deeply lobed, coarsely serrate, sometimes 4' long and wide,
with long stout glandular petioles and foliaceous lunate acuminate
coarsely glandular-serrate persistent stipules. Flowers 3/4'--5/8' in
diameter, on short villose pedicels, in compact 8--15-flowered hairy
corymbs, with oblong, acuminate, glandular bracts and bractlets,
deciduous with the opening of the flowers; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
sparingly villose, the lobes long, narrow, acuminate, tipped with minute
red glands, finely glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer, pubescent
on the inner surface; stamens 10--20, usually 10; anthers pinkish
purple; styles 4 or 5, surrounded at base by tufts of pale hairs. Fruit
ripening from the 15th to the 20th of September, and usually falling
about the 1st of October, on short glabrous pedicels, in drooping
few-fruited clusters, short-oblong to slightly obovoid, dull red to
crimson, 1/2'--5/8' long, about 1/2' wide; calyx sessile, with spreading
closely appressed serrate usually persistent lobes; flesh thin, pale
yellow or nearly white, acidulous; nutlets 4 or 5, broad, narrow and
acute at the ends, prominently ridged on the back with a high narrow
ridge, or often grooved, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk 2'--6' in diameter and often
6 deg.--9 deg. long, covered with close dark gray bark, ascending branches
forming an oblong, open head, and slender branchlets light orange-yellow
and covered when they first appear with long scattered caducous white
hairs, becoming bright red-brown and lustrous, and dark gray-brown the
following year, and armed with many stout usually slightly curved bright
red-brown shining spines, 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. River banks and low woods in rich soil; northeastern
Illinois (Leyden township, La Grange, Thatcher's Park, Cook County,
Highland Park, Deerfield, Wauconda, Lake County); Fox Point, Milwaukee
County, Wisconsin.


                      97. Crataegus Pringlei Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 449]

Leaves oval, acute, rounded or often abruptly narrowed and cuneate at
base, occasionally irregularly lobed above the middle with short broad
acute lobes, and coarsely and often doubly serrate with glandular teeth,
as they unfold villose on both surfaces, and often more or less tinged
with red, when the flowers open, usually in the last week of May,
roughened above by short closely appressed pale hairs and glabrous below
with the exception of a few hairs on the slender midrib and remote
primary veins, and at maturity thin, glabrous, and bright yellow-green
on the upper surface, pale below, 2'--2-1/2' long, and 1-3/4'--2-1/4'
wide, usually conspicuously concave by the gradual turning down of the
blades from the midrib to the margins, drooping on long thin slender
glandular petioles at first villose, ultimately glabrous, 1'--1-3/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots sometimes truncate or
slightly cordate at the base, and frequently 3' long and wide. Flowers
about 3/4' in diameter, on stout hairy pedicels, in many-flowered
compound villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, villose,
particularly toward the base, the lobes narrow, acuminate, coarsely
glandular-serrate, villose on both surfaces or only on the inner
surface; stamens 10, occasionally 5--10; anthers small, purple; styles
3--5, surrounded at the base by conspicuous tufts of pale tomentum.
Fruit ripening and falling late in September or early in October, on
stout pedicels, in erect villose mostly few-fruited clusters,
short-oblong, dark dull red, marked by few dark dots, villose at the
ends with long scattered pale hairs, 3/4' long and 5/8' in diameter;
calyx little enlarged, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base,
acuminate, glandular-serrate, often erect; flesh thick, yellow, dry and
acid, with a disagreeable flavor; nutlets 3--5, rounded and slightly
ridged on the back, 1/3' long.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 10'--12' in diameter,
covered with thin bark separating into large flakes broken into small
loose dark red-brown scales, stout branches forming a wide symmetrical
head, and slightly zigzag branchlets at first dark green and villose,
soon becoming glabrous, chestnut-brown and lustrous, bright orange-brown
during their second year, and armed with thick straight or somewhat
curved chestnut-brown spines often 1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Southern New Hampshire, through southern Vermont to
western Massachusetts and eastern New York; through central and western
New York and southern Ontario to northeastern Ohio (Plymouth, Ashtabula
County), the southern peninsula of Michigan and northeastern Illinois.


                  98. Crataegus lobulata Sarg. Red Haw.

[Illustration: Fig. 450]

Leaves oval to oblong-ovate, acute at apex, broad-cuneate or rounded at
the entire base, sharply and often doubly serrate above with straight
glandular teeth, and deeply divided into numerous narrow acute or
acuminate lobes spreading or pointing to the apex or to the base of the
leaf, when they first appear and until after the opening of the flowers
during the last week in May covered above with short soft pale hairs and
slightly pubescent below on the slender midrib, and thin primary veins
arching to the point of the lobes, and at maturity thin, dark
yellow-green and glabrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, with occasional short white hairs toward the base of the
midrib, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender,
nearly terete, at first tomentose, particularly at the base, becoming
pubescent or nearly glabrous and bright red, 1'--1-1/2' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, rounded or truncate at
the broad base, divided into numerous acuminate lateral lobes, often
3-1/2'--4' long and 3'--3-1/2' wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on
elongated slender pedicels, in rather compact many-flowered tomentose
corymbs, with linear-lanceolate glandular-serrate bright red bracts and
bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, or villose toward the
base, dark red, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base,
glabrous, coarsely glandular-serrate with large dark red stipitate
glands; stamens usually 10, occasionally 5--10; anthers small, dark
reddish purple; styles 3--5, sometimes surrounded at the base by a ring
of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening and falling early in October, on short
stout pedicels, in erect compact tomentulose clusters, short-oblong,
somewhat flattened at the rounded ends, bright crimson, very lustrous,
marked by occasional small white dots, about 3/4' long and 5/8' in
diameter; calyx little enlarged, the lobes small, lanceolate, coarsely
glandular-serrate, tomentose on the upper surface, erect and incurved,
persistent; flesh thick, yellow, sweet and juicy; nutlets 3--5, thin,
dark colored, ridged and often grooved on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 35 deg. high, with a straight trunk often a foot in
diameter, covered with dark red-brown fissured bark broken into small
thick plate-like scales, stout generally ascending branches forming an
open usually narrow irregular head, and slender branchlets, dark green
and covered with matted pale hairs when they first appear, becoming
bright chestnut-brown and very lustrous during their first season, and
light orange-brown the following year, and armed with many stout nearly
straight chestnut-brown spines rarely more than 1' in length.

Distribution. Burlington, Chittenden County, Vermont, and southward
through the Champlain valley to Crown Point, Essex County and to the
neighborhood of Albany, New York; western Massachusetts to southern
Connecticut (Stratford, Fairfield County); common.


                     99. Crataegus pedicellata Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 451]

Leaves broad-ovate or occasionally obovate or rhombic, acute or
acuminate, broad-cuneate or rounded at the entire base, coarsely often
doubly serrate above with spreading glandular teeth, and divided above
the middle into 4 or 5 pairs of short acute or acuminate lobes, nearly
two thirds grown when the flowers open during the last week in May, and
then roughened above by short rigid pale hairs and glabrous below, and
at maturity membranaceous, dark rich green and scabrate on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, 3'--4' long, and 2'--3' wide, with a
slender midrib, and thin remote primary veins arching to the point of
the lobes; petioles slender, nearly terete, glandular with minute
scattered dark glands, at first villose, becoming glabrous,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots sometimes
truncate or slightly cordate at base, more deeply lobed, often 3'--4'
long and 3' wide. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on long thin pedicels, in
loose lax many-flowered slightly villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes broad, acute, very coarsely
glandular-serrate; stamens usually 10; anthers rose color; styles 5,
surrounded at base by a conspicuous ring of pale tomentum. Fruit
ripening and falling during September, on long slender pedicels, in
few-fruited drooping glabrous clusters, obovoid until nearly fully
grown, becoming short-oblong when fully ripe, rounded at the ends,
bright scarlet, lustrous, marked by numerous small dark dots, 3/4' long,
and 1/2'--5/8' in diameter; calyx large and conspicuous, the lobes much
enlarged, coarsely serrate, and usually erect and incurved; flesh pale,
thin, dry and mealy; nutlets 5, narrowed and acute at the ends, rounded
and deeply grooved on the back, about 1/3' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
covered with close red-brown scaly bark, long comparatively slender
spreading or ascending branches forming a handsome symmetrical head, and
thin branchlets dark chestnut-brown and slightly villose at first,
becoming very lustrous and ashy gray in their second year, and armed
with straight or slightly curved shining chestnut-brown spines
1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Central and western New York to western Pennsylvania
(Allegheny and Crawford counties), and to southern Ontario to the
neighborhood of Toronto and London; common; passing into var. _gloriosa_
Sarg. differing in its rather larger flowers with pink anthers, larger
and more lustrous fruit often mammillate at base and ripening a few days
earlier and in its convex leaves. A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk
often 1 deg. in diameter, and a symmetrical round-topped head; Rochester,
Munroe County, New York; not common.


                     100. Crataegus Holmesiana Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 452]

Leaves oval or ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded or
broad-cuneate at base, coarsely doubly serrate above the middle with
straight teeth tipped at first with prominent dark red caducous glands,
and usually divided into 3 or 4 pairs of short acute or acuminate
lateral lobes, when they unfold dark red, roughened by rigid pale hairs
on the upper surface, and glabrous or sometimes villose on the lower
surface, scabrate above, pale yellow-green and nearly half grown when
the flowers open early in May, and at maturity thick and firm, almost
smooth, conspicuously yellow-green, usually about 2' long and 1-3/4'
wide, with a prominent midrib often bright red on the lower side toward
the base, and 4--6 pairs of slender primary veins arching to the point
of the lobes; petioles slender, nearly terete, glandular, glabrous or
sometimes puberulous while young, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots often broad-ovate to oval, rounded, truncate or
slightly cordate at base, more coarsely serrate and more deeply lobed,
and frequently 4' long and 3' wide. Flowers cup-shaped, 1/2'--3/4' in
diameter, on long slender glabrous pedicels, in loose glabrous or rarely
puberulous many-flowered corymbs, with oblanceolate or linear acute
glandular caducous bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
glabrous, more or less deeply tinged with red, the lobes long,
acuminate, glandular-serrate, or often nearly entire; glabrous on the
outer surface, villose-pubescent on the inner surface; stamens usually
5, sometimes 6--8; anthers large, dark reddish purple; styles usually 3,
surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening and
falling early in September, on long slender pedicels, in many-fruited
drooping clusters, obovoid to ellipsoidal, crimson, lustrous, marked by
occasional small dark dots, about 1/2' long, and 1/3' in diameter; calyx
enlarged, conspicuous, with erect and incurved glandular-serrate lobes,
bright red toward the base on the upper side; flesh thin, yellow, dry
and mealy, with a disagreeable flavor; nutlets usually 3, light
chestnut-brown, prominently grooved and ridged on the back with a broad
rounded ridge, about 1/4' long.

A tree, often 30 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 10'--15' in diameter,
covered with pale gray-brown or nearly white scaly bark, stout ascending
branches forming an open irregular rather compact head, and stout
glabrous branchlets dark green more or less tinged with red when they
first appear, becoming bright chestnut-brown or orange-brown and
lustrous, and ultimately ashy gray, and armed with occasional thick
mostly straight bright chestnut-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Rich moist hillsides and the borders of streams and
swamps, neighborhood of Montreal and southern Ontario to the coast of
southern Maine, central and western Massachusetts, Rhode Island, western
New York, and eastern Pennsylvania; most abundant and of its largest
size on the hills of Worcester County, Massachusetts. In Sellersville,
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, in a form of this species (var. _villipes_
Ashe) the young branchlets, petioles, and corymbs are often puberulous
and the under surface of the leaves more or less hairy, especially on
the midrib and veins. Passing into var. _tardipes_ Sarg. differing from
the type in its darker green leaves somewhat rougher on the upper
surface, flowers often 4/5' in diameter on villose pedicels, and in the
shorter slightly hairy pedicels of the fruit ripening early in October.

A tree, in size, habit and bark similar to the species; southern Ontario
(neighborhood of Toronto, common, near London, bank of the St. Claire
River below Sarnia and Walpole Island, Lamberton County); Province of
Quebec (Montreal, Caughnawaga, Isle Perrot, St. Ann's and Hemmingford);
central and western New York.


                      101. Crataegus acclivis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 453]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate, broad-cuneate or rounded at the entire
base, coarsely doubly serrate above with straight gland-tipped teeth,
and deeply divided into numerous wide-spreading acuminate lateral lobes,
when they unfold tinged with red, densely villose on the upper surface,
pubescent on the midrib and veins below, about half grown when the
flowers open during the last week of May and then light yellow-green,
slightly roughened above by short white hairs and pubescent on the
midrib and veins below, and at maturity membranaceous, dark yellow-green
and nearly smooth above, pale yellow-green and glabrous below,
2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout yellow midrib, and 5
or 6 pairs of primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the
lobes; petioles slender, slightly wing-margined at apex, glandular with
numerous small dark glands, densely villose early in the season,
becoming puberulous or glabrous in the autumn, 1-1/2'--2' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, acuminate, cordate at
the wide base, deeply divided into wide acute lateral lobes, and often
4'--5' long and wide, with foliaceous, lunate, coarsely
glandular-serrate stipules, 1-1/2' wide, and persistent throughout the
season. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on slender densely villose pedicels,
in broad lax many-flowered long-branched hairy corymbs, their bracts
lanceolate, glandular, large and conspicuous, persistent until after the
flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, covered with a thick coat of
long matted hairs, the lobes long slender, acuminate, serrate with
occasional large gland-tipped teeth, glabrous on the outer surface,
slightly villose on the inner surface; stamens usually 5; anthers pink;
styles mostly 5. Fruit ripening the middle of September and soon
falling, on long slender slightly hairy pedicels, in many-fruited
drooping clusters, short-oblong, broad and rounded at the ends,
yellowish red, glaucous, marked by occasional pale dots, about 3/4' long
and 5/8' wide; calyx sessile, with usually erect enlarged coarsely
serrate lobes villose on the upper side and often deciduous from the
ripe fruit; flesh thick, yellow, rather juicy; nutlets usually 5, narrow
and acute at the ends, ridged with a high broad ridge, or rounded and
slightly grooved on the back, about 5/8' long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 4'--5' in
diameter, covered with smooth light gray bark, numerous erect branches
forming an oblong open very irregular head, and stout slightly zigzag
branchlets coated when they first appear with long matted pale hairs,
light red-brown and lustrous, marked by small pale lenticels, and
pubescent at the end of their first season, becoming dull red or
orange-brown the following year, and armed with stout straight or curved
bright red-brown shining spines 1-1/4'--2' long.

Distribution. New York: near Albany, Albany County, steep banks of the
gorge of the Genesee River, Rochester, Munroe County, banks of the
Niagara River, Niagara Falls, Niagara County, and near Buffalo, Erie
County; common.


                      102. Crataegus delecta Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 454]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded or broad-cuneate
at the entire base, sharply often doubly serrate above with straight
glandular teeth, and divided usually only above the middle into numerous
short acuminate lateral lobes, when they unfold tinged with red and
covered with glistening white hairs more abundant below than above,
nearly half grown when the flowers open during the first half of May and
then roughened on the upper surface by short white hairs and glabrous or
sparingly villose on the midrib and veins below with scattered hairs
sometimes persistent through the season, and at maturity membranaceous,
light yellow-green, lustrous and glabrous above, paler below, 1-1/2'--2'
long and wide, with a stout yellow midrib, and 6 or 7 pairs of slender
primary veins arching obliquely to the point of the lobes; turning
purplish in the autumn before falling; petioles slender, covered early
in the season with matted pale hairs, becoming glabrous, slightly
glandular, often tinged with red below the middle, 3/4'--1' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots sometimes long-pointed at apex and
slightly cordate at base, more deeply lobed and more coarsely serrate,
and often 3'--4' long and wide. Flowers 3/4'--1' in diameter, on long
slender slightly hairy pedicels, in broad villose 10--15-flowered
sparingly villose corymbs, with glandular caducous bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, villose or nearly glabrous, the lobes
acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer surface,
villose on the inner surface; stamens 5--10, usually 5; anthers dark
rose color; styles 3--5, usually 5. Fruit ripening from the first to the
middle of September and soon falling, on stout glabrous pedicels, in
drooping few-fruited clusters, subglobose to slightly obovoid, bright
red or scarlet, becoming purple when fully ripe, 1/2'--3/4' long, and
2/3'--3/4' in diameter; calyx prominent, with erect and incurved
coarsely serrate lobes; flesh thick, yellow, juicy, mildly acid and
edible; nutlets 3--5, usually 5, narrowed and acute at the ends, rounded
and very irregularly ridged on the back, 1/4'--5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 1 deg. in diameter and
6 deg.--9 deg. long, covered with light gray slightly fissured smooth bark,
spreading or ascending branches forming an oblong open head, and slender
branchlets at first slightly villose, becoming glabrous, dull red, and
ultimately gray or olive-gray, and armed with stout nearly straight
spines much thickened below the middle, dark chestnut-brown and
lustrous, becoming dull brown or gray, and usually 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Pastures, open woods or their borders; northeastern
Illinois (Lockport, Will County, Wauconda, Fort Sheridan, Deerfield,
Lake Forest, Highland Park, Lake County).


                      103. Crataegus Eamesii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 455]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acute or acuminate, concave-cuneate or rounded at
the entire or glandular base, sharply often doubly serrate above with
straight glandular teeth, and divided into numerous short acute lateral
lobes, about half grown when the flowers open the middle of May, and
then membranaceous, light yellow-green and roughened above by short
rigid white hairs and pale and glabrous below with the exception of a
few hairs on the midrib, and slender primary veins arching to the point
of the lobes, and at maturity subcoriaceous, glabrous, dark rather dull
green and smooth above, pale yellow-green below, 3'--3-1/2' long, and
2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender, wing-margined above, villose at
first, becoming glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots usually rounded or truncate at the broad base, more
deeply lobed, often 3-1/2'--4' long and 3-1/2' wide. Flowers about 3/4'
in diameter, on slender slightly hairy pedicels, in crowded compact
5--25, usually 15--18-flowered sparingly villose corymbs, with
linear-obovate coarsely glandular reddish bracts and bractlets, mostly
deciduous before the flowers open; calyx narrowly obconic, glabrous, the
lobes long, slender, glandular with large bright red stipitate glands,
glabrous on the outer, slightly villose on the inner surface; stamens
5--10, usually 5--8; anthers deep rose-purple; styles 4 or 5, surrounded
at base by a narrow ring of pale pubescence. Fruit ripening early in
September and soon falling, on stout glabrous pedicels, in large
many-fruited drooping clusters, short-oblong to slightly ovoid, rounded
at the ends, bright cherry-red, lustrous, pruinose, marked by few large
dark dots, 5/8'--3/4' long, and about 1/2' in diameter; calyx only
slightly enlarged, the lobes erect and incurved, coarsely serrate, dark
red on the upper side below the middle, their tips deciduous from the
ripe fruit; flesh thick, pale yellow, juicy; nutlets 4 or 5, narrow at
the ends, irregularly ridged often with a high broad ridge, and
sometimes grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter,
ascending branches forming a narrow open head, and stout glabrous
branchlets bright reddish brown and rather lustrous during their first
season, becoming light gray slightly tinged with red in their second
year, and armed with stout straight or slightly curved spines 1'--1-1/2'
long; or occasionally shrubby, with a short trunk divided near the
ground into several spreading stems.

Distribution. Rich moist ground, Stratford, Fairfield County (_E. H.
Eames_), and Ansonia, New Haven County, Connecticut (_E. B. Harger_).


                      104. Crataegus sertata Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 456]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate, rounded, truncate, subcordate or rarely
cuneate at the broad base, finely and often doubly serrate with straight
gland-tipped teeth, and deeply divided into 5 or 6 pairs of wide
acuminate lobes, when they unfold coated above with short pale hairs and
villose below on the midrib and veins, about half grown and villose when
the flowers open during the first half of May, and at maturity
membranaceous, dark yellow-green and scabrate on the upper surface, pale
yellow-green and glabrous on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long, and
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a thin yellow midrib, and slender primary veins
arching obliquely to the point of the lobes; petioles slender, slightly
grooved, villose early in the season, ultimately glabrous, sparingly
glandular, 1-1/2'--3' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
broad-ovate, rounded or slightly cordate at base, often 3' long and
2-1/2' wide. Flowers 3/4'--1' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad
10--15-flowered densely villose corymbs, with linear to linear-obovate
glandular large and conspicuous caducous bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous above, villose below, the lobes
abruptly narrowed from the base, broad, acuminate, tipped with small red
glands, coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrate on the outer surface,
pubescent on the inner surface; stamens 5--10, usually 5; anthers pale
rose color; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by tufts of pale hairs.
Fruit ripening about the middle of September and soon falling, on
slender villose or pubescent pedicels, in drooping many-fruited
clusters, subglobose to slightly obovoid, rounded at the ends, bright
red and lustrous, becoming darker or crimson when fully ripe, marked by
occasional large pale dots, about 1/2' long and wide; calyx prominent,
with enlarged mostly erect incurved serrate lobes; flesh thin, yellow,
aromatic, pleasantly acid; nutlets 3--5, usually 4, thin, narrow and
acute at the ends, slightly ridged on the back with a wide or narrow
ridge, 3/8' long.

A tree, 10 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter and often 4 deg.--5 deg.
long, covered with close dark gray bark separating into long narrow thin
plate-like scales, stout spreading branches forming a handsome open
head, and slender nearly straight branchlets thickly coated when they
first appear with matted pale hairs, light brown and lustrous at the end
of their first season, and dark gray-brown the following year, and
unarmed or armed with stout nearly straight or curved spines 1'--2-1/2'
long.

Distribution. Open woods and pastures in rich moist soil; northeastern
Illinois (Mokena, Will County, Glenellyn, Dupage County, Barrington,
Glendon Park, Cook County, Highland Park, Lake Zurich, Lake County); Fox
Point, Milwaukee County, Wisconsin.




                              X. DILATATAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers in broad 6--12-flowered corymbs.
    Leaves broad-ovate; fruit bright scarlet.
                                                   105. C. dilatata (A).
    Leaves nearly orbicular to oval; fruit dull red blotched with green,
          or orange-red.
                                              106. C. suborbiculata (A).
    Leaves ovate to slightly obovate; fruit crimson, pruinose.
                                                  107. C. hudsonica (A).
  Flowers in very compact 5--7-flowered corymbs; leaves broad-ovate;
        fruit usually broader than high, much flattened at the ends,
        dark crimson, very lustrous.
                                               108. C. coccinioides (A).


                      105. Crataegus dilatata Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 457]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute, truncate, cordate or slightly rounded at the
broad base, coarsely and generally doubly and irregularly serrate above
with straight teeth tipped with large dark glands, unequally lobed
usually with 2 or 3 pairs of acute or acuminate lateral lobes, about one
third grown when the flowers open at the end of May, and then light
yellow-green, conspicuously plicate, roughened on the upper surface with
short stiff white hairs and glabrous on the lower surface, and at
maturity smooth and glabrous, dark green above, pale below, 2'--2-1/2'
long, and almost as wide as long, with a slender midrib and 4 or 5 pairs
of thin primary veins; petioles slender, somewhat glandular, at first
villose, soon glabrous, often dark red toward the base after midsummer,
1'--2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often 4'--5'
long, and frequently rather broader than long. Flowers 1'--1-1/8' in
diameter, on slender elongated hairy pedicels, in broad, loose, usually
8--12-flowered slightly villose corymbs, with lanceolate bracts and
bractlets glandular like the inner bud-scales with dark red glands;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, covered toward the base with matted pale
hairs, nearly glabrous above, the lobes broad, acuminate, coarsely
glandular with large scattered red glands, glabrous on the outer surface
and generally slightly villose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers
large, rose color; styles usually 5, surrounded at base by small tufts
of white hairs. Fruit ripening and falling early in September, on
slender pedicels, in many-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose, bright
scarlet, marked by numerous small dark dots, about 3/4' in diameter; the
calyx much enlarged, with spreading coarsely serrate lobes bright red on
the upper side toward the base; flesh thin, sweet and yellow; nutlets 5,
thin, rounded and prominently ridged on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk, covered with
light gray-brown scaly bark, branches spreading into a wide round-topped
symmetrical head, and short glabrous slightly zigzag branchlets armed
with few stout straight light brown shining spines 1'--2' long.

Distribution. Eastern Massachusetts, coast of Rhode Island, western
Vermont, in the neighborhood of Albany, New York, and near Montreal,
Province of Quebec.


                   106. Crataegus suborbiculata Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 458]

Leaves nearly orbicular to oval or rarely to oblong, short-pointed at
apex, broad and rounded or broad-cuneate at the entire base, sharply
doubly serrate above with slender straight or incurved glandular teeth,
and often divided above the middle into 3 or 4 pairs of short acute
lobes, when they unfold pale yellow-green and somewhat villose on the
upper surface toward the base and below in the axils of the principal
veins, about a third grown when the flowers open during the first week
of June, and at maturity thin and firm in texture, dull dark green
above, paler below, usually about 1-1/2' long and broad, with a slender
midrib and 4 or 5 pairs of thin primary veins; petioles slender,
slightly glandular, more or less winged above, 5/8'--1' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots nearly orbicular to oval, more
coarsely serrate and more deeply lobed, and frequently 3' long and wide,
their petioles often broadly winged and conspicuously glandular. Flowers
3/4' in diameter, on short stout pedicels, in compact 6--12-flowered
glabrous corymbs; calyx broadly obconic, the lobes gradually narrowed
from a broad base, long, acuminate, entire or occasionally obscurely
denticulate; stamens 20; anthers small, rose color; styles 5, surrounded
at base by a broad ring of hoary tomentum. Fruit falling in October
without becoming mellow, on short rigid pedicels, in few-fruited erect
clusters, subglobose, often rather longer than broad, about 5/8' in
diameter, dull red more or less blotched with green, or often wholly
green on one face, or scarlet in one form; calyx enlarged, prominent,
with a broad deep cavity and nearly entire wide-spreading lobes; flesh
yellow, thin, dry and hard; nutlets 5, broad and thick, narrow and
rounded at the ends, obscurely and unequally grooved on the back, about
1/4' long.

A tree, rarely more than 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a well-developed trunk
5'--6' in diameter, stout spreading branches forming a broad low
flat-topped head, and stout branchlets orange-brown in their first
season, becoming dark gray-brown the following year, and armed with
thick straight or slightly curved bright chestnut-brown shining spines
1'--2' in length.

Distribution. Low limestone ridges opposite Lachine near the south bank
of the St. Lawrence River, and on the Island of Montreal, Province of
Quebec; near Cornwall, Ontario.


                     107. Crataegus hudsonica Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 459]

Leaves ovate or slightly obovate, acute, gradually and abruptly narrowed
and mostly concave-cuneate at the entire base, sharply and often doubly
serrate above with straight or incurved glandular teeth, and frequently
slightly divided above the middle into short acute lobes, nearly fully
grown when the flowers open at the end of May, and then thin, light
yellow-green, smooth and glabrous above with the exception of a few
short white scattered hairs on the midrib, and pale and glabrous below,
and at maturity thin and firm in texture, glabrous, 2'--2-1/2' long, and
1-1/2'--1-3/4' wide, with a slender yellow midrib, and 5 or 6 pairs of
thin primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the lobes;
petioles slender, wing-margined above, glandular, at first slightly
hairy, becoming glabrous and rose color toward the base, 3/4'--1' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate to
suborbicular, full and rounded or broad-cuneate at the wide base, deeply
divided into broad lateral lobes, and 2'--3' long and wide. Flowers
about 3/4' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in broad usually
10--12-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous,
the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate,
glandular-serrate often only below the middle, glabrous on the outer
surface, slightly hairy on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers rose
color; styles 3--5. Fruit ripening early in September, in few-fruited
drooping clusters, subglobose, crimson, pruinose, marked by numerous
pale dots, about 5/8' in diameter; calyx enlarged, with a deep broad
cavity, and closely appressed serrate lobes villose on the upper side;
flesh thick, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5, rounded at base and
narrowed and rounded at apex, rounded and sometimes ridged on the back
with a high rounded ridge, about 5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
covered with pale scaly bark, heavy ascending and spreading branches
forming a broad open head, and stout ascending glabrous branchlets dark
orange color when they first appear and light orange-brown and lustrous
during their first winter, and armed with numerous slender straight or
slightly curved bright red-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long;
sometimes a broad bush, with numerous stout spreading stems.

Distribution. Rolling hills in the valley of the Hudson River, near
Albany, Albany County, New York.


                    108. Crataegus coccinioides Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 460]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute, full and rounded or truncate at base, sharply
and often doubly serrate with straight glandular teeth, and divided
above the middle into short acute lobes, as they unfold conspicuously
plicate, very lustrous, yellow-green, and villose on the lower side of
the midrib with a few short pale hairs usually persistent during the
season, about half grown when the flowers open early in May, and at
maturity thin and firm in texture, rather rigid, dull dark green and
smooth on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long,
and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a thin pale yellow midrib deeply impressed
above and often bright red toward the base after midsummer, and slender
primary veins arching to the point of the lobes; turning late in October
gradually bright orange and scarlet; petioles glandular on the upper
side with minute-stalked dark red glands, at first villose, soon
glabrous, often bright red or pink toward the base, 3/4'--1' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots more or less cordate at base and
usually 3-1/2'--4' long and wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, in very
compact 5--7-flowered glabrous or slightly villose corymbs, with
coarsely serrate oblong-obovate acute bracts and bractlets,
conspicuously glandular with large bright red glands; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acute
and coarsely glandular-serrate; stamens 20; anthers large, deep rose
color; styles 5, surrounded at base by a ring of pale tomentum. Fruit
ripening early in October and falling gradually during a month or six
weeks, on stout pedicels, in few-fruited compact erect clusters,
subglobose, much flattened at the ends, often obscurely angled, dark
crimson, very lustrous, marked by numerous large pale dots, 3/4' long,
and 7/8' wide; calyx much enlarged and conspicuous, with spreading or
erect lobes bright red on the upper side near the base; flesh thick,
firm, subacid, more or less deeply tinged with red; nutlets 5,
comparatively small, light-colored, narrow at the ends, acute at apex,
rounded at base, rounded and slightly ridged on the back, about 1/3'
long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a stem 8'--10' in diameter, covered
with dark brown scaly bark, stout spreading light gray branches forming
a broad handsome head, and stout nearly straight glabrous bright
chestnut-brown very lustrous branchlets armed with thick dark reddish
purple shining spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Dry woods in the neighborhood of St. Louis, Missouri; in
eastern Kansas.




                           XI. ROTUNDIFOLIAE.


                            _Coccineae_ Sarg.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 10; leaves coriaceous.
    Leaves elliptic or obovate; fruit subglobose, dark crimson; anthers
          pale yellow.
                                               109. C. rotundifolia (A).
    Leaves elliptic or ovate; fruit short-oblong to oblong-obovoid,
          bright carmine-red; anthers rose color.
                                                     110. C. Jonesae (A).
  Stamens 20; leaves subcoriaceous, rhombic to oblong-obovate; fruit
        short-oblong to subglobose, dark dull red or rusty orange-red;
        anthers pale yellow.
                                              111. C. Margaretta (A, C).


                    109. Crataegus rotundifolia Moen.

             _Crataegus coccinea_ var. _rotundifolia_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 461]

Leaves elliptic or obovate, acute or acuminate, gradually narrowed from
above the middle to the cuneate entire base, finely and often doubly
serrate above with incurved or straight teeth tipped with minute dark
glands, and divided above the middle into several short acute lateral
lobes, about half grown when the flowers open at the end of May, and
then thin, light yellow-green and glabrous, and at maturity coriaceous,
dark green, smooth and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a thin midrib, and 4
or 5 pairs of primary veins extending to the point of the lobes;
petioles slender, glandular, slightly winged at apex, glabrous, often
dark red toward the base, 3/4'--1' in length; leaves at the end of
vigorous shoots oblong-ovate, oval or often nearly orbicular, more
deeply lobed, and frequently 2-1/2'--3' long and wide. Flowers
1/2'--3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in broad loose
many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous,
the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acute, coarsely
glandular-serrate, glabrous, often bright red toward the apex; stamens
10; anthers small, pale yellow; styles 3 or 4. Fruit ripening and
falling late in October, on short stout pedicels, in drooping
many-fruited glabrous clusters, subglobose but occasionally rather
longer than broad, dark crimson, marked by scattered dark dots, about
1/2' in diameter; calyx enlarged, conspicuous, the lobes bright red on
the upper side toward the base, wide-spreading or erect; flesh thin,
yellow, dry and sweet; nutlets 3 or 4, rounded at the ends, about 1/4'
long.

A bushy tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in
diameter, covered with dark red-brown scaly bark, stout ascending
branches forming a broad round-topped symmetrical head, and slender
glabrous branchlets light green when they first appear, bright red-brown
and lustrous during their first year, and ultimately ashy gray, and
armed with many stout straight or slightly curved chestnut-brown shining
spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Nova Scotia, southern Quebec and Ontario to Manitoba and
Saskatchewan (Saskatoon), and southward through New England, eastern and
northern New York, the southern peninsula of Michigan and northern
Indiana; in Pennsylvania (Lackawanna, Bucks, Northampton and Blair
Counties); common in the New England coast region; a form (var. _pubera_
Sarg.) with young leaves covered above with soft pale hairs and
pubescent on the under side of the midrib and veins and villose
petioles, flowers with a pubescent calyx-tube, in villose corymbs,
becoming pilose when the fruit ripens, and young branchlets covered with
long matted pale hairs, ranges from Newfoundland to the shores of Lake
St. John, Province of Quebec, northern Ontario, Winnipeg and Manitoba,
and southward through the maritime provinces of Canada, New England to
southern Connecticut, northern and western New York (near Buffalo, Essex
County), the northern peninsula of Michigan, northeastern Wisconsin; in
central Minnesota (St. Cloud, Stearns County); common northward.


                       110. Crataegus Jonesae Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 462]

Leaves elliptic to ovate, acute, gradually narrowed or broad-cuneate at
the entire base, coarsely doubly serrate above with spreading or
incurved teeth tipped with deciduous dark red glands, and usually
divided above the middle into 2 or 3 pairs of short acute or acuminate
lobes, more than half grown when the flowers open during the first week
of June, and then membranaceous and coated with soft pale hairs most
abundant on the under side of the midrib and principal veins, and at
maturity thick and coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale and puberulous on the lower surface, 3'--4' long and
2'--3' wide, with a stout midrib, 4--6 pairs of primary veins and
conspicuous secondary veinlets; petioles stout, more or less winged
toward the apex, villose, ultimately glabrous, tinged with red below the
middle, 1-1/2'--2' in length, after midsummer often twisted at base,
bringing the lower surface of the leaf to the light; leaves at the end
of vigorous shoots usually more coarsely serrate and much more deeply
lobed, with broadly winged petioles, and falcate coarsely
glandular-serrate stipules sometimes 1' in length. Flowers 1' in
diameter, on long slender pedicels, in broad loose lax many-flowered
tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, tomentose, the lobes
abruptly narrowed from a broad base, long, acute, entire, villose;
stamens 10; anthers large, rose color; styles 2, or generally 3,
surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening
usually early in October, on slender elongated pedicels, in broad
many-fruited drooping glabrous or puberulous clusters, short-oblong to
oblong-obovoid, rounded at the ends, bright carmine-red, marked by
occasional large dots, 3/4'--1' long, and 3/4' in diameter; calyx
conspicuous, with enlarged and elongated closely appressed lobes; flesh
thick, yellow, sweet and mealy; nutlets 3 or rarely 2, thick, narrowed
and acute at base, full and broad at apex, rounded and ridged on the
back with a high broad ridge, about 7/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk often a foot in diameter,
covered with dark brown scaly bark, ascending or spreading branches
forming a broad open irregular head, and stout branchlets tomentose
early in the season, becoming orange-brown, glabrous and very lustrous
during their first summer, and light gray the following year, and armed
with stout straight or curved chestnut-brown shining spines 2'--3' long
and usually pointed toward the base of the branch.

Distribution. Rocky shores of sounds and bays; coast of Maine, Islesboro
and Belfast Bay to the island of Mount Desert (Waldo and Hancock
Counties); in hedges, near Fredericton, York County, New Brunswick;
Riviere du Loup, Kamouraska County, Province of Quebec (_Brother
Victorin_).


                     111. Crataegus Margaretta Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 463]

Leaves broad-rhombic, oblong-obovate or rarely ovate, acute or rounded
at apex, gradually narrowed and usually entire below, coarsely often
doubly crenately-serrate above with usually glandless teeth, and divided
above the middle or frequently only at apex into short broad rounded or
acute lobes when the flowers open in May, thin and roughened above by
short pale hairs and glabrous below, and at maturity firm and rather
leathery in texture, or subcoriaceous, glabrous, smooth, dark green and
somewhat lustrous on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface,
1'--1-1/4' long, and 1' wide, with a yellow midrib, and 3--5 pairs of
primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the lobes; petioles
slender, often slightly winged toward the apex, glandular at first with
minute dark red caducous glands, 1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end
of vigorous shoots broad-ovate or semiorbicular, usually more deeply and
more generally lobed, often 3' long and 2'--3' wide. Flowers about 3/4'
in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in 3--12-flowered thin-branched
slightly villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, slightly villose
toward the base, or glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from below,
acuminate or short-pointed at apex, finely and irregularly
glandular-serrate, glabrous or villose on the inner surface; stamens
usually 20; anthers small, light yellow; styles 2 or 3, surrounded at
the base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum, and villose below the middle
with occasional long spreading hairs. Fruit ripening and falling at the
end of September, in few-fruited drooping clusters, short-oblong,
rounded at the ends, or subglobose and flattened at the ends, dull dark
red or rusty orange-red or rarely yellow, marked by occasional dark
dots, and about 1/2' long; calyx only slightly enlarged, the lobes
spreading or erect and frequently deciduous before the fruit ripens;
flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 2 or 3, broad and rounded at
base, acute at apex, conspicuously grooved and ridged on the back with a
broad rounded ridge, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a straight trunk 4'--6' in diameter,
covered with thin dark gray-brown bark, small rather erect branches
forming a narrow open head, and slender branchlets, orange-green,
glabrous or sometimes pubescent when they first appear, becoming bright
chestnut-brown and lustrous, and ashy gray or gray tinged with red
during their second year, and armed with thin straight or slightly
curved bright chestnut-brown spines 3/4'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Central Iowa (Steamboat Rock, Harden County, Cedar Rapids,
Linn County), southward to Missouri (Hannibal, Marion County, Webster,
St. Louis County to the neighborhood of Springfield, Greene County), and
eastward to northeastern Illinois (Downers Grove, Dupage County);
through north central Indiana to southern Michigan (Kalamazoo and Ingham
Counties); through central and southern Ohio to the southeastern part of
the state (Washington County); southeastern Ontario (London and
Oakwood); in central Tennessee (West Nashville, Davidson County).




                            XII.  INTRICATAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 10; leaves broad-ovate to oval.
    Fruit depressed-globose, yellow-green flushed with russet-red;
          anthers pale yellow; calyx-lobes eglandular.
                                               112. C. Boyntonii (A, C).
    Fruit subglobose, red or russet-red; anthers pale rose color;
          calyx-lobes glandular with stalked glands.
                                                   113. C. Buckleyi (A).
  Stamens 20.
    Leaves oval to ovate or oblong-obovate; fruit short-oblong, dull
          red, often with a bright russet face; stamens usually 5--15;
          anthers small, pale yellow.
                                                    114. C. venusta (C).
    Leaves oblong-ovate to elliptic or ovate; fruit subglobose to
          short-oblong, yellow or orange-yellow, more or less flushed
          with red; anthers large, purple.
                                                  115. C. Sargentii (C).


                     112. Crataegus Boyntonii Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 464]

Leaves broad-ovate to oval, acute, rounded or cuneate at the entire
glandular base, sharply and often doubly serrate above with glandular
teeth, and frequently divided into 2 or 3 pairs of short broad acute
lateral lobes, when they unfold deep bronze-red, slightly glandular and
viscid, nearly fully grown when the flowers open early in May, and then
membranaceous and glabrous or occasionally slightly pilose, and at
maturity subcoriaceous, glabrous, yellow-green on the upper surface,
pale on the lower surface, 1'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--2' wide, with a thin
pale yellow midrib and 4--7 pairs of slender veins; petioles stout,
glandular often to the base with bright red glands, slightly winged
above, usually about 1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots often as broad as long, truncate or cordate at base, and more
coarsely dentate and more deeply lobed. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter,
on short slender pedicels, in compact 4--10-flowered compound corymbs;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, the lobes abruptly narrowed from a broad
base, acute or rounded at apex, entire or obscurely and irregularly
glandular-serrate above the middle; stamens 10; anthers large, pale
yellow; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a broad thick ring of hoary
tomentum. Fruit ripening and falling early in October, on short stout
pedicels, in few-fruited erect clusters, depressed-globose, more or less
angled, yellow-green flushed with russet-red, marked with small dark
dots, usually about 1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, the large
spreading lobes often deciduous before the fruit ripens; nutlets 3--5,
acute or acuminate at apex, rounded at the narrow base, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, sometimes armed with long gray compound spines, stout
ascending branches forming a narrow open irregular or occasionally a
round-topped head, and glabrous branchlets furnished with many thin
nearly straight light chestnut-brown spines 1-1/2'--2' long; or more
often a shrub, with numerous stems.

Distribution. Banks of streams, the borders of fields and upland woods
in the southern Appalachian foothill region from southern Virginia to
northern Georgia; in northern Alabama, southeastern Kentucky, and
eastern Tennessee; sometimes ascending to altitudes of 3000 deg. above the
sea.


                     113. Crataegus Buckleyi Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 465]

Leaves broad-ovate or oval, acute, rounded or subcordate or narrowed and
concave-cuneate at the entire base, coarsely often doubly serrate above
with straight glandular teeth, and more or less incisely lobed with
acuminate lateral lobes, more than half grown when the flowers open
about the middle of May and then pale green and glabrous with the
exception of a few caducous hairs on the upper side of the base of the
midrib, and at maturity dark green above, paler below, 1-1/2'--2' long,
and 1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles stout, conspicuously glandular above the
base, wing-margined at the apex, glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers
about 3/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels, in compact
3--7-flowered simple corymbs, with conspicuously glandular bracts and
bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes broad,
acuminate, laciniately cut toward the apex, and glandular with stipitate
glands; stamens 10; anthers pale rose color; styles 3--5, surrounded at
base by tufts of pale hairs. Fruit ripening late in September or in
October, subglobose, usually angled, red or russet-red, about 1/2' in
diameter; calyx little enlarged, with spreading or reflexed lobes; flesh
thin, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5, broad and rounded at base, rounded at
the slightly narrowed apex, prominently ridged on the back, with a broad
grooved ridge, about 5/16' long.

A tree, often 25 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--7' in diameter and sometimes
10 deg.--12 deg. long, covered with gray or often dark brown scaly bark, stout
spreading or ascending branches, and thick glabrous red-brown branchlets
armed with thin straight shining spines 1/2' long, becoming much longer
and branched on the trunk and large branches.

Distribution. Southwestern Virginia, through western North Carolina to
eastern Tennessee; usually at altitudes between 2000 deg. and 3000 deg.; common
on wooded slopes with Oaks, Hickories, and Pines.


                      114. Crataegus venusta Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 466]

Leaves oval to ovate or occasionally to oblong-ovate, acute, gradually
or abruptly narrowed and cuneate or rounded at the entire base, finely
serrate above with usually incurved glandular teeth, and frequently
slightly and irregularly divided above the middle into 1--3 pairs of
short broad acute lobes, when they unfold dark bronze color, with a few
scattered pale caducous hairs on the upper surface, about half grown
when the flowers open from the 20th to the end of April, and then
yellow-green, smooth and glabrous, and at maturity dark dull green
above, pale below, 2-1/2' long, and 1-1/2' wide, with a stout midrib and
4--7 pairs of thin primary veins; late in the autumn turning, especially
those on leading shoots deep orange or scarlet; petioles stout,
glandular, more or less winged above, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots generally broad-ovate, rounded at base,
deeply lobed with broad lobes, and often 3-1/2' long and 3' wide.
Flowers 1' in diameter, on short pedicels, in 4--9-flowered compact
corymbs, their bracts and bractlets like the inner bud-scales coarsely
glandular-serrate and bright red before falling; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acute, coarsely
glandular-serrate often only below the middle; stamens 15--20, usually
15--17; anthers small, pale yellow; styles 3--5, surrounded at the base
by a ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening and falling from the 1st to the
middle of October, on stout pedicels often 1' long, in few-fruited
clusters, short-oblong, rounded at the ends, dull red, often with a
bright russet face, and marked by occasional large dark dots; calyx
prominent, with a long tube, and spreading lobes often deciduous before
the fruit ripens; flesh thick, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5,
narrow and acute at base, broad, about 1/4' long.

A bushy tree, often 25 deg. high, with a short trunk a foot in diameter,
furnished like the large branches with innumerable stout much-branched
spines frequently 6' long, and slender nearly straight glabrous dark
chestnut-brown branchlets, armed with many stout straight or slightly
curved dark chestnut-brown shining spines frequently pointing toward the
base of the branch, and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long.

Distribution. Open Oak and Hickory-woods on the dry slopes of Red
Mountain in the southern part of the city of Birmingham, Jefferson
County, Alabama.


                     115. Crataegus Sargentii Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 467]

Leaves oblong-ovate to elliptic or rarely to ovate, acute or acuminate
at apex, gradually or abruptly cuneate or rounded at the nearly entire
base, irregularly doubly serrate above with straight or incurved
glandular teeth, and usually irregularly divided into 3 or 4 pairs of
short broad acute or acuminate lobes, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open late in April, and then subcoriaceous, pale yellow-green,
and villose on the midrib with scattered pale caducous hairs, and at
maturity lustrous, dark yellow-green above, pale below, 2'--3' long, and
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a thin midrib, 5--7 pairs of thin light yellow
veins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning in the autumn bright
yellow and red; petioles slender, glandular, more or less broadly winged
toward the apex, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots oblong-ovate, concave-cuneate at base, often 3' long and 2' wide,
their petioles broadly wing-margined to below the middle. Flowers nearly
1' in diameter, on long thin slightly villose pedicels, in 2--5 usually
3-flowered simple corymbs, with coarsely glandular-serrate bracts and
bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous or slightly villose,
the lobes foliaceous, acute, coarsely glandular-serrate above the
middle; stamens 20; anthers large, dark rose color; styles 3--5, usually
4, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening and
falling about the middle of September, often only a single fruit
maturing from a flower-cluster, subglobose to short-oblong, rounded at
the ends, yellow or orange-yellow, generally more or less flushed with
red, marked by occasional large dark dots, 1/3'--1/2' long; calyx
prominent, with an elongated tube and closely appressed lobes; flesh
yellow, thin and hard; nutlets 3--5, usually 4, about 1/4' long.

An intricately branched tree, rarely more than 20 deg. high, with a tall
trunk 6'--7' in diameter, stout ascending branches forming a narrow or
sometimes a round flat-topped head, and glabrous branchlets armed with
thin straight or slightly curved dark chestnut-brown shining spines,
3/4'--1-1/2' long; often a large shrub, with few or many stems.

Distribution. Rocky woods and bluffs in the foothill region of
northwestern Georgia (cliffs of the Coosa River near Rome, Floyd
County), southeastern Tennessee (near Chattanooga, Hamilton County, and
Tracy City, Grundy County), and northeastern Alabama; very abundant in
Alabama at Valley Head, De Kalb County, and on the low ridges extending
southward to the neighborhood of Birmingham, Jefferson County.




                           XIII. PULCHERRIMAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves oval to ovate or nearly orbicular, their lobes acute or
        rounded; fruit bright red.
                                                      116. C. opima (C).
  Leaves ovate to oval or obovate, their lobes acute; fruit orange-red.
                                                      117. C. robur (C).


                       116. Crataegus opima Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 468]

Leaves oval to ovate or nearly orbicular, acute, gradually or abruptly
narrowed and cuneate at the entire base, finely serrate above with
incurved teeth, and usually divided above the middle into short acute,
acuminate or rounded lobes, half grown when the flowers open the middle
of April, and then glabrous with the exception of a few short caducous
hairs on the midrib and veins, and at maturity light green on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, 1-1/2' long, and 1-1/4' wide, with a
slender midrib, and 5 or 6 pairs of arcuate primary veins spreading to
the point of the lobes; petioles narrowly winged at the apex, usually
about 3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots sometimes
rounded or nearly truncate at base and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and broad.
Flowers about 2/3' in diameter, on short slender pedicels, in compact
few-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the
lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acute, entire or sparingly
glandular-serrate, tipped with dark red glands, glabrous on the outer
surface, puberulous on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers dark rose
color; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of snowy white
tomentum. Fruit ripening about the 1st of October and then remaining on
the branches for several weeks, on short stout pedicels, in compact
few-fruited erect or drooping clusters, subglobose, often rather longer
than broad, bright red, about 1/4' in diameter; calyx prominent, with a
well-developed tube, and much enlarged closely appressed lobes often
deciduous with the tube before the fruit becomes entirely ripe; flesh
thin, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5, thin, 1/8' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall, slender often spiny trunk covered
with ashy gray bark nearly black at the base of old trees, spreading and
ascending branches forming a rounded or oval usually open head, and thin
nearly straight bright red-brown glabrous branchlets becoming gray
tinged with red or brown in their second season, and armed with thin
nearly straight bright chestnut-brown lustrous spines, 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Open woods in clay soil in the neighborhood of Greenville,
Butler County, Alabama; common near Tallahassee, Leon County, Florida.


                       117. Crataegus robur Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 469]

Leaves ovate, oval or obovate, acute or acuminate, entire or sparingly
glandular below, finely serrate above with incurved glandular teeth, and
incisely lobed above the middle with numerous short acute lobes, nearly
fully grown when the flowers open at the end of March, and then
membranaceous and dark yellow-green and lustrous, and at maturity
yellow-green, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a slender
yellow midrib, and thin primary veins extending very obliquely to the
point of the lobes; turning in the autumn orange, yellow, or brown;
petioles slender, slightly wing-margined toward the apex, sparingly
glandular, 1/2'--1' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
broadly ovate, cuneate or nearly truncate at the wide base, deeply
divided into broad lateral lobes, often 2'--3' long and broad, with a
stout broadly winged petiole frequently 1' long. Flowers 1-1/8'--1-1/4'
in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in 5--10-flowered glabrous
corymbs, with large conspicuously glandular bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from
a broad base, glabrous, entire or sparingly serrate; stamens 20; anthers
pale rose color; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of
pale hairs. Fruit ripening in September and October, on elongated,
slender pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose,
orange-red, about 1/2' in diameter; calyx-lobes deciduous before the
maturity of the fruit leaving a narrow ring round the shallow cavity;
flesh thin and firm; nutlets 3--5, broad, rounded at the ends, barely
grooved on the rounded back, 3/16' long and nearly as broad.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--6' in diameter, covered with
gray or brown scaly bark, spreading or ascending branches, and slender
red-brown branchlets unarmed or armed with stout spines 3/4'--1' long;
more often a large much-branched shrub, with one or more stems.

Distribution. Woods and borders of fields, northwestern Florida; common
in the neighborhood of Tallahassee, Leon County.




                            XIV. BRACTEATAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves oval to broad-obovate, subcoriaceous; corymbs many-flowered;
        stamens 10--20, usually 20; fruit bright red or orange-red.
                                                 118. C. Harbisonii (C).
  Leaves broad-ovate or rarely obovate, thin; corymbs 3--10-flowered;
        stamens 20; fruit bright red.
                                                      119. C. Ashei (C).


                    118. Crataegus Harbisonii Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 470]

Leaves oval to broad-obovate, acute at apex, cuneate or rounded at the
entire base, and coarsely serrate above with straight glandular teeth,
when they unfold roughened above by stout, rigid pale hairs, and soft
and pubescent below, nearly fully grown early in May when the flowers
open, and then thin, dark yellow-green above and pale below, and at
maturity subcoriaceous; pale on the lower surface, 2'--2-1/2' long, and
1'--1-1/2' wide, with a stout midrib and primary veins deeply impressed
on the upper side of the leaf, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets;
petioles stout, villose, more or less winged above, 1/4'--1/2' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, cuneate and
decurrent on their stouter petiole, 3'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3' wide,
with lunate coarsely glandular-dentate stipules frequently 1/2' long.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, in broad loose usually 10--12-flowered
corymbs, with broad acute conspicuous glandular-serrate bracts and
bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, densely villose at the base and
glabrous or pubescent above, the lobes elongated, gradually narrowed
from a broad base, acute, bright green, more or less hairy, coarsely
glandular-serrate, with large stipitate dark red glands; stamens 10--20,
usually 20; anthers large, light yellow; styles 3--5. Fruit ripening and
falling early in October, subglobose, often rather longer than broad,
bright red or orange-red, marked by numerous large dark dots; calyx
enlarged, with spreading glandular lobes often deciduous before the
fruit ripens; flesh yellow, thick, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5, narrowed
at the ends, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' in diameter, covered
with light gray or gray-brown bark, and often armed with straight or
much-branched spines, wide-spreading light gray or reddish branches
forming a rather open symmetrical head, and slender branchlets coated
when they first appear with long spreading white hairs, pubescent or
glabrous and light red-brown or orange-brown during their first season,
becoming dark or light gray the following year, and furnished with
numerous usually stout straight dark reddish brown shining spines
1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Dry limestone hills and ridges; West Nashville, Davidson
County, Tennessee; common.


                       119. Crataegus Ashei Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 471]

Leaves broad-ovate or occasionally obovate, acute and generally
short-pointed at apex, gradually or abruptly narrowed and cuneate and
usually entire at base, coarsely and occasionally doubly serrate above
with straight or incurved teeth tipped with small dark glands, when they
unfold roughened on the upper surface with short pale hairs and
pubescent below, nearly fully grown and membranaceous when the flowers
open early in May, and at maturity thin but firm in texture, pale and
puberulous on the lower surface on the slender midrib and primary veins,
about 2' long and 1-1/2' wide; petioles stout, broadly winged above,
glandular, pubescent early in the season but ultimately nearly glabrous,
about 1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots usually
broadly oval or nearly orbicular, rounded or short-pointed at apex,
2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on
slender hairy pedicels, in 3--10-flowered simple or compound corymbs,
with broad conspicuous glandular bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube
broadly obconic, thickly coated with long matted reflexed white hairs,
the lobes broad, acute, nearly glabrous on the outer surface, villose on
the inner surface, glandular with small stout stipitate glands; stamens
20; anthers small, yellow; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow
ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening and falling late in September or
early in October, on stout villose or glabrous pedicels, in few-fruited
clusters, subglobose or rather longer than broad, bright red, marked by
large scattered dots, more or less villose toward the ends, about 1' in
diameter; calyx conspicuous, with elongated coarsely glandular-serrate,
erect incurved or reflexed lobes; flesh thick and yellow; nutlets 3--5,
thin, acute at the ends, 1/3' long.

A tree, rarely more than 20 deg. high, with a slender trunk covered with
smooth light gray or red-brown bark becoming fissured and scaly on old
individuals, stout ascending branches forming a pyramidal or oval head,
and slender branchlets coated when they first appear with long pale
matted reflexed hairs, soon becoming nearly glabrous, lustrous,
orange-brown or reddish brown, and light gray or gray tinged with red
during their second season, and armed with straight or slightly curved
thin dark red-brown shining spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Abandoned fields, and woods, growing usually on clay
soils; near Montgomery, Montgomery County, and Gallion, Hale County,
Alabama.




                               XV. FLAVAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 20.
    Anthers pink or purple.
      Corymbs usually 3--6-flowered.
        Leaves elliptic to broad-ovate, yellow-green; fruit dark
              orange-brown.
                                                      120. C. flava (C).
        Leaves ovate to obovate or orbicular, bright yellow-green; fruit
              obovoid, dark orange color with a red cheek.
                                                    121. C. visenda (C).
        Leaves obovate or ovate, dark green; fruit subglobose to
              short-oblong, red or orange-red.
                                                     122. C. ignava (C).
      Corymbs 1--5-flowered.
        Leaves broad-obovate to nearly orbicular, bright green; fruit
              globose or depressed-globose, bright red.
                                                   123. C. consanguinea.
        Leaves obovate, bright green; fruit ellipsoidal to short-oblong,
              orange-red; anthers pink.
                                                        124. C. tristis.
    Anthers yellow (_doubtful in_ 128, 133).
      Leaves yellow-green.
        Leaves 3-nerved.
          Leaves obovate-cuneate, often 3-lobed at apex; fruit obovoid
                to subglobose, bright orange-red and lustrous; corymbs
                tomentose.
                                                      125. C. floridana.
          Leaves obovate; fruit subglobose to short-oblong, dull
                brownish yellow; corymbs glabrous.
                                                      126. C. lacrimata.
        Leaves with numerous primary veins.
          Leaves thin.
            Leaves scabrate above at maturity, obovate, rounded or
                  abruptly short-pointed at apex; fruit subglobose to
                  short-oblong, bright orange-red.
                                                  127. C. Ravenelii (C).
            Leaves smooth above at maturity.
              Leaves obovate to obovate-cuneiform; fruit subglobose,
                    bright red.
                                                      128. C. senta (A).
              Leaves obovate to oval or orbicular; fruit subglobose to
                    ellipsoidal, orange-red or red and orange.
                                                     129. C. annosa (C).
          Leaves subcoriaceous.
            Flowers in 3--5-flowered corymbs.
              Leaves obovate; fruit globose or depressed-globose,
                    orange-yellow with a red cheek.
                                                      130. C. panda (C).
              Leaves obovate to oblong-ovate, minutely serrate; fruit
                    globose, red or yellow.
                                                    131. C. integra (C).
            Flowers in 1 or 2-flowered corymbs; leaves spathulate; fruit
                  obovoid, red.
                                                    132. C. recurva (C).
      Leaves conspicuously blue-green, broad-ovate to orbicular; fruit
            subglobose to short-oblong, light red, puberulous at the
            ends.
                                                     133. C. dispar (C).
  Stamens 10; anthers yellow; leaves broad-obovate to oval or rhombic,
        dark yellow-green; fruit subglobose, dull orange-red, often
        slightly villose at the ends.
                                                     134. C. aprica (C).


                        120. Crataegus flava Ait.

[Illustration: Fig. 472]

Leaves elliptic to broad-obovate, acute or rarely rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed and cuneate at the glandular base, and coarsely
doubly serrate above with broad straight or incurved teeth tipped with
large dark red stipitate glands, when they unfold bronze color, villose
above with short pale caducous hairs most abundant near the base of the
midrib and pubescent below on the midrib and veins, about half grown
when the flowers open from the 10th to the 20th of April, and at
maturity membranaceous, yellow-green, usually about 2' long and 1-1/2'
wide, with a slender yellow midrib and 3 or 4 pairs of primary veins
usually puberulous on the under side and only slightly impressed above;
petioles slender, glandular, winged nearly to the base, generally more
or less villose, after midsummer often light red on the lower side, and
about 1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots frequently 3'
long and 2' wide, and sometimes broad-ovate, 3-lobed or divided into 2
or 3 pairs of lateral lobes, their petioles 1'--1-1/2' long, broadly
winged and conspicuously glandular, and foliaceous lunate or elliptic
coarsely glandular-serrate stipules. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on
short slender pedicels, in few-flowered simple or compound slightly
villose compact corymbs, with lanceolate acute coarsely
glandular-serrate bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic,
glabrous, the lobes wide, acute, usually laciniately divided, very
glandular; stamens 20; anthers large, dark rose color. Fruit ripening
early in October and soon falling, in few-fruited drooping clusters,
short-oblong, full and rounded at the ends, dark orange-brown,
1/2'--5/8' long, and 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, with a
long narrow tube, and enlarged closely appressed lobes often deciduous
before the fruit ripens; flesh thick, orange color, dry and mealy;
nutlets 5, gradually narrowed and rounded at the ends, ridged and deeply
grooved on the back with a high narrow ridge, about 1/2' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered
with thin dark brown bark tinged with red and divided into narrow
rounded ridges, stout ascending branches forming an open and somewhat
irregular head sometimes 20 deg. across, and slender slightly zigzag
glabrous branchlets dark green deeply tinged with red when they first
appear, becoming dull red-brown or orange-brown during their first
season, darker the following year, and ultimately dark gray-brown, and
armed with thin nearly straight bright chestnut-brown spines
3/4'--1-1/4' long.

Distribution. Dry sandy soil on the sand hills of Summerville, near
Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia, and at River Junction, Gadsden
County, Florida.


                      121. Crataegus visenda Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 473]

Leaves ovate, obovate, or orbicular, short-pointed and acute or
occasionally broad and rounded at apex, concave-cuneate and gradually
narrowed at the mostly entire base, finely serrate above with rounded
teeth, glandular with bright red glands, and divided above the middle
into short acute lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at the
end of March, and then glabrous with the exception of a few short pale
hairs on the two surfaces near the base of the midrib, and at maturity
thin and firm in texture, bright yellow-green and lustrous above, pale
below, glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' long, and 3/4'--1' wide, with a slender
midrib, and thin primary veins extending very obliquely to the point of
the lobes; turning yellow, orange, or brown in the autumn; petioles
slender, broadly wing-margined above the middle, conspicuously
glandular, sparingly villose early in the season, becoming nearly
glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on short
villose pedicels, in simple 3--6-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, hairy near the base with scattered pale hairs, glabrous above,
the lobes broad, acuminate, glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer,
pilose on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers pale purple; styles
3--5, surrounded at base by small tufts of white hairs. Fruit ripening
and falling late in August and early in September, on stout pedicels,
usually in 1 or 2-fruited clusters, obovoid, dark orange-colored, with a
red cheek, 1/2'--5/8' long, nearly 1/2' in diameter; calyx enlarged, the
lobes coarsely glandular-serrate, puberulous on the upper surface,
closely appressed; flesh soft and yellow; nutlets 3--5, obtuse and
rounded at the ends, rounded and slightly ridged on the back, about 3/8'
long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' in diameter, covered
with dark gray or brownish bark, crooked horizontal or ascending
branches forming a broad irregular head, and stout often contorted
branchlets villose when they first appear, soon glabrous, dull reddish
brown to ashy gray, and armed with slender straight spines 1/2'--5/8'
long.

Distribution. Sandy soil near Bristol, Liberty County, Florida.


                      122. Crataegus ignava Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 474]

Leaves obovate to ovate, acute, gradually narrowed from near the middle
to the concave-cuneate glandular base, sharply often doubly serrate
above with glandular teeth, and usually divided toward the apex into
short acute lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at the end
of April, and then membranaceous, glabrous with the exception of a few
hairs on the midrib above and on the midrib and slender veins below, and
at maturity subcoriaceous, bright green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale and still hairy on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and
1'--1-1/2' wide; turning in the autumn yellow and brown sometimes
flushed with red; petioles slender, wing-margined at the apex,
glandular, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter, on
slender glabrous pedicels, in 3--6-flowered simple corymbs, with
lanceolate conspicuously glandular reddish bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes abruptly narrowed from
the base, wide, glabrous, glandular with dark red stipitate glands, and
often coarsely serrate above the middle; stamens 20; anthers large, dark
rose color; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a ring of pale hairs.
Fruit ripening and falling at the end of September and early in October,
on slender erect pedicels, in few-fruited clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, orange-red, marked by numerous pale dots, about 3/8' long;
calyx enlarged and prominent, with spreading lobes often deciduous from
the ripe fruit; flesh thick and soft; nutlets 3--5, rounded at the ends,
prominently but irregularly ridged and grooved on the back, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 10 deg.--12 deg. high, with a slender trunk covered with ashy
gray fissured scaly bark often tinged with brown and frequently nearly
black near the ground, stout ascending branches, and slender zigzag
glabrous branchlets bright red-brown during their first season, becoming
dark gray-brown, and armed with many very slender red-brown lustrous
ultimately ashy gray spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Northeastern Alabama; common on Lookout Mountain above
Valley Head and at Collinsville, DeKalb County, and at Gadsden, Etowah
County.


                   123. Crataegus consanguinea Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 475]

Leaves broad-obovate to nearly orbicular, occasionally oval or rhombic,
acute and generally short-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed and
concave-cuneate or sometimes rounded at the entire base, finely and
often doubly serrate with glandular teeth, and frequently irregularly
divided above the middle into short acute lobes, nearly fully grown when
the flowers open at the end of March or early in April, and then very
thin, blue-green, slightly villose, especially on the midrib and veins,
and at maturity thin, bright green, glabrous with the exception of a few
hairs on the under side of the slender midrib, and thin primary veins
extending very obliquely toward the end of the leaf, about 1' long, and
3/4'--7/8' wide; petioles slender, glandular, wing-margined above,
villose early in the season, becoming glabrous, 1/3'--3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often 1-1/2'--2' long and wide.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long slender hairy pedicels, in simple
1--5-flowered corymbs, with oblanceolate acuminate bright red caducous
bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, sparingly hairy with
long pale caducous hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad
base, acute, glandular with minute bright red glands, glabrous; stamens
20; anthers small, deep rose color; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a
narrow ring of short pale hairs. Fruit ripening and falling about the
middle of September, on slender glabrous pedicels, often only a single
fruit in a cluster developing, globose to depressed-globose, bright red,
marked by small dark dots, nearly 1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent,
with enlarged appressed lobes; flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy;
nutlets 3--5, thick, narrowed and rounded at base, broad and rounded at
apex, ridged on the back with a broad low rounded ridge, about 5/16'
long.

A tree, often 20 deg. high, with a tall trunk 6'--8' in diameter, covered
with nearly black deeply furrowed bark broken into short thick closely
appressed scales, wide-spreading often pendulous branches forming a
broad symmetrical handsome head, and slender slightly zigzag branchlets
covered when they first appear with pale caducous hairs, soon becoming
bright red-brown and lustrous, and dull reddish brown in their second
season, and armed with short nearly straight gray or chestnut-brown
spines 1/3'--3/4' long.

Distribution. Dry upland Oak-woods in western Florida from the
neighborhood of Tallahassee, Leon County to the Apalachicola River;
common in the neighborhood of River Junction, Gadsden County, and at
Aspalaga, Liberty County.


                      124. Crataegus tristis Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 476]

Leaves obovate, acute, acuminate, or rounded and often more or less
undulate-lobed at the broad apex, gradually narrowed from above the
middle and concave-cuneate at the glandular base, and serrate above with
blunt glandular teeth, about half grown when the flowers open at the end
of April, and then slightly pilose on the upper and villose on the lower
surface on the thin midrib and in the axils of the slender veins
extending obliquely to the point of the lobes, and at maturity thin and
firm in texture, bright green and glabrous, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long, and
about 3/4' wide; turning in the autumn yellow, brown, and orange;
petioles slender, wing-margined above, conspicuously glandular, slightly
puberulous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
oblong-obovate, often deeply and irregularly divided into broad acute
lateral lobes, and frequently 1-1/2'--2' long and nearly as broad.
Flowers 5/8'--3/4' in diameter, on slender villose pedicels, in simple
3--5-flowered corymbs, with rose-colored and conspicuously glandular
bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, hairy toward the base
with long scattered pale hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed from a
broad base, acuminate, glandular with large dark red glands, and entire
or coarsely serrate above the middle; stamens 20; anthers pink; styles
3--5. Fruit ripening and falling late in August or early in September,
ellipsoidal or short-oblong, orange-red, about 1/2' long, with soft
flesh; calyx little enlarged, with recurved persistent lobes; nutlets
3--5, broad and rounded at base, gradually narrowed and acute at apex,
rounded and ridged on the back with a broad low slightly grooved ridge,
about 5/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter, covered
with dark sometimes nearly black deeply furrowed bark, stout pendulous
branches forming a broad shapely handsome head, and slender branchlets
hoary-tomentose when they first appear, bright red-brown and puberulous
at the end of their first season, becoming dark gray-brown, and armed
with few slender straight spines 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long; or often a large
shrub.

Distribution. Slopes of low hills, northwestern Georgia; common in the
neighborhood of Rome, Floyd County.


                     125. Crataegus floridana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 477]

Leaves obovate-cuneate, frequently 3-lobed at apex with short rounded
lobes, gradually narrowed and cuneate at the entire base, finely serrate
above with straight or incurved teeth tipped with conspicuous ultimately
dark persistent glands, 3-nerved with slender nerves, numerous thin
secondary veins and reticulate veinlets, slightly villose above as they
unfold, nearly fully grown when the flowers open about the middle of
March, and then light yellow-green and glabrous with the exception of a
few persistent hairs on the upper side of the nerves and in their axils,
and at maturity thick and firm, dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, 1'--1-1/2' long, and about 1/2'
wide; petioles slender, glandular, more or less winged toward the apex,
tomentose, becoming pubescent or glabrous, usually about 1/2' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots frequently 2' long, and sometimes
divided by deep rounded sinuses into numerous narrow lateral lobes,
their stipules lunate, foliaceous, pointed, coarsely glandular-serrate.
Flowers about 5/8' in diameter, on slender tomentose pedicels, in few
usually 1--3-flowered simple compact corymbs; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, coated with long matted white hairs, the lobes narrow,
acuminate, glandular with bright red stipitate glands, villose toward
the base on the outer surface and on the inner surface; stamens 20;
anthers small, pale yellow; styles 4 or 5, surrounded at the base by a
broad ring of long shining white hairs. Fruit ripening from the middle
to the end of August, on short stout pubescent pedicels, solitary or in
2 or 3-fruited drooping clusters, obovoid to short-oblong, usually about
3/4' long, bright orange-red, lustrous, marked by numerous pale dots;
calyx prominent, with an elongated tube puberulous on the outer surface,
and reflexed glandular-serrate lobes; flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy;
nutlets 4 or 5, acute at base, broad and rounded at apex, rounded and
occasionally slightly ridged on the back, about 1/3' long.

A tree, rarely more than 15 deg. high, with a long straight trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, covered with thick nearly black deeply furrowed bark broken
into short thick plate-like scales, small drooping branches forming a
handsome symmetrical head, and slender conspicuously zigzag pendulous
branchlets coated when they first appear with long pale matted hairs,
becoming during their first season dark red-brown and more or less
villose, and dark brown the following year, and armed with thin straight
spines 3/4'--1' long, or unarmed.

Distribution. Dry sandy soil of the Pine-barrens of northeastern
Florida; abundant in the neighborhood of Jacksonville, Duval County.


                     126. Crataegus lacrimata Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 478]

Leaves obovate, rounded or acute and glandular-serrate at apex usually
with incurved teeth, entire and glandular below, gradually narrowed from
above the middle to the base, and 3-nerved with slender yellow nerves,
numerous thin secondary veins and reticulate veinlets, when the flowers
open early in April nearly fully grown, light yellow, glabrous, with the
exception of small tufts of pale caducous hairs in the axils of the
nerves below, and at maturity subcoriaceous, lustrous, 1/4'--3/4' long,
and about 1/3' wide; petioles slender, wing-margined toward the apex,
dark orange-brown, at first puberulous, soon becoming glabrous,
1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers about 2/3' in diameter, on short stout
glabrous pedicels, in 3--5-flowered simple corymbs, with long linear
entire caducous bracts and bractlets turning red in fading; calyx-tube
broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad
base, acuminate, entire, tipped with large dark glands; stamens 20;
anthers large, light yellow; styles usually 3, surrounded at base by a
narrow ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening toward the end of August, on
slender pedicels, in 1 or 2-fruited clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, rounded at the ends, dull brownish yellow marked by
occasional dark dots, about 1/3' in diameter; calyx prominent, with an
elongated tube, and spreading lobes usually deciduous before the fruit
ripens; flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 3, broad, rounded at
the broad ends, rounded and sometimes obscurely grooved on the back,
about 3/8' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. but usually not more than 10 deg. high, with a tall
trunk 4'--6' in diameter, covered with thick deeply furrowed black bark
broken on the surface into thick plate-like closely appressed scales,
long slender drooping branches forming a handsome symmetrical
round-topped head; and thin glabrous very zigzag branchlets light
orange-brown when they first appear, soon becoming reddish brown and
lustrous, and dark gray-brown in their second year, and armed with many
small nearly straight dark chestnut-brown spines 1/2'--3/4' long.

Distribution. Western Florida, Walton and Santa Rosa Counties (Pensacola
to De Funiak Springs); sometimes in moist sand; more often in dry
barrens; common and often a conspicuous feature of the vegetation.


                     127. Crataegus Ravenelii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 479]

Leaves obovate, rounded and abruptly short-pointed or acute at the broad
sometimes slightly lobed apex, gradually narrowed from above the middle
to the elongated cuneate base, more or less undulate on the margins, and
coarsely and usually doubly glandular-serrate above with large bright
red ultimately dark persistent glands, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open the middle of April, and then coated with long pale
caducous hairs, and at maturity thin and firm in texture, yellow-green,
scabrous on the upper surface, pale, and pubescent on the lower surface
on the slender veins, 1'--1-1/2' long, and about 3/4' wide; petioles
slender, glandular, winged above, tomentose when they first appear,
becoming pubescent, 1/4'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots often 2' long and 1-1/2' wide, and frequently divided above the
middle into 2 or 3 pairs of broad lateral lobes. Flowers about 3/4' in
diameter, on slender tomentose pedicels, in simple corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, thickly coated with long white hairs, the lobes
lanceolate, villose on the outer, glabrous on the inner surface,
glandular with small red glands; stamens 20; anthers small, pale yellow;
styles 5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of pale tomentum. Fruit
ripening early in October, on short thick pedicels, in few-fruited
drooping or spreading clusters, globose to short-oblong, bright
orange-red, marked by occasional dark dots, puberulous at the ends,
1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, with enlarged spreading and
appressed lobes; flesh thick, yellow, subacid; nutlets 5, narrowed and
acute at the ends, ridged on the back with a high narrow ridge, 1/2'
long.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk often 14' or 15' in diameter,
covered with thick dark brown bark deeply divided into narrow
interrupted ridges broken on the surface into short thick plate-like
scales, heavy ascending or spreading branches forming an open irregular
head, and stout zigzag branchlets thickly coated at first with hoary
tomentum, dark purple or red-brown and pubescent during their first
summer, becoming dark red-brown and glabrous the following season, and
armed with thick straight dull gray-brown spines usually about 1-1/2'
long.

Distribution. Sand hills near Aiken, Aiken County, South Carolina, and
in Summerville near Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia.


                       128. Crataegus senta Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 480]

Leaves obovate or obovate-cuneiform, acute or sometimes rounded and
frequently slightly divided into several short acute lobes at the broad
apex, gradually narrowed from the middle to the entire base, and serrate
or doubly serrate above with incurved conspicuously glandular teeth,
when they unfold often dark red, covered above with long pale caducous
hairs and villose below on the midrib and veins, nearly fully grown when
the flowers open from the 1st to the 10th of May and then bright
yellow-green and almost glabrous with the exception of the persistent
tufts of pale hairs in the axils of the veins, and at maturity thin and
firm, dark green and lustrous above, paler below, usually about 1-1/2'
long and 1' wide, with an orange-colored midrib, generally 3 pairs of
slender primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the lobes, and
dark conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning red, yellow, or brown in
the autumn; petioles slender, glandular, wing-margined above, at first
tomentose, becoming pubescent or nearly glabrous, about 3/4' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, often nearly
orbicular, more deeply lobed with broad rounded or acute lobes,
2'--2-1/2' in diameter, their stipules lunate, coarsely
glandular-dentate, sometimes 1/2' long. Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on
long slender pedicels coated with matted pale hairs, in lax compound
3--6-flowered villose corymbs, with lanceolate straight or falcate
glandular bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, villose
particularly toward the base, the lobes narrow, elongated, acuminate,
nearly glabrous, coarsely and irregularly glandular-serrate; stamens 20;
styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of hoary tomentum. Fruit
ripening and falling at the end of September or early in October, on
slender slightly hairy elongated pedicels, in few-fruited drooping
clusters, globose, bright red, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx enlarged,
with closely appressed lobes; flesh yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5,
broad and rounded at apex, narrowed and acute at base, slightly grooved
on the back, about 1/2' long.

Distribution. Abandoned fields and open Pine-woods near Asheville,
Buncombe County, North Carolina, at altitudes of about 2200 deg.


                      129. Crataegus annosa Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 481]

Leaves obovate, oval, or oblanceolate, cuneate and glandular at base,
sharply and often doubly glandular-serrate above, and usually slightly
lobed toward the short-pointed acute apex, more than half grown when the
flowers open early in April and then pale yellow-green and scurfy above,
with a few short pale hairs above and below near the base of the midrib,
and at maturity thin, glabrous, bright green, 1'--1-1/2' long, and
3/4'--1' wide, with a prominent pale yellow midrib, and remote slender
veins extending very obliquely to the point of the lobes; turning in the
autumn yellow, orange, or brown; petioles slender, narrowly winged
above, conspicuously glandular with large dark glands, 1/2'--3/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate to obovate or
suborbicular, coarsely serrate, conspicuously reticulate-venulose,
sometimes 2' long and wide, with broadly winged petioles and foliaceous
coarsely dentate persistent stipules often 3/4' long. Flowers 3/4' in
diameter, on stout villose pedicels, in simple 3--5-flowered villose
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, sparingly villose toward the base,
the lobes acute, glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer surface,
puberulous on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers almost white;
styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a broad ring of snow-white tomentum.
Fruit ripening and falling late in August or early in September,
subglobose or ellipsoidal, orange-red or red and orange, about 1/2'
long; calyx little enlarged, the lobes puberulous on the upper side and
reflexed; flesh thick and soft; nutlets 3--5, broad and rounded at base,
narrowed and rounded at apex, rounded and ridged on the back with a
broad low rounded ridge, about 5/16' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
covered with dark rough often black bark, stout spreading or ascending
branches, and thick dull red-brown ultimately dark gray or nearly black
branchlets armed with straight rather stout spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Eastern central Alabama; common near Phoenix, Lee County,
and Girard, Russell County.


                       130. Crataegus panda Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 482]

Leaves obovate, rounded and short-pointed or abruptly narrowed and acute
at the broad occasionally slightly lobed apex, concave-cuneate and
glandular at the entire base, and finely serrate above with minute
incurved glandular teeth, when they unfold tinged with red and sparingly
villose, nearly fully grown when the flowers open the 1st of April and
then roughened above by short pale rigid hairs and villose above and
below on the midrib and on the veins below, and at maturity glabrous, or
puberulous on the under surface of the slender midrib, subcoriaceous,
light green and lustrous, glandular, 1'--1-1/4' long, and 3/4'--1' wide,
with slender primary veins extending very obliquely toward the end of
the leaf; turning yellow-brown or orange color in the autumn before
falling; petioles slender, slightly wing-margined at apex, villose early
in the season, becoming glabrous, glandular, about 3/8' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate, rounded, apiculate and
lobed at apex, puberulous and villose on the midrib and veins on the
lower surface, often 1-3/4' long and 2' wide. Flowers 5/8'--3/4' in
diameter, on slender hairy pedicels, in compact 3--5-flowered simple
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, covered with matted white hairs,
the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate,
glandular-serrate, more or less villose; stamens 20; anthers nearly
white; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of pale hairs.
Fruit ripening and falling at the end of August or early in September,
on stout pedicels, in erect few-fruited clusters, globose or
depressed-globose, orange-yellow, with a red cheek, 3/8'--3/4' in
diameter; calyx slightly enlarged, with closely appressed often
deciduous lobes; flesh thick, succulent, orange-yellow; nutlets 3--5,
narrowed and acute at the ends, grooved on the rounded back with a broad
shallow groove, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
covered with dark rough bark, crooked recurved branches forming an open
irregular head, and stout branchlets covered at first with matted pale
hairs, reddish brown and puberulous during their first season, becoming
gray, and unarmed or occasionally armed with stout spines 1/2'--1' long.

Distribution. Dry sandy soil near Tallahassee, Leon County, Florida.


                      131. Crataegus integra Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 483]

Leaves obovate to oblong-obovate, narrowed from near the middle to the
acute apex, concave-cuneate and gradually narrowed to the slender base,
and finely serrate, nearly half grown when the flowers open about the
20th of March, and then glandular on the margins, slightly hairy on the
midrib and on the under side of the veins, and at maturity
subcoriaceous, bright green, lustrous, and glabrous above, paler below,
1'--1-1/4' long, and about 3/4' wide, with a thin yellow midrib
puberulous below, slender primary veins extending very obliquely to the
end of the leaf, with 1 or 2 pairs near the middle of the blade more
prominent than those below and above them; turning in the autumn yellow,
orange and brown; petioles slender, narrowly wing-margined above,
glandular, at first hoary-tomentose, becoming pubescent or puberulous,
1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broadly
obovate, short-pointed at apex, slightly undulate-lobed above the
middle, sometimes 1-1/2' long and broad. Flowers 5/8'--3/4' in diameter,
on slender elongated hoary-tomentose pedicels, in 3--5-flowered simple
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, thickly covered with matted white
hairs, the lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, acuminate,
glandular, pilose on the outer, sparingly pilose on the inner surface;
stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a
thick ring of white hairs. Fruit ripening and falling in August, on
slender erect pubescent pedicels, globose, red, about 1/2' in diameter;
calyx deciduous; flesh thin, orange-yellow, and succulent; nutlets 3--5,
narrowed and acute at the base, rounded at the apex, flat and grooved on
the back with a narrow shallow groove, about 5/16' long.

A tree, 12 deg.--15 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 8' in diameter, covered
with thick nearly black checkered bark, drooping branches forming a
handsome symmetrical head, and slender very zigzag branchlets clothed
when they first appear with hoary tomentum, rather bright reddish brown
and roughened by minute tubercles at the end of their first season,
becoming gray or grayish brown, and unarmed or armed with occasional
short slender spines.

Distribution. Sandy woods and abandoned fields; central Florida; common
near Eustis, Lake County, and Orlando, Orange County.


                      132. Crataegus recurva Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 484]

Leaves spatulate, rounded or acute or sometimes obovate and obtusely
3-lobed at apex, and finely glandular-serrate with bright red glands,
nearly half grown when the flowers open about the 20th of March and then
almost glabrous above, slightly hairy near the base below, and at
maturity subcoriaceous, glabrous, about 1' long and 1/4'--1/2' wide,
with a slender yellow midrib and one pair of veins often more prominent
than the others and nearly parallel with the margins of the blade;
turning in the autumn yellow, orange, and brown; petioles slender,
conspicuously glandular, villose when they first appear, becoming
glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
broad-obovate, deeply divided into narrow lateral ascending rounded
lobes, concave-cuneate at base, with a stouter midrib, and veins arching
to the point of the lobes, and often 1' long and 3/4' wide. Flowers
1/2'--5/8' in diameter, on stout pedicels thickly covered with matted
pale hairs, solitary or in 2-flowered simple corymbs; calyx-tube broadly
obconic, pilose below, nearly glabrous above, the lobes slender,
acuminate, glandular-serrate, slightly hairy on the outer surface,
glabrous on the inner surface; stamens 20; anthers pale yellow; styles
3--5. Fruit ripening in August, erect on short stout pedicels, obovoid,
red, 1/2' long; calyx little enlarged, often deciduous; flesh thick and
soft; nutlets 3--5, broad and rounded at the ends, rounded and obscurely
grooved on the back, about 1/4' long.

A tree, 15 deg.--18 deg. high, with a short trunk 5'--6' in diameter, covered
with gray or brownish rough bark, slender pendulous branches forming a
broad symmetrical head, and slender very zigzag branchlets, villose
early in the season, becoming bright chestnut-brown and very lustrous
and ultimately dark reddish brown, and armed with numerous slender
straight spines usually about 1/2' long.

Distribution. Dry sandy soil, Ocala, Marion County, Florida.


                      133. Crataegus dispar Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 485]

Leaves broad-ovate or orbicular, 3-nerved, acute or rounded at apex,
generally narrowed and cuneate or concave-cuneate at the glandular
entire base, serrate or doubly serrate above with straight or incurved
glandular teeth, and mostly divided above the middle into short acute
lobes, when they unfold coated with long matted white hairs most
abundant on the lower surface, more than half grown when the flowers
open about the middle of April and then blue-green and villose above and
tomentose below, and at maturity thin and firm in texture, blue-green
and glabrous on the upper surface, pale and slightly pubescent on the
lower surface, usually about 1' long and 3/4'--1' wide; turning red,
yellow, or brown in the autumn; petioles slender, tomentose, becoming
pubescent or villose, glandular, slightly wing-margined above, usually
about 1/3' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots broad-ovate
or suborbicular, rounded at the broad base, coarsely serrate, and often
deeply divided above the middle into 3 wide acute lobes broader than
long. Flowers about 5/8' in diameter, on slender hoary-tomentose
pedicels, in simple 3--7-flowered corymbs, with narrow-obovate acute
glandular bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated with
hoary tomentum, the lobes narrow, acute, glandular-serrate with minute
bright red glands, tomentose on the outer surface below the middle,
glabrous above, tomentose on the inner surface; stamens 20; styles 3--5,
surrounded at base by a ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening late in
August or early in September, on slender pubescent pedicels, in
few-fruited clusters, subglobose to short-oblong, light red, puberulous
toward the ends, about 1/3' in diameter; calyx prominent, with reflexed
closely appressed lobes tomentose at base; flesh thin, yellow, subacid;
nutlets 3--5, rounded at the ends, ridged on the back with a broad low
ridge, dark brown, 1/4' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a short trunk a foot in diameter, heavy
ascending branches forming a broad irregular head, and stout zigzag
branchlets at first hoary-tomentose, dark red-brown and pubescent during
their first summer, becoming darker colored and glabrous the following
season, and armed with thick or thin nearly straight dark red-brown
ultimately gray spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Dry sand hills near Aiken, Aiken County, and Trenton,
Edgefield County, South Carolina; more abundant at Summerville, west of
Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia.


                      134. Crataegus aprica Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 486]

Leaves broad-obovate, oval, or rhombic, acute and short-pointed or
rounded and often somewhat lobed at apex, gradually or abruptly narrowed
and cuneate at the entire base, and serrate usually only above the
middle with small incurved teeth terminating in conspicuous rose-colored
ultimately dark red persistent glands, when they unfold deep orange
color, roughened above by short pale appressed hairs and sparingly
villose below, especially on the slender midrib and remote primary
veins, nearly fully grown when the flowers open about the 10th of May,
and at maturity thick and firm, glabrous, smooth, and dark yellow-green
on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 1'--1-1/4' long, and 1'
wide; petioles stout, conspicuously glandular, more or less winged
toward the apex, villose early in the season, becoming nearly glabrous,
usually bright red on the lower side toward the base after midsummer,
about 1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often nearly
orbicular, frequently more deeply lobed, and 1-1/2'--2' long and wide,
with a stout broadly winged petiole, and foliaceous lunate stipules.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on slender villose pedicels, in small
3--6-flowered compact simple corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic,
villose at base, glabrous above, the lobes gradually narrowed from a
broad base, acuminate, glabrous, coarsely glandular-serrate; stamens 10;
anthers small, bright yellow; styles 3--5, surrounded at base by a
narrow ring of pale hairs. Fruit ripening late in the autumn, on stout
glabrous or slightly villose pedicels, in erect or drooping usually 2 or
3-fruited clusters, subglobose, rarely rather longer than broad, about
1/2' in diameter, dull orange-red, often slightly villose at the ends,
marked by numerous small dark dots; calyx much enlarged, with
wide-spreading coarsely glandular acuminate lobes bright red at base on
the upper side; flesh thin, light yellow, sweet and rather juicy;
nutlets 3--5, broad and rounded at the ends, rounded and ridged on the
back with a broad low ridge, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a stem 6'--8' in diameter, covered
with deeply furrowed dark gray bark broken irregularly into small
persistent plate-like scales, and becoming on old stems often nearly
black, spreading often elongated contorted branches forming a broad open
head, and slender zigzag branchlets dark green tinged with red and
villose when they first appear, soon becoming nearly glabrous, light
orange-brown at midsummer, dark reddish brown or purple before winter,
and ultimately ashy gray, and armed with thin nearly straight
chestnut-brown spines 1'--1-1/2' long; or frequently a much-branched
shrub, with several stout spreading stems.

Distribution. Dry woods in the foothill region of the southern
Appalachian Mountains; southwestern Virginia through western North
Carolina to eastern Tennessee and northern Georgia; in northern Alabama;
usually at altitudes between 1500 deg. and 3500 deg.; common.




                            XVI. MICROCARPAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Fruit short-oblong; leaves orbicular to broad-ovate, pinnately
        5--7-cleft.
                                                  135. C. apiifolia (C).
  Fruit subglobose.
    Leaves broad-ovate to triangular, long-stalked; calyx deciduous from
          the fruit.
                                              136. C. Phaenopyrum (A, C).
    Leaves spatulate to oblanceolate, short-stalked; calyx generally
          persistent on the fruit.
                                                 137. C. spathulata (C).


              135. Crataegus apiifolia Michx. Parsley Haw.

[Illustration: Fig. 487]

Leaves broad-ovate to orbicular, acute at apex, truncate, slightly
cordate or cuneate at the broad base, and pinnately 5--7-cleft with
shallow acute or deep wide sinuses, and incisely lobed with broad or
acute segments serrate toward the apex with spreading glandular teeth,
when they unfold pilose above with long pale hairs, and mostly glabrous
below, fully grown when the flowers open late in March or early in
April, and at maturity thin, bright green and rather lustrous above,
paler and glabrous or pilose below on the prominent midrib and primary
veins, or on occasional plants pubescent on both surfaces, 2/3'--1-1/2'
wide; petioles slender, pubescent, becoming glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often divided nearly to the
midrib, with foliaceous lunate coarsely glandular-serrate short-stalked
stipules sometimes 1/2' long. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on long slender
hairy pedicels, in crowded densely villose usually 10--12-flowered
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous or covered with long
matted pale hairs, the lobes lanceolate, acute, glabrous, usually
glandular-serrate, often tinged with red toward the apex; stamens 20;
anthers bright rose color; styles 1--3. Fruit ripening in October and
persistent on the branches until the beginning of winter, short-oblong,
bright scarlet, 1/3' long; calyx prominent, the lobes elongated,
reflexed, often deciduous from the ripe fruit; flesh thin; nutlets 1--3,
rounded at the ends, about 1/3' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 6'--8' in diameter,
branches spreading nearly at right angles and forming a wide irregular
open head, and slender more or less zigzag often contorted branchlets
covered when they first appear with long pale hairs, light red or pale
orange-brown and usually puberulous in their first winter, ultimately
light brown or ashy gray, and armed with stout straight chestnut-brown
spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps or in hummocks in
Pine-barrens in the coast and Piedmont regions of the south Atlantic
States from southeastern Virginia to Georgia; in western Florida south
to Lafayette County (near Old Town), north-central and southern Alabama,
Louisiana and the coast region of Texas to the valley of the lower
Colorado River (low woods, Peyton's Creek, Matagorda County), and
through Arkansas to eastern Oklahoma (Page, Le Flore County) and to
southeastern Missouri; most abundant and of its largest size in southern
Arkansas and western Louisiana.


            136. Crataegus Phaenopyrum Med. Washington Thorn.

                        _Crataegus cordata_ Ait.

[Illustration: Fig. 488]

Leaves broad-ovate to triangular, acute or acuminate, truncate,
broad-cuneate, rounded or cordate at the entire base, coarsely serrate
above with acute spreading often gland-tipped teeth, and more or less
incisely lobed or often 3-lobed, tinged with red when they unfold and
sparingly pilose above with long pale caducous hairs, fully grown when
the flowers open at the end of May, and at maturity thin and firm, dark
green and lustrous above, pale and rarely pubescent on the lower
surface, especially on the conspicuous orange-colored midrib and primary
veins, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide; turning late in the autumn
bright scarlet and orange; petioles slender, terete, glabrous,
3/4'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers on slender pedicels, in rather compact
many-flowered glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous,
the lobes short, nearly triangular, entire, abruptly contracted at apex
into a minute point, glabrous on the outer, pubescent on the inner
surface, ciliate on the margins; stamens 20; anthers rose color; styles
2--5, surrounded at base by conspicuous tufts of pale hairs. Fruit
ripening in September and October and persistent on the branches until
the spring of the following year, depressed-globose, scarlet, lustrous,
1/4' in diameter; calyx deciduous from the ripe fruit, leaving a wide
circular scar surrounding the persistent erect tips of the carpels;
nutlets 3--5, narrowed and acute at base, broad and rounded at apex,
about 1/8' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a straight trunk sometimes a foot in
diameter, generally dividing 4 deg.--5 deg. above the ground into slender
usually upright branches forming an oblong or occasionally round-topped
head, slender zigzag glabrous bright chestnut-brown lustrous branchlets,
becoming dark gray or reddish brown, and armed with slender sharp spines
1-1/2'--2' long; often much smaller, and sometimes a broad spreading
bush.

Distribution. Banks of streams in rich soil; western North Carolina at
altitudes of about 2000 deg., to middle Tennessee and southern Kentucky; in
southern Missouri (St. Francois, Wayne, Shannon, Carter and Ripley
Counties), and in Richland County, Illinois; now often naturalized in
the middle and Ohio valley states; nowhere common. Often cultivated in
the eastern states and in western Europe; hardy as far north as eastern
Massachusetts.


                    137. Crataegus spathulata Michx.

             _Crataegus spathulata_ var. _flavanthera_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 489]

Leaves spatulate to oblanceolate, rounded or acuminate and sometimes
3-lobed at apex, gradually narrowed from above the middle to the slender
concave-cuneate entire base, and crenately serrate above, nearly fully
grown when the flowers open from March to May and then sparingly villose
above with long white caducous hairs, and at maturity subcoriaceous,
glabrous, dark green and lustrous above, paler below,
reticulate-venulose, with an obscure yellow midrib and primary veins,
1'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, clustered at the end of short lateral
branchlets; petioles slender, wing-margined to the base, 1/8'--1/4' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots often deeply 3-lobed above
the middle with rounded coarsely crenately serrate lobes, and narrowed
below into a long winged petiole, 1'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with
a broad thick midrib often pilose on the lower surface, their stipules
foliaceous, lunate, sharply serrate, stalked, often 1/2' broad. Flowers
1/2' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in glabrous many-flowered
narrow corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the lobes short,
nearly triangular, almost entire, minutely glandular-apiculate; stamens
20; anthers pale yellow; styles 2--5. Fruit ripening in October,
subglobose, bright scarlet, lustrous, about 1/8' in diameter; calyx only
slightly enlarged, with reflexed lobes; flesh thin, dry and mealy;
nutlets 3--5, broad and rounded at apex, narrowed at base, 1/16'--1/8'
long.

A tree, 18 deg.--25 deg. high, with a straight trunk occasionally 8'--10' in
diameter, slender upright and spreading branches forming a broad open
head, and thin zigzag glabrous light reddish brown branchlets, unarmed,
or armed with straight stout light brown spines 1'--1-1/2' long; more
often a shrub, with numerous spreading stems.

Distribution. Rich soil usually near the banks of streams or swamps, or
low depressions in Pine-forests; North Carolina (near Albemarle, Stanly
County) to central South Carolina, central, northwestern (Rome, Floyd
County), and southwestern Georgia to northern Florida (Ocala, Marion
County, to River Junction, Gadsden County); northern Alabama southward
to Dallas County; eastern and western Mississippi (near Natchez, Adams
County); eastern and northwestern Louisiana (Richland, Rapides, Caddo
and Natchitoches Parishes); eastern Texas to the valley of the Guadalupe
River (near Seguin, Guadalupe County), southeastern Oklahoma
(Bennington, Bryan County), and through southern and western Arkansas to
southwestern Missouri (Tanney and Jasper Counties); probably most
abundant in central Georgia.




                          XVII. BRACHYACANTHAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves oblong-lanceolate to ovate or rhombic; broad-ovate to nearly
        triangular on vigorous shoots; fruit subglobose to obovoid,
        bright blue covered with a glaucous bloom.
                                              138. C. brachyacantha (C).
  Leaves narrow-rhombic to oval; lanceolate, acuminate on vigorous
        shoots; fruit globose, blue-black, very lustrous.
                                                    139. C. saligna (F).


       138. Crataegus brachyacantha Sarg. & Engelm. Pomette Bleue.

[Illustration: Fig. 490]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate to ovate or rhombic, acute or rounded at apex,
gradually narrowed to the concave-cuneate entire base, and
crenulate-serrate above with minute incurved glandular teeth, slightly
puberulous when they unfold on the upper surface and glabrous on the
lower surface, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at the end of
April and early in May, and at maturity subcoriaceous, glabrous, dark
green and lustrous, 1'--2' long, and 1/2' to nearly 1' wide, with a thin
inconspicuous midrib and veins; petioles slender, narrowly wing-margined
above, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots
sometimes broad-ovate or almost triangular, cuneate, truncate or cordate
at the broad base, more or less deeply lobed, frequently 2-1/2' long and
2' wide, with foliaceous broadly ovate to triangular acute stalked
stipules sometimes 1' long. Flowers 1/3' in diameter, on slender
pedicels, in crowded glabrous many-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, glabrous, the lobes short, nearly triangular, gradually
narrowed to the gland-tipped apex, entire; petals turning bright orange
color in fading; stamens 15--20; anthers yellow; styles 3--5. Fruit
ripening and falling the middle of August, on erect pedicels, in
few-fruited clusters, subglobose or obovoid, bright blue, covered with a
glaucous bloom, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx slightly enlarged, with
spreading lobes; flesh thin; nutlets 3--5, narrowed and acute at base,
full and rounded at apex, rounded and slightly grooved on the back,
about 1/4' long.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 18'--20' in diameter, covered with
thick dark brown deeply furrowed scaly bark, and divided usually 5 deg.--10 deg.
from the ground into stout spreading light gray branches forming a broad
compact round-topped head, and branchlets light green and slightly
pubescent early in the season, soon becoming glabrous and pale
red-brown, and ultimately ashy gray, and armed with numerous short stout
generally curved or sometimes straight slender spines 1/3'--2/3' long,
and also often terminal on the lateral branchlets of vigorous shoots.

Distribution. Borders of streams in rich moist soil; southwestern
Arkansas (Ashtown, Little River County, and Texarkana, Miller County) to
the valley of the Trinity River (Livingston, Polk County), eastern
Texas, and to western Louisiana (Caddo, Webster, Ouachita, Natchitoches,
St. Landry and Jefferson Davis Parishes); in eastern Louisiana (Glen
Gordon, Covington, St. Tammany Parish; common); a few miles west of
Opelousas, Louisiana, surrounding with dense groves low wet prairies and
a conspicuous and beautiful feature of arborescent vegetation.


                     139. Crataegus saligna Greene.

[Illustration: Fig. 491]

Leaves narrow-rhombic to oval, gradually narrowed at the ends, acute or
acuminate and apiculate at apex, entire toward the base, finely serrate
above with incurved teeth tipped with minute bright red glands, nearly
fully grown when the flowers open toward the middle of June, and then
light yellow-green, covered above with short pale hairs and pale and
glabrous below, and at maturity thick and firm, dark green, glabrous and
lustrous above, pale below 1-1/2'--2' long, and 3/4'--1' wide, with a
stout midrib rose color on the upper side, dark obscure forked veins,
and reticulate veinlets; turning late in the autumn to brilliant shades
of orange and bright scarlet; petioles slender, glandular near the base,
with 2 or 3 large stipitate dark red caducous glands, and about 1/3' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots lanceolate, acuminate,
coarsely serrate, often irregularly and deeply divided into 2 or 3 acute
lateral lobes, 3'--3-1/2' long, and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide. Flowers about
5/8' in diameter, on short slender pedicels, in compact glabrous few or
many-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube glabrous, the lobes nearly triangular,
entire, often bright red toward the apex; stamens 20; anthers small,
yellow; styles 5. Fruit ripening toward the end of September, on stout
pedicels, in compact drooping clusters, globose, 1/4' in diameter, dull
vinous red and very lustrous when fully grown, ultimately blue-black;
calyx small, with reflexed persistent lobes; flesh thin, yellow, dry and
sweet; nutlets 5, thick, rounded and slightly ridged on the back,
1/8'--3/16' long.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a short stem, long slender spreading
branches gracefully drooping at the ends, covered with bright red or
reddish brown bark, separating on old trunks near the ground into long
slightly attached narrow plate-like gray scales, and slender glabrous
bright red lustrous branchlets armed with numerous straight slender
spines 3/4'--1-1/2' long; often forming clumps or small thickets with
numerous stems 8 deg.--15 deg. tall springing from a single root.

Distribution. Banks of the Cimarron, Gunnison, White, Tomichi, Eagle,
San Juan, and other Colorado streams on both slopes of the continental
divide at altitudes of 6000 deg.--8000 deg. above the sea.




                          XVIII. MACRACANTHAE.


                           _Tomentosae_ Sarg.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves thin, with midrib and veins only slightly impressed on their
        upper surface; anthers rose color or red.
    Mature leaves pale pubescent below.
      Leaves ovate to ovate-oblong; fruit in erect clusters, obovoid,
            orange-red; stamens 20.
                                               140. C. tomentosa (A, C).
      Leaves ovate, oval, or obovate, in drooping clusters, globose to
            subglobose, bright red or orange-red; stamens 5--10.
                                               141. C. Chapmanii (A, C).
    Mature leaves glabrous (_slightly pubescent on the midrib and veins
          below in 142_).
      Stamens 20.
        Leaves elliptic to suborbicular, smooth above; fruit in drooping
              clusters, subglobose to short-oblong.
                                                    142. C. Gaultii (A).
        Leaves elliptic, scabrate above; fruit in erect clusters,
              subglobose.
                                                     143. C. vegeta (A).
      Stamens 10; leaves ovate, scabrate above; fruit short-oblong.
                                                   144. C. Deweyana (A).
  Leaves subcoriaceous to coriaceous, with midrib and veins deeply
        impressed on their upper surface and pubescent below.
    Anthers rose color.
      Stamens 20.
        Leaves elliptic, acute at the ends; fruit globose.
                                                 145. C. succulenta (A).
        Leaves broadly oval or obovate; fruit subglobose to
              short-oblong.
                                                    146. C. gemmosa (A).
      Stamens 10.
        Leaves broad-obovate or oval; fruit globose, villose at the
              ends; calyx-lobes coarsely glandular-serrate.
                                               147. C. illinoiensis (A).
        Leaves broad-obovate to oval or rhombic; fruit subglobose;
              calyx-lobes entire.
                                                148. C. integriloba (A).
    Anthers yellow; stamens 10; leaves broad-obovate to elliptic or
          oval; fruit in erect clusters, globose.
                                                149. C. macracantha (A).


                       140. Crataegus tomentosa L.

[Illustration: Fig. 492]

Leaves ovate, oblong-ovate, rhombic or elliptic, acute, acuminate or
rarely rounded at apex, gradually narrowed to the cuneate entire base,
sharply and usually doubly serrate above with broad spreading usually
glandular teeth, and often divided above the middle into several short
lateral lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open from the 1st to
the middle of June, and at maturity thin and firm, gray-green, coated
below with pale persistent pubescence, puberulous or ultimately glabrous
above, conspicuously reticulate-venulose, 2'--5' long, and 1'--3' wide,
with a broad midrib and slender primary veins; turning brilliant orange
and scarlet in the autumn before falling; petioles stout, glandular,
wing-margined, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots sometimes broad-obovate to semiorbicular, rounded and abruptly
short-pointed at apex, rounded at base, and 3'--4' long and wide; more
often oblong-obovate, acuminate, and 5'--6' in length. Flowers 1/2' in
diameter, on slender villose pedicels, in villose corymbs; calyx-tube
obconic, hoary-tomentose, the lobes lanceolate, acute, coarsely or
pinnately serrate, usually glandular, stamens 20; anthers pale rose
color; styles 2--5. Fruit ripening in October, on slender erect
pubescent pedicels, in broad many-fruited clusters, obovoid or rarely
subglobose, 1/2' in diameter, erect, dull orange-red, translucent when
fully ripe, mostly persistent on the branches until the following
spring; flesh thick, orange-yellow, sweet and succulent; nutlets about
1/4' long and broad, rounded at the ends, the ventral cavities broad and
deep.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in diameter, covered with
smooth pale gray or dark brown furrowed bark, slender spreading often
nearly horizontal smooth gray branches forming a wide flat head, and
slender branchlets covered when they first appear with thick hoary
tomentum, becoming dark orange color and puberulous in their first
winter, and ashy gray in their second season, and unarmed, or armed with
occasional slender straight dull ashy gray or very rarely bright
chestnut-brown spines 1'--1-1/2' long.

Distribution. Near Troy, Rensselaer County, New York, westward through
New York to southwestern Ontario, through Ohio, southern Michigan,
Indiana and Illinois to central Minnesota and southward to Pennsylvania
and along the Appalachian Mountains to northeastern Georgia, and to
central Iowa, northeastern Missouri to the valley of the Meramec River,
and to eastern Kansas; near Nashville, Davidson County, Tennessee; in
the neighborhood of Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia; and in Dallas
County, Alabama (_R. S. Cocks_).

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the gardens of western
Europe.


                     141. Crataegus Chapmanii Ashe.

                        _Crataegus mollita_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 493]

Leaves ovate, oval, or obovate, acuminate, gradually narrowed and acute
or concave-cuneate at the entire base, sharply serrate above with
glandular teeth, and often slightly lobed above the middle, about half
grown when the flowers open early in June and then covered above with
short soft pale hairs and pale-tomentose below, and at maturity dark
dull green and smooth or scabrate above, pale-tomentulose below,
especially on the slender yellow midrib and primary veins, 2-1/2'--3'
long, and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; turning yellow or brown in the autumn
before falling; petioles stout, wing-margined at apex, tomentose early
in the season, becoming nearly glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots sometimes 6' long and 4' wide. Flowers about
3/8' in diameter, on long stout hoary-tomentose or pubescent pedicels,
in broad many-flowered tomentose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic,
tomentose, the lobes acuminate, glandular-serrate, sparingly villose;
stamens 10; anthers rose color; styles 2 or 3. Fruit ripening the middle
of September, on elongated slightly villose pedicels, in broad lax
drooping many-fruited clusters, globose to subglobose, bright red, about
5/8' in diameter; calyx only slightly enlarged, with reflexed coarsely
glandular-serrate lobes; flesh juicy, succulent, yellow; nutlets 2 or 3,
about 3/4' long and nearly as broad, thin, rounded at the obtuse ends,
rounded and obscurely ridged on the back, the ventral cavities broad and
deep.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
covered with gray scaly bark, erect branches forming a broad open head,
and slender branchlets hoary-tomentose early in the season, becoming
bright red-brown and lustrous, and armed with occasional stout straight
or curved bright chestnut-brown spines 1-1/2'--2' long.

Distribution. Banks of streams in the Appalachian region from Virginia
to northern Georgia and eastern Tennessee; in southern Missouri (Taney
County, _C. mollita_).


                      142. Crataegus Gaultii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 494]

Leaves elliptic to suborbicular, acute or rounded at apex,
concave-cuneate or rounded at the entire base, coarsely doubly serrate
above with straight glandular teeth, and occasionally divided above the
middle into short acute lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open
at the end of May and then very thin, yellow-green and sparingly villose
above, pale and slightly pubescent below, and at maturity thin and firm
in texture, glabrous, dark dull green on the upper surface, pale on the
lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 2'--2-3/4' wide, with a stout yellow
midrib deeply impressed above, and 6 or 7 pairs of primary veins
extending obliquely to the point of the lobes; petioles stout,
wing-margined to below the middle, villose on the upper side early in
the season with matted white hairs, becoming nearly glabrous, 1/2'--1'
in length. Flowers 5/8' in diameter, on long slender slightly villose
pedicels, in broad many-flowered hairy corymbs, their bracts and
bractlets linear, acuminate, glandular, mostly persistent until the
flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes broad,
acuminate, coarsely glandular-serrate, glabrous on the outer, villose on
the inner surface; stamens 18--20; anthers pale pink; styles 2 or 3.
Fruit ripening from the middle to the end of September, on slender
slightly hairy pedicels, in few-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose to
short-oblong, 1/2'--5/8' long; calyx prominent, with spreading appressed
coarsely serrate lobes; flesh thick, yellow, soft and juicy; nutlets 2
or 3, rounded at the ends, about 3/16' long and nearly as wide, the
ventral cavities long, deep, and narrow.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk often 10' in diameter and 6 deg.--7 deg.
long, spreading branches forming a broad round-topped head, and slender
slightly zigzag glabrous light red-brown lustrous branchlets, unarmed,
or armed with occasional straight slender dark purple shining spines
1-1/4'--1-3/4' long.

Distribution. Open pastures, Milton Township and Gleneilyn, Du Page
County, and Mokena, Will County, northeastern Illinois.


                       143. Crataegus vegeta Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 495]

Leaves elliptic, acuminate, gradually narrowed and concave-cuneate at
the entire base, finely often doubly serrate above, with straight
glandular teeth, and slightly divided above the middle into numerous
short acute lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at the end
of May and then membranaceous, dark yellow-green and roughened above by
short rigid pale hairs and densely pubescent below, and at maturity thin
and firm in texture, dark dull green and scabrate on the upper surface,
pale and pubescent on the lower surface on the slender midrib, and 5 or
6 pairs of thin primary veins arching obliquely to the point of the
lobes, 3'--4' long, and 1-3/4'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender, broadly
wing-margined at apex, villose on the upper side early in the season,
becoming glabrous and rose color in the autumn, 1/2'--3/4' long. Flowers
5/8'--3/4' in diameter, on long slender villose pedicels, in usually
10--12-flowered hairy corymbs, with linear to linear-obovate acute
glandular bracts and bractlets becoming reddish and mostly persistent
until after the flowers open; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, villose, the
lobes slender, acuminate, glandular-serrate, villose; stamens 20;
anthers small, light pink or red; styles 2 or 3, usually 3. Fruit
ripening late in September, on slender elongated rigid slightly villose
pedicels, in few-fruited erect clusters, subglobose, scarlet, lustrous,
marked by small pale dots, about 3/8' in diameter; calyx prominent, with
a short tube and spreading reflexed serrate lobes; flesh thin, yellow,
dry and mealy; nutlets 2 or 3, 1/4' long and nearly as broad, full and
rounded at the ends, the ventral cavities broad and deep.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk sometimes 8' in
diameter, stout wide-spreading branches forming a symmetrical
round-topped head, and very slender nearly straight branchlets, light
orange-green when they first appear, becoming bright red-brown and
lustrous at the end of their first season and darker the following year,
and unarmed, or sparingly armed with slender nearly straight purple
shining spines about 4' long.

Distribution. Oak-woods in moist rich soil near the banks of the Calumet
River, Calumet, Cook County, Illinois.


                      144. Crataegus Deweyana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 496]

Leaves ovate, acuminate or abruptly long-pointed at apex, abruptly
narrowed and concave-cuneate at the entire often unsymmetric base,
coarsely doubly serrate above with straight or incurved gland-tipped
teeth, and slightly divided above the middle into several pairs of small
acuminate spreading lobes, about one third grown when the flowers open
during the last week of May and then membranaceous, dark yellow-green,
and covered above with short lustrous white hairs, and light
yellow-green and glabrous below, and at maturity thin, yellow-green and
scabrate on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 3'--4' long,
and 2'--2-3/4' wide, with a stout midrib deeply impressed on the upper
side, and 6 or 7 pairs of thin primary veins arching to the point of the
lobes; petioles stout, wing-margined at apex, deeply grooved, sparingly
villose on the upper side, soon glabrous, glandular with occasional
minute dark glands, usually dull orange color in the autumn, 3/4'--1' in
length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots more deeply lobed and more
coarsely serrate, subcoriaceous, often 4' long and 3-1/2' wide, and
gradually narrowed into stout broad-winged coarsely glandular petioles,
their stipules foliaceous, stipitate, lunate, acutely lobed,
glandular-serrate with minute dark red glands, sometimes 1/2' long,
persistent through the season. Flowers about 1/2' in diameter, on
slender hairy pedicels, in wide lax slightly villose corymbs; calyx-tube
narrowly obconic, villose at base, glabrous above, the lobes slender,
elongated, acuminate, finely glandular-serrate usually only above the
middle, dark green and glabrous on the outer surface, villose on the
inner surface; stamens 7--10, usually 10; anthers small, dark rose
color; styles 2 or 3, usually 2. Fruit ripening from the first to the
middle of October and falling a few weeks later, on long slender
puberulous pedicels, in wide many-fruited drooping clusters, subglobose
to short-oblong, rounded at the ends, scarlet, lustrous, marked by
occasional large pale dots, 1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, with
elongated glandular-serrate lobes dark red on the upper side near the
base, usually erect and incurved, mostly persistent on the ripe fruit;
flesh when fully ripe thick, yellow and sweet; nutlets usually 2,
occasionally 3, about 3/16' long and 1/8' wide, rounded at the ends,
rounded and conspicuously ridged on the back, the ventral cavities broad
and shallow.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk sometimes 10' in diameter,
covered with light gray bark becoming rough and scaly near the base,
slender branches, the lower horizontal and wide-spreading, the upper
ascending and forming a wide open irregular head, and stout glabrous
branchlets dark orange-brown when they first appear, deep red-brown and
lustrous on the upper, gray-brown and lustrous on the lower side during
their first winter, becoming gray slightly tinged with red the following
year, and armed with numerous stout curved chestnut-brown or purple
spines 1-1/2'--2' long and occasionally persistent on old stems.

Distribution. Western and central New York; Hagaman swamp near
Rochester, and Rush, Monroe County, Portage, Livingston County, Castile
and Silver Springs, Wyoming County, and near Ithaca, Thompkins County;
not common.


                     145. Crataegus succulenta Link.

[Illustration: Fig. 497]

Leaves elliptic, acute or acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed from
near the middle to the entire base, coarsely and usually doubly serrate
above with spreading glandular teeth, and divided above the middle into
numerous short acute lobes, nearly fully grown when the flowers open at
the end of May or early in June and then membranaceous, covered above
with soft pale hairs, and puberulous or rarely nearly glabrous below,
and at maturity coriaceous, dark green, glabrous and somewhat lustrous
above, pale yellow-green and mostly puberulous below on the stout yellow
midrib, and 4--7 pairs of slender veins extending obliquely to the point
of the lobes and deeply impressed on the upper side, usually 2'--2-1/2'
long and 1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles stout, more or less winged above,
frequently bright red after midsummer, generally about 1/2' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots occasionally ovate, and often
2-1/2' long and 3' wide. Flowers about 2/3' in diameter, on long slender
hairy pedicels, in broad lax villose corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly
obconic, villose or glabrous, the lobes broad, acute, laciniate,
glandular with bright red glands, and generally villose; stamens usually
20, sometimes 15; anthers small, rose color; styles 2 or 3, surrounded
at base by a ring of pale hairs. Fruit beginning to ripen about the
middle of September and sometimes remaining on the branches until the
end of October, on slender elongated pedicels, in broad loose
many-fruited drooping clusters, globose, bright scarlet, marked by large
pale dots, 1/2'--2/3' in diameter; calyx prominent, with a broad shallow
depression, and much enlarged coarsely serrate closely appressed
persistent lobes; flesh thick, yellow, becoming juicy, sweet and pulpy;
nutlets 2 or 3, 1/3' long, 1/4' broad, prominently ridged on the back,
the ventral cavities wide and deep.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a short trunk 5'--6' in diameter,
covered with dark red-brown scaly bark, stout ascending branches forming
a broad irregular head, and stout more or less zigzag glabrous dark
orange-brown lustrous branchlets becoming dull gray-brown in their
second season and ultimately ashy gray, and armed with numerous stout
slightly curved bright chestnut-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2-1/2'
long; or usually shrubby and much smaller, and often flowering when only
a few feet high.

Distribution. Coast of northeastern Massachusetts; southwestern Vermont;
eastern and western New York; near London, Ontario; widely distributed
in Pennsylvania; northeastern Illinois.


                      146. Crataegus gemmosa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 498]

Leaves broad-oval or rarely broad-obovate, gradually narrowed and
cuneate or occasionally rounded at the entire base, sharply and usually
doubly serrate from below the middle with straight glandular teeth, and
often slightly lobed toward the acute or acuminate apex with short acute
lobes, dark red and villose as they unfold, nearly fully grown when the
flowers open from the middle to the end of May and then membranaceous,
light yellow-green, nearly glabrous above and pale and villose below,
and at maturity thick and firm in texture, very dark dull green on the
upper surface, pale on the lower surface and pubescent on the under side
of the stout yellow midrib deeply impressed and occasionally puberulous
above, and on the 4 or 5 pairs of slender primary veins extending
obliquely to the end of the leaf, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--2' wide;
petioles stout, villose or pubescent, more or less winged above,
glandular while young with minute bright red caducous glands, usually
pink in the autumn, 1/4'--1/2' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous
shoots more coarsely serrate, frequently divided into short acute
lateral lobes, and often 4' long and 3' wide, with a rose-colored midrib
and stout spreading primary veins. Flowers 1/2'--3/4' in diameter, on
slender hairy pedicels, in broad open compound villose many-flowered
corymbs, with lanceolate or oblanceolate acuminate glandular-serrate
conspicuous bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, more or
less villose with matted pale hairs, or nearly glabrous, the lobes
lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous or villose on the outer surface, villose
on the inner surface, coarsely glandular-serrate with bright red glands;
stamens 20; anthers small, rose color; styles 2 or 3, surrounded at the
base by a narrow ring of pale tomentum. Fruit ripening early in October
and becoming very succulent just before falling, on long slender
pedicels, in drooping many-fruited glabrous or puberulous clusters,
subglobose to short-oblong, scarlet, lustrous, 1/2' in diameter; calyx
prominent, with an elongated narrow tube, and reflexed villose lobes
bright red toward the base on the upper side; flesh thick, bright
yellow, sweet and succulent; nutlets usually 3, or 2, 1/4' long, broad
and flat, full and rounded at the ends, ridged on the back with a
prominent rounded ridge, the ventral cavities broad and deep.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 10'--12' in diameter,
covered with dark brown scaly bark, stout spreading or ascending
branches forming a broad rather open symmetrical head, stout zigzag
glabrous red-brown or gray-brown lustrous branchlets armed with straight
or slightly curved thick chestnut-brown spines usually about 2' long,
and winter-buds sometimes 1/4' in diameter.

Distribution. Rich forest glades, or the margins of woods, usually in
low rich soil; eastern New York, near Albany, Albany County; western New
York (Munroe and Livingston Counties); southern Ontario (La Salle on the
Niagara River and near London); northwestern Ohio (Oak Harbor, Ottawa
County); southern Michigan; common; Illinois (Calumet, Cook County, and
Manley, Fulton County); southern Wisconsin (Waukesha, Waukesha County
and near Madison, Dane County).


                    147. Crataegus illinoiensis Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 499]

Leaves broad-obovate to oval, rounded or rarely acute at the wide apex,
broad-cuneate and entire at the base, coarsely and often doubly serrate
above, with straight or incurved teeth tipped with minute deciduous
glands, and sometimes slightly and irregularly divided toward the apex
into short acute lobes, when they unfold covered below with a thick coat
of hoary tomentum and pilose above, and when the flowers open about the
20th of May membranaceous, yellow-green, covered above with short pale
hairs and pubescent below, and at maturity thick and firm in texture,
dark green and glabrous on the upper surface, pale and pubescent on the
lower surface, particularly on the stout midrib and 4--6 pairs of
primary veins deeply impressed on the upper side, 2'--2-1/2' long, and
1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles stout, slightly winged toward the apex,
generally bright red below the middle after midsummer, and usually
1/2'--2/3' in length; leaves at the end of vigorous shoots usually
elliptic, acute or acuminate, more coarsely dentate and more often
lobed, sometimes decurrent nearly to the base of the stout petiole,
3'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3' wide. Flowers about 5/8' in diameter, on
slender slightly hairy pedicels, in broad compact villose corymbs;
calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated with long matted pale hairs, the
lobes broad, acuminate, very coarsely glandular-serrate with large
stipitate bright red glands, glabrous on the outer surface except at the
base, villose on the inner surface; stamens 10; anthers rose color;
styles 2 or usually 3. Fruit ripening early in October and persistent on
the branches until after the beginning of winter, on stout bright red
pedicels, in few-fruited drooping villose clusters, globose, scarlet,
lustrous, marked by occasional dark dots, more or less villose at the
ends, 1/2' in diameter; calyx prominent, with a short villose tube, and
spreading lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, sparingly
glandular-serrate or nearly entire, villose, mostly deciduous before the
fruit ripens; flesh thin, yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 2 or 3, 1/4'
long, broad and thick, rounded at the ends, the ventral cavities broad
and deep.

A tree, rarely more than 18 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--5' in diameter,
covered with thin close bark broken on the surface into pale plate-like
scales, and divided into several long erect and spreading slender
branches forming a wide open-topped head, and stout somewhat zigzag
branchlets covered at first with scattered pale caducous hairs, bright
orange-brown and lustrous during their first season, becoming dark brown
in their second year and ultimately ashy gray, and armed with numerous
slender straight or curved bright chestnut-brown shining spines
1-1/2'--3' long.

Distribution. Open woods along the gravelly banks of small streams in
Stark and Peoria Counties, Illinois; not common.


                    148. Crataegus integriloba Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 500]

Leaves broad-obovate, oval or rhombic, acute, gradually or abruptly
narrowed below the middle, entire at the cuneate base, coarsely doubly
serrate above with spreading glandular teeth, and irregularly divided
into numerous short acute or acuminate lobes, coated in early spring
with soft pale caducous hairs, nearly fully grown when the flowers open
during the first week in June, and at maturity glabrous, thin and firm
in texture, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale
yellow-green on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide,
with a slender midrib often dark red at the base, and 4--6 pairs of
slender primary veins deeply impressed on the upper side; petioles
stout, more or less broadly winged toward the apex, at first puberulous,
soon glabrous, often red on the lower side, 1/3'--3/4' in length; leaves
at the end of vigorous shoots more coarsely serrate, more deeply lobed,
often 3' long and 2-1/2' wide, with stout broadly winged petioles.
Flowers 3/4' in diameter, on long slender villose pedicels, in broad
open crowded villose corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, coated toward
the base with long matted white hairs and glabrous above, the lobes
linear-lanceolate, elongated, entire or very rarely furnished with
occasional caducous glands; stamens 10; anthers large, rose color;
styles 2 or 3, surrounded at base by a narrow ring of snow-white hairs.
Fruit ripening at the end of September or early in October, on short
stout pedicels, in drooping or erect many-fruited slightly villose
clusters, subglobose, bright scarlet, lustrous, marked by large pale
dots, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; calyx enlarged, prominent, with elongated
entire lobes, dark red on the upper side at base, much reflexed and
persistent; flesh thin, yellow, sweet and pulpy; nutlets 2 or 3, about
1/4' long, thick and broad, rounded at the narrow ends, the ventral
cavities broad and deep.

A tree, occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a straight erect trunk 6'--8'
in diameter, wide-spreading or erect branches forming an open irregular
head, and stout nearly straight or occasionally slightly zigzag glabrous
branchlets, lustrous and red-brown or orange-brown during their first
summer and ultimately dull ashy gray, and armed with stout nearly
straight bright chestnut-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and
often pointed toward the base of the branch.

Distribution. Low limestone ridges, Province of Quebec, south of the St.
Lawrence River near the Lachine Rapids, and at Caughnawaga, Rockfield,
and Adirondack Junction.


                   149. Crataegus macracantha Koehne.

[Illustration: Fig. 501]

Leaves broad-obovate to elliptic or oval, acute or rounded and sometimes
short-pointed at apex, gradually or abruptly narrowed and cuneate at the
entire base, coarsely and often doubly serrate above with straight or
incurved gland-tipped teeth, and usually divided above the middle into
numerous short acute or acuminate lobes, when they unfold often bright
red and coated on the upper surface with soft pale hairs, more than half
grown when the flowers open late in May and then dull yellow-green,
nearly glabrous on the upper surface and pale and puberulous on the
lower surface, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green and glabrous
above, frequently puberulous below on the midrib, and on the 4--6 pairs
of slender primary veins extending obliquely to the point of the lobes
and deeply impressed on the upper side, usually 2'--2-1/2' long and
1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles stout, more or less winged above, frequently
bright red after midsummer and usually about 1/2' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots often broad and rounded at base, coarsely
dentate, 3'--4' long, and 2-1/2'--3' wide. Flowers about 3/4' in
diameter, on long slender hairy pedicels, in broad more or less villose
corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, more or less villose or nearly
glabrous, the lobes long, narrow, acuminate, glandular with minute dark
glands, glabrous on the outer surface, slightly villose on the inner
surface; stamens usually 10, occasionally 8--12; anthers pale yellow;
styles 2--3, surrounded at the base by a broad ring of hoary tomentum.
Fruit ripening at the end of September and often remaining on the
branches for several weeks longer, on erect slender pedicels, in broad
open many-fruited usually slightly villose clusters, globose, often
hairy at the ends until nearly ripe, crimson, very lustrous, 1/4'--1/3'
in diameter; calyx large and conspicuous, the lobes coarsely serrate,
reflexed and persistent; flesh thin, dark yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets
2 or 3, about 1/4' long and wide, broad and rounded at the ends, the
ventral cavities deep and irregular.

A tree, occasionally 15 deg. high, with a tall stem 5'--6' in diameter,
covered with pale close bark, stout wide-spreading branches forming an
open rather irregular head, and stout slightly zigzag glabrous light
chestnut-brown very lustrous branchlets, becoming dull reddish brown in
their second year, and armed with numerous slender usually curved very
sharp bright chestnut-brown shining spines 2-1/2'--4' long.

Distribution. Western Vermont (near Middlebury, Addison County); central
and western New York; southern Ontario (near Toronto); northeastern
Illinois (Barrington County); and eastern Pennsylvania (Bucks and
Northampton Counties).




                           XIX. DOUGLASIANAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves subcoriaceous, lustrous above, obovate to broad-ovate, coarsely
        serrate, usually lobed; stamens 5--20, normally 10; spines
        numerous, short and stout.
                                                      150. C. Douglasii.
  Leaves thinner, dull bluish green, lanceolate to oblong-obovate or
        elliptic, acute at the ends, finely serrate, not lobed; stamens
        10--20; spines few, long and slender or wanting.
                                                      151. C. rivularis.


                     150. Crataegus Douglasii Lindl.

[Illustration: Fig. 502]

Leaves broad-obovate to ovate, gradually narrowed below to the cuneate
entire base, coarsely serrate above with minute glandular teeth, and
often incisely lobed toward the acute apex, nearly fully grown and
coated above and on the midrib and veins below with short pale hairs
when the flowers open in May, and at maturity thin, glabrous, dark green
and lustrous above, paler below, 1'--2' long, and 1/2'--1-1/2' wide;
petioles slender, wing-margined above, sparingly glandular, villose
early in the season, becoming glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length; leaves at
the end of vigorous shoots broad-obovate, incisely lobed at the broad
apex, often deeply divided into lateral lobes, or occasionally 3-lobed,
3'--4' long, and 2'--3' wide. Flowers 1/2'--7/12' in diameter, on long
slender glabrous pedicels, in broad glabrous corymbs, with linear
caducous bracts and bractlets; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous, the
lobes gradually narrowed from a broad base, entire or occasionally
minutely dentate, acute and bright red at apex, glabrous on the outer
surface, villose on the inner surface; stamens 10 or rarely 5 by
abortion; anthers small, pale rose color; styles 2--5, surrounded at
base by tufts of long pale hairs. Fruit ripening and falling in August
and September, on slender pedicels, in compact, many-fruited drooping
clusters, short-oblong, truncate at apex, black and lustrous, very
rarely chestnut-colored (f. _badia_ Sarg.), about 1/2' long; calyx
persistent; flesh thick, sweet and succulent, light yellow; nutlets
usually 5, about 1/4' long, narrowed at base, broad and rounded at apex,
ridged on the back with a narrow ridge, the ventral cavities irregular,
small and shallow.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a long trunk 18'--20' in diameter, stout
branches spreading and ascending and forming a compact round-topped
head, and slender rigid glabrous bright red or orange-red lustrous
branchlets unarmed, or armed with straight or slightly curved blunt or
rarely acute bright red ultimately ashy gray spines 1/3'--1' long; often
shrubby and spreading into wide thickets.

Distribution. Banks of mountain streams; valley of the Parsnip River,
British Columbia, through Washington and Oregon to the valley of the
Pitt River, California, and eastward in the United States through the
northern Rocky Mountain region to the Bighorn Mountains, Wyoming;
passing into the var. _Suksdorfii_ Sarg. differing in its 20 stamens,
fruit not more than 1/3' in diameter, usually in few-fruited clusters
and ripening from the 1st of July to the middle of August. A shrub with
numerous stems occasionally 25 deg. high; banks of the Columbia River and
borders of bottom-lands, western Klickitat County, Washington.


                     151. Crataegus rivularis Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 503]

Leaves lanceolate to narrowly oblong-obovate or elliptic, acute,
acuminate or abruptly acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed and
concave-cuneate at the long entire base, and very finely crenately
serrate above with glandular teeth, when they unfold tinged with red,
villose above and coated below with matted pale hairs, more than half
grown when the flowers open late in May and then hairy on the midrib and
veins above and pale and glabrous below, and at maturity thin, dull
bluish green and smooth on the upper surface, pale yellow-green on the
lower surface, about 2' long and 3/4' wide, with a slender yellow midrib
and 3 or 4 pairs of thin obscure primary veins; petioles slender,
slightly winged at apex, at first villose, becoming glabrous and
rose-colored below the middle, and about 1/2' in length; leaves at the
end of vigorous shoots often rhombic, coarsely serrate, often slightly
incisely lobed, coriaceous, 3' long, and 2' wide, with a stout broadly
winged petiole. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, on long slender pedicels, in
rather compact glabrous corymbs; calyx-tube broadly obconic, glabrous,
the lobes linear, entire or glandular with minute caducous glands,
glabrous on the outer surface, sparingly villose on the inner surface,
often tinged with red; stamens 10--20; anthers pale rose color. Fruit
ripening in September, on long pedicels, in drooping few-fruited
clusters, short-oblong, full and rounded at the ends, dark crimson and
marked by many large white dots when fully grown, becoming black and
lustrous at maturity, 1/3'--1/2' long; calyx slightly enlarged,
persistent, with elongated closely appressed entire lobes slightly
villose and dark red on the upper side below the middle; flesh thin,
yellow, dry and mealy; nutlets 3--5, 1/4' long, narrowed and rounded at
the ends, slightly ridged on the back, the ventral cavities broad and
shallow.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg. high, with a slender trunk covered with dark
brown scaly bark, erect branches forming a narrow rather open head, and
slender bright red-brown lustrous branchlets marked by numerous pale
lenticels, and unarmed or armed with straight slender spines usually
about 1' long.

Distribution. Banks of mountain streams, often forming thickets;
southeastern Idaho, (Pocatello and Inkom, Bannock County); northeastern
Nevada (Lee, Elk County) to southwestern Wyoming, eastern Utah,
southwestern Colorado, and northern New Mexico.




                              XX. ANOMALAE.


                 CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Stamens 5--15; corymbs glabrous; leaves scabrate above.
                                                   152. C. scabrida (A).
  Stamens 20; corymbs villose; leaves glabrous above.
                                                    153. C. virilis (A).


                      152. Crataegus scabrida Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 504]

Leaves oval to obovate, acuminate, gradually narrowed from near the
middle to the acuminate base, irregularly glandular-serrate nearly to
the base, and divided above into numerous short spreading lobes coated
above when the flowers open at the end of May with short pale hairs, and
at maturity thick and firm, dark green and scabrate on the upper
surface, pale yellow-green and glabrous on the lower surface, 2'--3'
long, and 1-1/2'--2' wide; petioles slender, occasionally glandular,
often slightly winged toward the apex, 1/2'--1-1/4' in length. Flowers
3/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels, in broad glabrous
corymbs; calyx narrowly obconic, glabrous, the lobes linear-lanceolate,
long-acuminate, finely glandular-serrate; stamens 5--15; anthers small,
pale yellow; styles 3, surrounded at base by a thick tuft of pale
tomentum. Fruit in loose drooping clusters, subglobose, scarlet, 1/2' in
diameter, only the base of the reflexed calyx-lobes persistent on the
ripe fruit; flesh yellow, thick, dry and mealy; nutlets 3, rounded and
prominently ridged on the back, 1/3' long, the ventral depression wide,
shallow, irregular, often obscure.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 6' to 8' in diameter, spreading
horizontal branches forming a broad round-topped head, and stout
slightly zigzag glabrous branchlets marked by oblong pale lenticels,
dark chestnut-brown during their first season, becoming ashy gray during
their second year, and armed with slender straight or curved spines
1-1/2'--2' in length; or often a tall intricately branched shrub.

Distribution. Valley of the St. Lawrence River, near Montreal, Province
of Quebec to the neighborhood of Toronto, southern Ontario; northern and
western Vermont; southern New Hampshire (slopes of Little Monadnock
Mountain); western Massachusetts, and western New York.


                      153. Crataegus virilis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 505]

Leaves oblong-obovate, acuminate or rounded and short-pointed at apex,
concave-cuneate and gradually narrowed to the acute entire base, finely
doubly serrate above with straight glandular teeth, and slightly divided
above the middle into 3 or 4 pairs of small acuminate lobes, nearly
fully grown when the flowers open during the first week of June and then
thin, yellow-green, smooth and slightly hairy above and pale bluish
green and covered below with short white hairs most abundant on the
stout yellow midrib and slender primary veins, and at maturity thin,
glabrous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, slightly villose
on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3' long, and 1-3/4'--2' wide; petioles
stout, wing-margined often to below the middle, slightly villose on the
upper side early in the season, soon glabrous, 3/5'--1' in length;
leaves at the end of vigorous shoots subcoriaceous, oval to rhombic,
acuminate, often long-pointed, 3'--4' long, and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a
rose-colored midrib and stout broadly winged petiole. Flowers about 1/2'
in diameter, on slender villose pedicels, in broad lax hairy usually
15--18-flowered corymbs; calyx-tube narrowly obconic, coated with long
matted pale hairs, the lobes slender, acuminate, irregularly
glandular-serrate near the middle, glabrous on the outer, slightly
villose on the inner surface, reflexed after anthesis; stamens 20,
anthers slightly tinged with pink, styles 4 or 5. Fruit ripening from
the middle to the end of September, on puberulous reddish pedicels, in
erect or spreading few-fruited clusters, short-oblong to ovoid, scarlet,
lustrous, pubescent especially near the rounded ends, marked by small
dark dots, 2/5'--1/2' long, and about 1-1/3' in diameter; calyx
prominent, with long slender spreading and reflexed coarsely serrate
usually persistent lobes villose on the upper surface; flesh thin,
yellow, rather dry; nutlets 4 or 5, acute at the ends, prominently
ridged on the back with a broad deeply grooved ridge, generally
furnished with obscure ventral depressions, about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a short trunk frequently 1 deg. in
diameter, covered with dark scaly bark, stout ascending branches forming
a narrow open irregular head, and slender nearly straight glabrous
branchlets dark orange-green when they first appear, becoming light
chestnut-brown, lustrous and marked by pale lenticels in their first
season, and armed with stout straight or slightly curved bright
chestnut-brown shining spines 1-1/2'--2' in length, long persistent and
becoming branched on old stems.

Distribution. Fence rows, southwest of the village of Weston, near
Toronto, Ontario.




                           8. COWANIA D. Don.


Trees or shrubs with scaly bark and rigid terete branchlets. Leaves
alternate, simple, lobed or rarely linear, subcoriaceous,
straight-veined, glandular-dotted on the upper surface, tardily
deciduous or persistent, short-petiolate; stipules adnate to the base of
the petiole. Flowers solitary at the end of short lateral branches;
calyx-tube turbinate, persistent, the limb 5-lobed, deciduous, the lobes
imbricated in the bud; disk thin, adnate to the tube of the calyx, its
margins thickened; petals 5, obovate, spreading, larger than the
calyx-lobes; stamens numerous, inserted in two rows in the mouth of the
calyx-tube, incurved, persistent; anthers peltate, eglandular, 2-celled,
opening longitudinally; carpels 5--12, inserted in the bottom of the
calyx-tube, free, villose, 1-celled; style short, villose, stigma
simple, filiform; ovule solitary, ascending; raphe linear, dorsal;
micropyle inferior. Fruit composed of 5--12 1-celled ellipsoidal akenes,
included in the tube of the calyx, and tipped with the much elongated
persistent styles covered with long white hairs; seed filling the cavity
of the carpel, linear-obovoid, erect; hilum basal, minute; testa
membranaceous; albumen thin; cotyledons oblong, radicle inferior.

Cowania is confined to the dry interior region of the United States and
Mexico. Three species can be distinguished; of these the type of the
genus, _Cowania mexicana_ D. Don, sometimes attains the size and habit
of a small tree. The genus was named in honor of James Cowan (died
1823), an English merchant who traveled in Mexico and Peru and sent
plants to England.


                      1. Cowania mexicana D. Don.

                      _Cowania Stansburiana_ Torr.
                       _Cowania Davidsonii_ Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 506]

Leaves short-petioled, cuneate, revolute on the margins, 3 or rarely
5-lobed above the middle, the lobes linear, entire or slightly divided,
coriaceous, dark green above, hoary-tomentose below, 1/3'--1/2' long,
tardily deciduous or persistent until spring; leaves on vigorous shoots
and on flower-bearing branchlets occasionally linear and entire;
stipules ciliate on the margins, united below and adnate to the short
persistent petiole, free above the middle and acute at apex, persistent
and becoming woody on the flower-bearing branchlets. Flowers appearing
in early spring, 1' in diameter; calyx-tube more or less tomentose and
covered with rigid glandular hairs, the lobes rounded at apex,
hoary-tomentose; petals broad-obovate, rounded and emarginate at apex,
cuneate and short-stipitate below, pale yellow or nearly white. Fruit
ripening in October, about 1/4' long and as long as the calyx-tube, the
elongated style often 2' in length.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, short spreading branches forming a narrow head, and slender
rigid branchlets red and glandular during their first season, becoming
dark reddish brown and glabrous the following year. Bark of the trunk
pale gray, separating freely into long narrow thin loosely attached
plates; more often a shrub with spreading stems often only a few feet
tall.

Distribution. Dry rocky slopes and mesas, usually at altitudes between
6000 deg. and 8000 deg.; northern Utah and central Nevada, through Arizona and
western New Mexico to northern Mexico; common and probably of its
largest size near the southern rim of the Grand Canyon, and on the lower
slopes of the San Francisco Mountains, Arizona.




               9. CERCOCARPUS H. B. K. Mountain Mahogany.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, rigid terete branches, short lateral
spur-like branchlets conspicuously roughened for many years by the
crowded narrow horizontal scars of fallen leaves, minute buds, the
scales of the inner rows accrescent on the growing shoots and often
colored. Leaves alternate, simple, entire or serrate, coriaceous,
straight-veined, short-petiolate, persistent; stipules minute, adnate to
the base of the petiole, deciduous. Flowers axillary on the short
lateral branchlets, sessile or short-pedicellate, solitary or fascicled,
the pedicels sometimes lengthening before the fruit ripens; calyx-tube
long, cylindric, abruptly expanded at apex into a cup-shaped, 5-lobed
deciduous limb, the lobes imbricated in the bud; disk thin, slightly
glandular, adnate to the tube of the calyx; petals 0; stamens 15--30, in
2 or 3 rows; filaments incurved in the bud, free, short, terete; anthers
oblong, pubescent or tomentose, distinct and united by a broad
connective; ovary composed of a single carpel inserted in the bottom and
included in the tube of the calyx, acute, terete, smooth, striate or
sulcate, sericeous, rarely bicarpellate; style terminal, filiform,
villose or glabrate, crowned with a minute obtuse stigma; ovule
solitary, subbasilar, ascending; raphe dorsal; micropyle inferior. Fruit
a linear-oblong coriaceous slightly ridged angled or sulcate akene,
included in the persistent tube of the spindle-shaped calyx more or less
deeply cleft at the apex, and tipped with the elongated persistent style
clothed with long white hairs. Seed solitary, linear, acute, erect;
hilum conspicuous lateral above the oblique base; testa membranaceous;
embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons ovate-oblong,
elongated, fleshy; radicle inferior.

Cercocarpus is confined to the dry interior and mountainous regions of
North America. Twenty-one species, often of doubtful value, have been
distinguished; seventeen are credited to the territory of the United
States and the others to Mexico. The heavy hard brittle wood of all the
species makes valuable fuel and is occasionally used in the manufacture
of small articles for domestic and industrial use.

The generic name, from {kerkos} and {karpos}, refers to the peculiar
long-tailed fruit.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers usually in many-flowered clusters.
    Leaves coarsely serrate above the middle.
      Leaves oval to semiorbicular or obovate, hoary-tomentose below,
            sinuate-dentate; flowers short-pedicellate.
                                                          1. C. Traskiae.
      Leaves oval to slightly obovate, green and glabrous below,
            denticulate with broad apiculate teeth; flowers
            long-pedicellate.
                                                       2. C. alnifolius.
    Leaves finely serrate above the middle, obovate to oval, pale and
          villose below; flowers short-pedicellate.
                                                       3. C. betuloides.
  Flowers solitary or rarely in 2 or 3-flowered clusters, nearly
        sessile.
    Leaves narrow-lanceolate, lance-elliptic or oblanceolate, acute at
          the ends, entire, pale or rufous below.
                                                       4. C. ledifolius.
    Leaves oblong-obovate to narrow-elliptic, entire or slightly dentate
          below the apex, villose-pubescent.
                                                    5. C. paucidentatus.


                     1. Cercocarpus Traskiae Eastw.

[Illustration: Fig. 507]

Leaves oval to semiorbicular or obovate, rounded or acute at apex,
cuneate, rounded or occasionally somewhat cordate at the narrow base,
revolute on the margins, entire below, coarsely sinuate-dentate above
the middle with slender teeth tipped with minute dark glands, when they
unfold covered above with soft pale hairs and below with thick hoary
tomentum, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green, lustrous and villose
or nearly glabrous on the upper surface, pale-tomentose on the lower
surface, 1-1/2'--2' long, and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with prominent primary
veins running obliquely to the point of the teeth, and, like the stout
midrib, conspicuously impressed on the upper side; petioles stout,
hoary-tomentose, about 1/4' in length; stipules acuminate, scarious,
covered on the margins with long white hairs, 1/4' long. Flowers
appearing early in March, nearly sessile, in 1--5 usually 4 or
5-flowered clusters, hoary-tomentose, 1/2'--3/4' long; calyx broad,
glabrous on the inner surface; anthers tomentose. Fruit: mature calyx,
light reddish brown, villose-pubescent, deeply cleft at apex, 1/2' long;
akene slightly ridged on the back, 1/3' in length, covered with long
lustrous white hairs; style 1-1/2'--2' in length.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a trunk often inclining, usually
much contorted, 2'--10' in diameter and 6 deg.--8 deg. long, stout
wide-spreading branches, and stout branchlets, hoary-tomentose when they
first appear, marked by numerous small scattered lenticels, bright
reddish brown during two or three years, ultimately dark gray-brown and
conspicuously roughened by the enlarged ring-like leaf-scars. Bark light
gray, sometimes slightly broken by shallow fissures and marked by
irregular cream-colored blotches.

Distribution. Steep sides of a deep narrow arroyo on the south coast of
Santa Catalina Island, California.


                    2. Cercocarpus alnifolius Rydb.

          _Cercocarpus parvifolius_ Sarg., in part, not Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 508]

Leaves occasionally persistent until late in the spring, oval to
slightly obovate, rounded or rarely acute at apex, rounded or cuneate at
base, and coarsely serrate above the middle with broad apiculate teeth,
when they unfold covered above with soft white hairs and pale and
villose on the midrib and veins below, and at maturity thick, glabrous,
dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale and yellow-green on
the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long, and 1'--2' wide, with a stout
midrib and 6--7 pairs of slender prominent veins; petioles stout,
sparingly villose early in the season, soon glabrous, 1/3'--1/2' long;
stipules ovate, abruptly long-pointed, covered with silky white hairs.
Flowers on slender hairy pedicels 1/3'--1/2' long, in 2--15 usually 4 or
5-flowered clusters; calyx-tube villose, about 5/12' long, the limb
villose on the outer surface, 1/4' broad. Fruit: mature calyx-tube
many-nerved, deeply cleft at apex, villose-pubescent, dark
chestnut-brown, 1/3'--1/2' long; akene covered with long silky hairs;
style 2'--2-1/2' in length.

A tree, 12 deg.--20 deg. high, with one or two or three trunks, occasionally 8'
in diameter, small erect and spreading branches forming a narrow
round-topped head, and slender branchlets green and sparingly villose
when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous, and in their second year
chestnut-brown and lustrous and marked by minute pale lenticels. Bark
about 1/4' thick, dark reddish brown, fissured and divided into small
closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Hillsides, Descanso Canyon, about a mile and a half up the
coast west of Avalon, Santa Catalina Island, and on Santa Cruz Island,
California.


                    3. Cercocarpus betuloides Nutt.

           _Cercocarpus parvifolius_ var. _betuloides_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 509]

Leaves obovate to oval, acute or rounded at apex, cuneate at base,
finely serrate above the middle with straight or incurved glandular
teeth, dark green on the upper surface, pale and villose-pubescent or
tomentose sometimes becoming nearly glabrous on the lower surface,
1'--1-1/4' long, and 1/3'--1/2' wide, with a thin midrib, and 5--8 pairs
of slender primary veins more or less deeply impressed on the upper side
of the leaf; petioles densely villose, often becoming glabrous, about
1/4' in length; stipules scarious, acuminate. Flowers nearly sessile, in
1--3-flowered clusters; calyx-tube densely villose, about 1/3' long, the
limb turbinate, villose on the outer surface, glabrous on the inner
surface, 1/4' wide. Fruit on slender slightly villose pedicels
1/4'--1/3' in length; mature calyx-tube often slightly gibbous, deeply
cleft at apex, light chestnut-brown, sparingly villose, 1/12' in
diameter; akene covered with stiff spreading hairs; style 2'--3' in
length.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a single trunk, small ascending and
spreading branches forming an open irregular head, and slender red-brown
branchlets covered when they first appear with loose pubescence, soon
becoming glabrous; more often a tall or low shrub with several stems.
Bark smooth, separating into thin deciduous scales.

Distribution. Common and widely distributed over the California coast
ranges from Siskiyou County to the Santa Monica and San Bernardino
Mountains.


                    4. Cercocarpus ledifolius Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 510]

Leaves narrow-lanceolate, lance-elliptic or oblanceolate, acute at the
ends, apiculate, entire with thick revolute margins, coriaceous,
reticulate-veined, puberulous while young, and at maturity dark green,
lustrous and glabrous on the upper surface and pale or rufous and
tomentulose on the lower surface, resinous, 1/2'--1' long, and
1/3'--2/3' wide, with a broad thick midrib deeply grooved on the upper
side, and obscure primary veins; persistent until the end of their
second summer; petioles broad, about 1/8' in length; stipules nearly
triangular. Flowers solitary, sessile in the axils of the clustered
leaves, 2/3' long; calyx hoary-tomentose. Fruit: mature calyx-tube
almost 1/2' long, nearly cylindric, rather larger above than below,
10-ribbed, obscurely 10-angled, slightly cleft at apex, hoary-tomentose;
akene pointed at the ends, obscurely angled, chestnut-brown, 1/4' long,
covered with long pale or tawny hairs; style 2'--3' in length, generally
contracted by 1 or 2 partial corkscrew twists.

A resinous slightly aromatic tree, occasionally 40 deg. high, with a short
trunk sometimes 2-1/2 deg. in diameter, stout spreading usually contorted
branches forming a round compact head, and red-brown branchlets coated
at first with pale pubescence, soon becoming glabrous, frequently
covered with a glaucous bloom, silver gray or dark brown in their second
year, and for many years marked by the conspicuous elevated leaf-scars.
Bark red-brown, divided by deep broad furrows, and broken on the surface
into thin persistent plate-like scales, becoming on old trunks 1' thick.
Wood bright clear red or rich dark brown, with thin yellow sapwood of
15--20 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry gravelly arid slopes at altitudes of 5000 deg.--9000 deg.;
mountain ranges of the interior region of the United States from eastern
Washington and Oregon, to lower Green and Snake River valleys, Wyoming,
and through Utah and Nevada to southwestern Colorado; in California to
the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada, the northern slopes of the San
Bernardino Mountains, on Mt. Pinos, San Diego County, and on the
northern coast mountains (Snow Mountain to Scott Mountain, _Jepson_).


                  5. Cercocarpus paucidentatus Britt.

                      _Cercocarpus eximius_ Rydb.

[Illustration: Fig. 511]

Leaves oblong-obovate to narrow-elliptic, acute or rounded and often
apiculate at apex, gradually narrowed from above the middle and acute at
base, their margins revolute, often undulate, and entire or dentate
toward the apex with few small straight or incurved apiculate teeth,
when they unfold coated with hoary tomentum, and at maturity thick,
gray-green and covered with soft white hairs or nearly glabrous on the
upper surface, pale and tomentulose on the lower surface, 1/2'--1' long
and 1/4'--1/2' wide, with a thin prominent midrib and primary veins;
petioles stout, tomentose, ultimately pubescent or nearly glabrous,
1/16'--1/5' in length; stipules linear-lanceolate, tomentose, about half
as long as the petioles. Flowers appearing from March to May and often
again in August, nearly sessile, solitary, in pairs or rarely in
3-flowered clusters in the axils of the crowded leaves; calyx-tube
slender, 1/6'--1/4' long, thickly covered on the outer surface, like the
short rounded lobes, with long white hairs. Fruit: mature calyx-tube
short-stalked, light red-brown, villose, deeply cleft at apex, about
1/4' long; akene nearly terete, covered with long white hairs; style
1'--1-1/2' in length.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a long straight trunk sometimes 6'--8' in
diameter, erect rigid branches forming a narrow open or irregular head,
and slender bright red-brown lustrous branchlets marked irregularly by
large scattered pale lenticels, covered at first with a thick coat of
hoary tomentum, villose or pubescent for two or three years and
ultimately ashy gray or gray tinged with red, the spur-like lateral
branchlets much roughened by the ring-like scars of fallen leaves. Bark
about 1/8' thick, divided by shallow fissures and broken on the surface
into small light red-brown scales.

Distribution. In forests of Pines and Oaks usually at altitudes of about
5000 deg., on the dry ridges of the mountains of western Texas, and of
southern New Mexico and Arizona; in Arizona ranging northward to Oak
Creek Canyon, near Flagstaff, Coconino County (_P. Lowell_); and
southward over the mountains of northern Mexico.




                  10. PRUNUS B. & H. Plum and Cherry.


Trees or shrubs, with bitter astringent properties, slender branchlets,
marked by the usually small elevated horizontal leaf-scars with 2 or 3
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and small scaly buds, their scales
imbricated in many rows, those of the inner rows accrescent and often
colored. Leaves convolute or conduplicate in the bud, alternate, simple,
usually serrate, petiolate, deciduous or persistent; stipules free from
the petiole, usually lanceolate and glandular, often minute, early
deciduous. Flowers in axillary umbels or corymbs, or in terminal or
axillary racemes, appearing from separate buds before, with, or later
than the leaves, or on leafy branches; calyx 5-lobed, the lobes
imbricated in the bud; disk thin, adnate to the calyx-tube, glandular,
often colored; petals 5, white, deciduous; stamens usually 15--20,
inserted with the petals in 3 rows, those of the outer row 10, opposite
the petals, those of the next row alternate with them and with those of
the inner row, sometimes 30 in 3 rows; filaments filiform, free,
incurved in the bud; anthers oval, attached on the back; ovary inserted
in the bottom of the calyx-tube, 1-celled; style terminal, dilated at
apex into a truncate stigma; ovules 2, suspended; raphe ventral; the
micropyle superior. Fruit a 1-seeded drupe; flesh thick and pulpy or dry
and coriaceous; stone bony, smooth, rugose, or pitted, compressed,
indehiscent. Seed filling the cavity of the nut, suspended; seed-coat
thin, membranaceous, pale brown; cotyledons thick and fleshy; radicle
superior.

Prunus with about one hundred and twenty species is generally
distributed over the temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, and
is abundant in North America, eastern Asia, western and central Asia and
central Europe, ranging southward in the New World into tropical
America, and to southern Asia in the Old World. Of the twenty-five or
thirty species which occur in the United States, twenty-two are
arborescent in habit. Several of the species bear fruits which are
important articles of human food; many contain in the seeds and leaves
hydrocyanic acid, to which is due their peculiar odor, and the fruit of
some of the species is used to flavor cordials. The wood of Prunus is
close-grained, solid, and durable, and a few of the species are
important timber-trees.

_Prunus_ is the classical name of the Plum-tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers in sessile axillary umbels; fruit usually slightly 2-lobed by
        a ventral groove, generally more than 1/2' in diameter, red to
        nearly black or yellow, often covered with a glaucous bloom.
        Prunophora. Plums.
    Leaves convolute in the bud, their petioles usually without glands.
      Leaves broad-ovate to orbicular; fruit often 1' or more in
            diameter, red or yellow, nearly destitute of bloom.
                                                   1. P. subcordata (G).
      Leaves ovate-lanceolate to oblong or obovate; fruit 1/2' in
            diameter or less, blue, nearly black, red or yellow, covered
            with a glaucous bloom.
                                                    2. P. umbellata (C).
    Leaves conduplicate in the bud.
      Leaves dull dark green, usually abruptly pointed at apex.
        Fruit red, rarely yellow, or blue in one form of 2 and 5; leaves
              oblong to obovate; stone of the fruit compressed.
          Leaves crennate-serrate, their petioles biglandular;
                calyx-lobes glandular.
                                                        3. P. nigra (A).
          Leaves sharply serrate with slender often apiculate teeth.
            Leaves narrowed and usually cuneate at base.
              Leaves glabrous or villose on the midrib below; petioles
                    and calyx-lobes usually without glands.
                                              4. P. americana (A, C, F).
              Leaves pubescent below; fruit covered with a thick
                    glaucous bloom.
                Petioles eglandular or with a single gland near the
                      apex; pedicel of the flower glabrous; calyx-tube
                      puberulous; stone of the fruit rounded at base.
                                                    5. P. lanata (A, C).
                Petioles glandular near the apex with 1--3 prominent
                      glands; pedicel of the flower furnished near the
                      apex, like the glabrous calyx-tube, with long
                      white hairs; stone of the fruit pointed at base.
                                                   6. P. tenuifolia (C).
            Leaves usually broad and rounded at base, ovate to elliptic
                  or obovate, conspicuously reticulate-venulose;
                  petioles glandular.
                                                     7. P. mexicana (C).
        Fruit purple, covered with a glaucous bloom; leaves lanceolate
              to oblong-ovate; petioles and calyx-lobes without glands;
              stone of the fruit turgid.
                                               8. P. alleghaniensis (A).
      Leaves thin and lustrous, acute or acuminate, narrowed at base;
            petioles usually glandular; fruit red or yellow, the stone
            turgid.
        Calyx-lobes glandular.
          Leaves oblong-obovate to oblong-oval or rarely
                oblong-lanceolate.
                                                    9. P. hortulana (A).
          Leaves elliptic to lanceolate.
                                               10. P. Munsoniana (A, C).
        Calyx-lobes without glands; leaves lanceolate to
              oblong-lanceolate.
                                             11. P. angustifolia (A, C).
  Flowers in axillary umbels or corymbs; fruit bright red and lustrous,
        1/2' in diameter or less; leaves conduplicate in the bud.
        Mahaleb. Bird Cherries.
    Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acuminate or rarely acute at apex.
                                         12. P. pennsylvanica (A, B, F).
    Leaves oblong-obovate to oblanceolate, usually obtuse, occasionally
          acute at apex.
                                            13. P. emarginata (B, F, G).
  Flowers in terminal racemes on leafy branches of the year; fruit
        globose, red or rarely yellow; leaves conduplicate in the bud.
        Padus. Wild Cherries.
    Calyx-lobes deciduous from the fruit; leaves oblong-oval or obovate,
          abruptly pointed, cuneate, rounded or in one form cordate at
          base.
                                         14. P. virginiana (A, B, F, G).
    Calyx-lobes persistent on the fruit.
      Petioles biglandular near the apex.
        Leaves oblong to oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, glabrous, or
              rarely pubescent on the midrib below.
                                                 15. P. serotina (A, C).
        Leaves oval, broad-ovate or rarely obovate, acute, short-pointed
              or rounded at apex, villose-pubescent below.
                                                 16. P. alabamensis (C).
        Leaves obovate, oval or elliptic, short-pointed or rounded at
              apex, covered below with rufous hairs.
                                                   17. P. australis (C).
      Petioles without glands; leaves elliptic to ovate or slightly
            obovate, acute, rounded or abruptly short-pointed at apex,
            in one form rusty pubescent on the midrib below.
                                                18. P. virens (E, F, H).
  Flowers in racemes from the axils of persistent leaves of the previous
        year; fruit globose or slightly three-lobed; leaves conduplicate
        in the bud. Laurocerasus. Cherry Laurels.
    Calyx-lobes rounded, undulate on the margins; leaves
          oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, entire or rarely remotely
          spinulose-serrate; fruit black, the stone broad-ovoid, acute,
          cylindric.
                                                 19. P. caroliniana (C).
    Calyx-lobes acute, minute.
      Leaves elliptic to oblong-ovate, entire; fruit orange-brown, the
            stone subglobose.
                                                  20. P. myrtifolia (D).
      Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, rounded or emarginate at
            apex, conspicuously spinulose-dentate; fruit red, becoming
            purple or nearly black, the stone ovoid, short-pointed.
                                                  21. P. ilicifolia (G).
      Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acuminate or abruptly short-pointed at
            apex, usually entire; fruit dark purple or nearly black, the
            stone ovoid to obovoid, short-pointed.
                                                      22. P. Lyonii (G).


                 1. Prunus subcordata Benth. Wild Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 512]

Leaves broad-ovate or orbicular, usually cordate, sometimes truncate or
rarely cuneate at base, and sharply often doubly serrate, when they
unfold puberulous on the upper surface and pubescent on the lower
surface, and at maturity glabrous, or puberulous below, slightly
coriaceous, dark green above and pale below, 1'--3' long and 1/2'--2'
wide, with a broad midrib and conspicuous veins; northward turning
brilliant scarlet and orange or red and yellow in the autumn before
falling; petioles slender, usually eglandular, 1/2'--3/4' in length;
stipules lanceolate, acute, glandular-serrate. Flowers appearing before
the leaves in March and April, 2/3' in diameter, on slender glabrous or
pubescent pedicels 1/4'--1/2' long, in 2--4-flowered umbels; calyx-tube
campanulate, glabrous or puberulous, the lobes oblong-obovate, rounded
at apex, pubescent on the outer surface, more or less clothed with pale
hairs on the inner surface, half as long as the obovate white petals
rounded above and narrowed below into a short claw. Fruit ripening in
August and September, on stout pedicels 1/2'--2/3' long; short-oblong,
1/2'--1-1/4' long, with dark red or sometimes bright yellow skin, and
more or less subacid flesh; stone flattened or turgid, acute at the
ends, 1/3'--1' long, narrowly wing-margined on the ventral suture,
conspicuously grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
dividing 6 deg.--8 deg. from the ground into stout almost horizontal branches,
and glabrous or pubescent bright red more or less spinescent branchlets
marked by occasional minute pale lenticels, becoming darker red or
purple in their second year, and ultimately dark brown or ashy gray; or
often a bush, with stout ascending stems 10 deg.--12 deg. tall, or a low
much-branched shrub. Winter-buds acute, 1/8' long, with chestnut-brown
scales, scarious on the margins, those of the inner rows 1/4' long at
maturity, oblong, acute, and generally bright red. Bark about 1/4'
thick, gray-brown, deeply fissured, and divided into long thick plates
broken on the surface into minute persistent scales. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, pale brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood of 5 or 6
layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry rocky hills and open woods usually in the neighborhood
of streams, sometimes forming thickets of considerable extent; central
Oregon to northeastern California in the region east of the Cascade and
Sierra Nevada Mountains, and common to central California; on the
foothills of the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada up to altitudes of
4000 deg. south to the Yosemite Valley, and on the coast ranges to Black
Mountain, Santa Clara County; of its largest size on the borders of
small streams in southern Oregon and northern California; at high
altitudes, and in the arid regions of southeastern Oregon a low shrub
producing sparingly small sometimes pubescent fruit (var. _oregona_
Wight); Klamath Indian Reservation, near Klamath Falls and in Sprague
River Valley, Klamath County.


               2. Prunus umbellata Ell. Sloe. Black Sloe.

[Illustration: Fig. 513]

Leaves obovate-lanceolate to oblong, acute at the ends or sometimes
rounded or slightly cordate at base, finely and sharply serrate with
remote incurved glandular teeth, and usually furnished with 2 large dark
glands at the base, when they unfold bright bronze-green, with red
margins, midrib, and petiole, glabrous above and pubescent or glabrous
below with the exception of a few hairs along the prominent
orange-colored midrib and primary veins, and at maturity thin, dark
green above, paler below, 2'--2-1/2' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, petioles
stout, glabrous or pubescent, about 1/3' in length; stipules lanceolate,
setaceous, glandular-serrate, 1/4'--2/3' long. Flowers opening in March
and April before the appearance of the leaves, 2/3' in diameter, on
slender glabrous pedicels 1/2' long, in 3 or 4-flowered umbels;
calyx-tube broad-obconic, glabrous or puberulous, the lobes sometimes
slightly clavate at the acute red apex, scarious on the margins, and
hoary-tomentose on the inner surface; petals nearly orbicular,
contracted at the base into a short claw. Fruit ripening from July to
September, on slender stems 1/2' to nearly 1' long, globose, without a
basal depression, about 1/2' in diameter, with a tough thick black or on
some individuals yellow, and on others bright red skin covered with a
glaucous bloom, and thick acid flesh; stone flattened with thin brittle
walls, 1/2' long, 1/4'--5/16' wide and half as thick, acute at the ends,
slightly rugose, conspicuously ridged on the ventral suture, and
slightly grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, sometimes 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short often crooked or inclining
trunk 6'--10' in diameter, slender unarmed branches forming a wide
compact flat-topped head, and slender branchlets more or less densely
coated at first with pale pubescence, soon becoming glabrous, lustrous
and bright red, and in their second year dark dull brown and marked by
occasional orange-colored oblong lenticels; or frequently a low shrub.
Winter-buds about 1/16' long, with acute chestnut-brown apiculate
scales, those of the inner rows at maturity 1/4' long and red at the
apex. Bark 1/4' thick, dark brown, separating into small appressed
persistent scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, dark reddish brown,
with thick lighter colored sapwood of about 30 layers of annual growth.
The fruit is used in large quantities in making jellies and jams.

Distribution. Stanly County (near Albemarle, _J. S. Holmes_), North
Carolina, and South Carolina southward, usually in the neighborhood of
the coast, to Orange County, Florida, and westward to eastern Texas and
southern Arkansas. The form with red fruit common in the interior of the
Florida peninsula (Orange County). Variable in the amount of its
pubescence and slightly variable in the shape of the fruit, and passing
into var. _injucunda_ Sarg. (_Prunus mitis_ Beadl.). A small tree with
branchlets hoary tomentose when they first appear, becoming pubescent,
and puberulous in their second season, leaves more or less tomentose
below, villose pedicels, calyx and ovary, and subglobose to short-oblong
fruit. Central and southern Georgia (base of Stone Mountain and Little
Stone Mountain, De Kalb County, and near Augusta, Richmond County), and
eastern Alabama (near Auburn, Lee County). More distinct is


                   Prunus umbellata var. tarda Wight

                          _Prunus tarda_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 514]

Differing from the type in the more oblong stone of the later-ripening
fruit, lighter-colored bark and larger size.

Leaves oblong or oval, or occasionally obovate, acute or acuminate and
short-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, and
finely serrate with straight or incurved teeth tipped with dark minute
persistent glands, when they unfold glabrous or rarely scabrous or
puberulous above and cinereo-tomentose below, and at maturity thick and
firm, dark yellow-green and glabrous on the upper surface, pale and
pubescent or puberulous on the lower surface, especially along the
prominent light yellow midrib and thin primary veins, 1-1/2'--3' long
and 3/4'--1-1/4' wide; petioles stout, tomentose or ultimately
pubescent, 1/3'--1/2' in length, glandular at apex with 2 large round
stalked dark glands, or often eglandular; stipules acicular, often
bright red, about 1/3' long. Flowers appearing early in April with or
before the leaves, about 3/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels,
in 2 or 3-flowered umbels; calyx-tube narrow-obconic, glabrous toward
the base, villose above, the lobes acute, entire, villose on the outer
surface, hoary-tomentose on the inner surface; petals oblong-obovate,
gradually contracted below into a short claw. Fruit ripening late in
October or early in November, on stout rigid pedicels, short-oblong to
subglobose, 1/3'--1/2' long, clear bright yellow on some trees, bright
red on others, and on others purple, dark blue, or black, with tough
thick skin, and thick very acid flesh; stone ovoid more or less
compressed, very rugose, obscurely ridged on the ventral suture and
slightly grooved on the dorsal suture, acute and apiculate at apex, and
rounded at base.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 18'--20' in diameter,
wide-spreading branches forming an open symmetrical head, and slender
branchlets marked by small scattered dark lenticels, light-green and
hoary-tomentose when they first appear, becoming glabrous, light
red-brown and lustrous during their first summer and darker at the end
of their second year. Winter-buds narrow, acute, the color of the
branchlets, 1/16'--1/8' long. Bark 1/2'--5/8' thick, light brown tinged
with red, and divided by shallow interrupted fissures into flat ridges
broken on the surface into small loose plate-like scales.

Distribution. Glades and open woods in the neighborhood of Marshall,
Harrison County, Texas, to western Louisiana, southern Arkansas, and
western Mississippi.


              3. Prunus nigra Ait. Red Plum. Canada Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 515]

Leaves oblong-ovate to obovate, abruptly contracted at apex into a long
narrow point, cuneate, truncate or slightly cordate at base, and doubly
crenate-serrate with small dark glandular teeth, when they unfold
faintly tinged with red and pubescent on the under surface or glabrous
with the exception of conspicuous tufts of slender white or rufous hairs
in the axils of the primary veins, and at maturity thick and firm, dull
dark green on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 3'--5' long
and 1-1/2'--3' wide, with a conspicuous pale midrib and slender veins;
petioles stout, biglandular at apex with 2 large dark glands, 1/2'--1'
in length; stipules lanceolate or on vigorous shoots often 3--5-lobed,
glandular-serrate, 1/2' long. Flowers appearing in early spring with or
before the leaves, 1-1/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous dark red
pedicels, 1/2'--2/3' long, in 3 or 4-flowered umbels; calyx-tube
broad-obconic, dark red on the outer surface, bright red on the inner
surface, the lobes narrow, acute, glandular, glabrous or occasionally
pubescent on the outer surface, reflexed after the flowers open; petals
broad-ovate, rounded at apex, more or less erose on the margins,
contracted at base into a short claw, white, turning pink in fading.
Fruit ripening from the middle to the end of August, oblong-oval,
1'--1-1/4' long, with a tough thick orange-red skin nearly destitute of
bloom, and yellow rather austere flesh; stone oval, compressed, 1' long,
2/3' wide, thick-walled, acutely ridged on the ventral suture and
slightly grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 8'--10' in diameter,
divided usually 5 deg.--6 deg. from the ground into a number of stout upright
branches forming a narrow rigid head, stout slightly zigzag branchlets
marked by numerous pale excrescences, bright green, glabrous or
puberulous at first, and dark brown tinged with red in their second
season, and stout spiny lateral spur-like secondary branchlets.
Winter-buds acuminate, 1/8'--1/4' long, with chestnut-brown, triangular
scales pale and scarious on the margins. Bark about 1/8' thick, light
gray-brown, with a smooth outer layer exfoliating in large thick plates
of several papery layers, and in falling exposing the darker slightly
fissured scaly inner bark. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, rich bright
red-brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. In the alluvial soil of river valleys and on limestone
hills; western New Brunswick (near the mouth of the Aroostook River) to
the valley of the Saint Lawrence River and westward to the southern
shore of Georgian Bay, the northern shore of Lake Superior (west of Port
Arthur, Ontario), the valley of the Winnipeg River, Manitoba, and
southward to northern New England, central and western New York,
northern Ohio (Lorraine County), southern Michigan, northeastern
Illinois, southeastern and western Wisconsin (valley of the Wisconsin
River), eastern Minnesota and North Dakota.

Often cultivated in Canadian gardens and occasionally in those of the
northern states as a fruit-tree or for the beauty of its flowers.
Varieties are propagated by pomologists.


                 4. Prunus americana Marsh. Wild Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 516]

Leaves oval to oblong-oval or slightly obovate, acuminate at apex,
narrowed and cuneate or rounded at base, and sharply often doubly
serrate with slender apiculate teeth, when they unfold glabrous or
slightly pubescent, and often furnished below with conspicuous axillary
tufts of pale hairs, and at maturity thick and firm, more or less
rugose, dark green on the upper surface, pale and glabrous on the lower
surface, 3'--4' long and 1-1/2'--1-3/4' wide, with a thin midrib
glabrous or villose-pubescent on the lower side, and slender primary
veins; petioles slender, eglandular or furnished near the apex with one
or two glands, glabrous or puberulous, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers
appearing in early spring before or with the unfolding of the leaves, 1'
in diameter, bad-smelling, on slender glabrous pedicels 1/3'--2/3' long,
in 2--5-flowered umbels; calyx-tube narrow-obconic, bright red, glabrous
or puberulous, green on the inner surface, the lobes lanceolate to
oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, eglandular or obscurely glandular
above the middle, usually dentate toward the apex, glabrous or
puberulous on the outer surface, soft-pubescent on the inner surface;
petals rounded and irregularly laciniate at apex, contracted below into
a long narrow claw, bright red at base, 1/2' long and 1/4' wide. Fruit
ripening in June at the south and from the middle of August to early
October at the north, subglobose or slightly elongated, usually rather
less than 1' in diameter, in ripening turning from green to orange often
with a red cheek, becoming bright red when fully ripe, usually destitute
of bloom and more or less conspicuously marked by pale spots, with a
thick tough acerb skin and bright yellow succulent rather juicy acid
flesh; stone oval slightly rugose rounded at apex, more or less narrowed
at base, 3/4'--1' long and 2/5'--3/5' wide, often as thick as broad,
slightly and acutely ridged on the ventral suture and obscurely grooved
on the dorsal suture.

A tree 20 deg.--35 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 1 deg. in diameter and
dividing usually 4 deg. or 5 deg. from the ground into many spreading branches
often pendulous at the end and forming a broad graceful head and slender
glabrous branchlets at first bright green, light orange-brown during
their first winter, becoming darker and often tinged with red and marked
by minute circular raised lenticels, and furnished with long slender
remote sometimes spinescent lateral branchlets; usually spreading by
shoots from the roots into broad thickets, or in the Gulf States growing
with a single stem. Winter-buds acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, the
chestnut-brown scales more or less erose on the margins, the inner
scales when fully grown foliaceous, 1/2' long, oblong, acute, remotely
serrate, with 2 narrow acuminate lateral lobes. Bark about 1/2' thick,
dark brown tinged with red, the outer layer separating into long thin
persistent plates, southward often lighter-colored. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, strong, dark rich brown tinged with red, with thin
lighter-colored sapwood. The fruit is sometimes used in the preparation
of jellies and preserves, and is eaten raw or cooked.

Distribution. In the middle and northern states in rich soil, growing
along the borders of streams and swamps; in the south Atlantic states
often in river swamps; west of the Mississippi on bottom-lands, dry
uplands and low mountain slopes; western Connecticut (Gaylordsville,
Litchfield County), Eastern Greenbush, Rensselaer County and central New
York to southern Ontario, central Michigan and northern Indiana, and
northwestward to North Dakota, Manitoba (near Brandon), the Bitter Root
Mountains, Wyoming and western Montana (Dixon, Sanders County), and
southward to western Florida, central Mississippi, Alabama, eastern
Louisiana, Missouri, southern Arkansas, eastern Kansas and Oklahoma, and
in the Rocky Mountain region along the eastern foothills of Colorado to
northern New Mexico (near Las Vegas, San Miguel County); and
northeastern Utah (near Logan, Cache County); on the southern
Appalachian Mountains ascending to altitudes of 3000 deg., and in South
Carolina and Georgia extending to the immediate neighborhood of the
coast; in the Rocky Mountain region usually a low shrub forming large
thickets. Passing into the var. _floridana_ Sarg., differing in its much
thinner finely serrate leaves and purple fruit. A small tree without
root suckers; low rich woods near St. Marks, Wakulla County, western
Florida; common.


                     5. Prunus lanata Mack. & Bush.

                    _Prunus americana lanata_ Sudw.
                         _Prunus Palmeri_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 517]

Leaves ovate to oblong-obovate, elliptic or rarely slightly obovate,
abruptly acuminate and long-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate or rarely rounded at base, and coarsely often doubly serrate
with apiculate spreading teeth, when they unfold sparingly covered above
by short caducous hairs and below by long white spreading hairs, and at
maturity thin, light yellow-green and glabrous on the upper surface,
pale and more or less densely covered below with close soft pubescence
at the south often becoming fuscous late in the season, and villose on
the midrib and primary veins, 2-1/2'--4' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide;
petioles slender, pubescent, eglandular or furnished with a gland near
the apex, 1/2'--2/3' in length, stipules linear, acuminate, occasionally
3-lobed, villose, sparingly glandular. Flowers about 3/4' in diameter,
on slender glabrous pedicels 1/2'--2/3' in length, in 2--5-flowered
umbels; calyx-tube narrow-obconic, puberulous, the lobes long,
acuminate, entire or rarely slightly serrate toward the apex, ciliate on
the margins, puberulous and more or less tinged with red on the outer
surface, pubescent on the inner surface; petals oblong-oval, narrowed
and rounded at apex, gradually narrowed below into a long claw, about
1/4' wide; stamens about 25; style elongated, exceeding the stamens.
Fruit on drooping glabrous pedicels, ellipsoid, deep crimson covered
with a glaucous bloom, often 1' long and 4/5' in diameter, with thick
succulent flesh; stone oblong, compressed, rounded at base, pointed and
apiculate at apex, ridged on the dorsal edge with a thin narrow ridge,
thin and slightly grooved on the ventral edge.

A tree 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, small erect
branches and slender unarmed branchlets light yellow-green and
puberulous or pubescent when they first appear, usually becoming
glabrous before the end of their first season, light orange-brown during
their first season and dark red-brown the following year; sometimes a
shrub only a few feet tall; usually growing with a single well-developed
trunk; occasionally spreading by suckers from the roots into small
thickets. Winter-buds acute, 1/8'--1/6' long, with light chestnut-brown
puberulous scales ciliate on the margins. Bark pale gray-brown,
exfoliating in large thin scales.

Distribution. Hillsides and river-bottom lands; southern Indiana (near
Columbus, Bartholomew County, and Gordon Hills, Gibson County), through
southern Illinois (Gallatin, Pope, Richland and Johnson Counties) to
western Kentucky (Ballard and Hickman Counties); through Missouri and
Arkansas to eastern Oklahoma, western Louisiana and eastern Texas to
Wilson County (Southerland Springs); through eastern Louisiana (West
Feliciana and Tammany Parishes), and near Selma, Dallas County, Alabama.


                       6. Prunus tenuifolia Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 518]

Leaves oblong to oblong-obovate or elliptic, gradually narrowed and
acute or acuminate and often abruptly long-pointed at apex, cuneate or
often narrowed and rounded at base, finely doubly serrate with teeth
pointing to the apex of the leaf, at maturity thin, dark yellow-green
and sparingly covered above with short soft white hairs, paler and soft
pubescent below, especially on the slender midrib, and 7 or 8 pairs of
thin primary veins connected by occasional cross veinlets, 3'--4' long
and 1-1/4'--2' wide; petioles slender, pubescent, becoming puberulous or
nearly glabrous, glandular near the apex with 1--3 prominent dark
glands, or eglandular. Flowers 4/5' in diameter, opening from the middle
to the end of March, on slender pedicels 2/5'--4/5' long, furnished near
the apex with a few long white hairs, in 2--4-flowered sessile umbels;
calyx-tube narrow-obconic, glabrous with the exception of occasional
long scattered white hairs near the base, the lobes narrow, entire, or
minutely dentate near the rounded apex, ciliate on the margins,
pubescent on the outer surface, densely villose on the inner surface,
reflexed after anthesis; petals white, ovate-oblong, narrowed and
rounded at apex, crenulate above the middle, gradually narrowed below
into a short claw. Fruit on stout slightly hairy or glabrous stems,
oblong to oblong-obovoid, red, covered with a thick glaucous bloom,
3/5'--3/4' long and 1/2'--3/5' in diameter, with a thick skin and thin
flesh; stone oblong, compressed, pointed at the ends, slightly sulcate
at apex, unsymmetric, ridged on the full and rounded dorsal edge with a
broad thin ridge, thin nearly straight and only slightly grooved on the
ventral edge, 2/5'--3/5' long and about 1/2' wide.

A tree 30 deg. high, with a tall trunk usually about 12' but occasionally
18' in diameter, stout spreading branches and stout or slender glabrous
branchlets light orange green when they first appear, becoming light
gray or red-brown and lustrous at the end of their first season, and
dark dull red-brown the following year. Bark of the trunk and large
branches thick, pale gray, and broken into long plate-like scales.

Distribution. Dry Oak-woods near Jacksonville and Larissa, Cherokee
County, Texas.


               7. Prunus mexicana S. Wats. Big Tree Plum.

                        _Prunus arkansana_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 519]

Leaves ovate to elliptic or obovate, abruptly long-pointed and acuminate
at apex, rounded or rarely cuneate and often glandular at base, and
finely doubly serrate with apiculate slender straight or slightly
incurved teeth, at maturity thick, dark yellow-green, glabrous and
lustrous on the upper surface, paler and sparingly covered on the lower
surface with long soft white hairs most abundant on the prominent midrib
and primary veins and on the numerous conspicuous reticulate veinlets,
1-3/4'--3-1/4' long and 1-1/4'--2' wide; petioles stout, pubescent or
puberulous, glandular at apex with large dark glands, or eglandular,
2/5'--3/5' in length. Flowers appearing in March before the leaves, 1'
in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels in 3 or 4-flowered sessile
umbels; calyx-tube narrow-obconic, glabrous, the lobes oblong or
oblong-ovate, about as long as the tube, rounded and laciniate at apex
or entire, ciliate and glandular on the margins with small sessile
glands, puberulous on the outer surface, hoary-tomentose on the inner
surface, reflexed after anthesis; petals sometimes puberulous on the
outer surface toward the base, ovate-orbicular to oblong-ovate, rounded
at the narrow apex, crenulate, abruptly or gradually narrowed below into
a short claw, about 3 times as long as the calyx-lobes; style longer
than the stamens. Fruit ripening from the end of August to early
October, subglobose to short-oblong, rounded at the ends, dark
purple-red with a slight glaucous bloom, 1-1/4'--1-1/3' long and
1'--1-1/4' in diameter, with thick succulent flesh; stone smooth obovoid
to nearly circular, turgid, unsymmetric, narrowed and rounded at base,
rounded or short-pointed at apex, ridged on the rounded dorsal edge with
a broad thin ridge, thin, less rounded and grooved on the ventral edge,
3/4'--1' long and about 1/2' wide.

A tree from 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 8'--10' in diameter,
stout branches forming an open irregular head, and slender glabrous
branchlets light orange-brown, very lustrous and marked by dark
lenticels during their first winter and dull gray-brown the following
year. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, glabrous, 1/4' long. Bark dark, nearly
black or light gray, exfoliating in plate-like scales on young stems and
large branches, becoming rough and deeply furrowed on old trunks.

Distribution. Open woods on rich alluvial bottom-lands, upland prairies
and hillsides; southeastern Kansas (near Parsons, Labette County),
through Arkansas to western Oklahoma (Navina, Logan County, Minca, Grady
County), western Louisiana, northern and eastern Texas to the valley of
the San Antonio River, ranging westward in Texas over the Edwards
Plateau and to Brown and Palo Pinto Counties; in West Feliciana Parish,
eastern Louisiana; in Coahuila and Nuevo Leon.

Passing into the following varieties:

Prunus mexicana var. reticulata Sarg. Differing in its thicker leaves
more often narrowed at base, with more prominent reticulate veinlets,
pubescent pedicels, globose fruit ripening late in September or in
October, with thin, bitter, astringent flesh and dark deeply furrowed
bark.

Distribution. Uplands and along the margins of river bottoms;
neighborhood of Denison and Sherman, Grayson County, northern Texas.

Prunus mexicana var. polyandra Sarg.

Differing in the narrowed base of the leaves, the more numerous stamens,
in its earlier ripening fruit, with an obovoid compressed stone pointed
at apex and gradually narrowed and acute at base.

Distribution. Rich woods near Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas.

Prunus mexicana var. fultonensis Sarg.

Differing in its thinner leaves pubescent below over the whole surface,
and in its smaller dark bluish-purple fruit, ripening in June, with thin
flesh and a compressed stone pointed at apex and gradually narrowed and
acute at base.

Distribution. Rich woods near Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas.


                 8. Prunus alleghaniensis Porter. Sloe.

[Illustration: Fig. 520]

Leaves lanceolate to oblong-ovate, often long-pointed, finely and
sharply serrate with glandular teeth, and furnished at base with 2 large
rather conspicuous glands, when they unfold covered with soft
pubescence, and at maturity puberulous on the upper surface, and
glabrous with the exception of a few hairs in the axils of the veins, or
covered, especially along the broad midrib and conspicuous veins, with
rufous pubescence on the lower surface, rather thick and firm in
texture, dark green above and paler below, 2'--3-1/2' long and
2/3'--1-1/4' wide; petioles slender, grooved, pubescent or puberulous,
1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers appearing in May with the unfolding of the
leaves, 1/2' in diameter, on slender puberulous pedicels 1/2'--2/3'
long, in 2--4-flowered umbels; calyx-tube narrow-obconic, pubescent or
puberulous on the outer surface, the lobes ovate-oblong, rounded at
apex, scarious on the margins, and coated with pale tomentum on the
inner surface; petals rounded at apex, contracted at base into a short
claw, turning pink in fading. Fruit ripening the middle of August, on
stout puberulous pedicels, subglobose or slightly oval to obovoid,
1/3'--2/3' in diameter, with thick rather tough dark reddish-purple skin
covered with a glaucous bloom, and yellow juicy austere flesh; stone
thin-walled, turgid, two thirds as thick as broad, 1/4'--1/2' long,
pointed at the ends, ridged on the ventral suture, and slightly grooved
on the dorsal suture.

A slender tree, occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes
6'--8' in diameter, dividing into numerous erect rigid branches, and
branchlets at first coated with pale caducous pubescence, becoming dark
red and rather lustrous in their first winter, and ultimately nearly
black, and unarmed, or sometimes armed with stout spinescent lateral
spur-like branchlets. Winter-buds acuminate or obtuse, 1/16' long, their
inner scales accrescent, scarious, oblong, acute, 2/3' long, bright red
at apex. Bark 1/4' thick, dark brown, fissured and broken on the surface
into thin persistent scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, brown
tinged with red, with thin pale sapwood of 10--12 layers of annual
growth. The fruit is made into preserves, jellies and jams.

Distribution. Low moist soil, often forming shrubby thickets sometimes
of considerable extent, and dry ridges; slopes of Tusseys Mountain in
the northwestern part of Huntingdon County, and over the main range of
the Alleghany Mountains into Clearfield and Elk Counties, Pennsylvania;
rocky ridges near the Natural Bridge, Rockbridge County, Virginia, and
lower slopes of Peak Mountain on South Fork of Buffalo Creek, Ashe
County, North Carolina (_W. W. Ashe_), and in southern Connecticut; of
its largest size on limestone bluffs south of the Little Juniata River,
Pennsylvania. A shrubby variety with leaves broader in proportion to
their length and less acuminate at apex (var. _Davisii_ Wight) occurs in
Roscommon and Montmorency Counties, Michigan.


                 9. Prunus hortulana Bailey. Wild Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 521]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oblong-oval or rarely to oblong-lanceolate,
acuminate and contracted at apex into a long slender point, cuneate or
more or less rounded at the narrow base, and finely serrate with
incurved lanceolate glandular teeth, when they unfold pilose with
slender white hairs, and at maturity glabrous above, pilose below in the
axils of the primary veins and along the midrib with tawny hairs, thin
but firm, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface paler on the
lower surface, 4'--6' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad conspicuous
orange-colored midrib, primary veins connected near the margins of the
leaf, and prominent reticulate veinlets; petioles slender,
orange-colored, 1'--1-1/2' in length and furnished above the middle with
numerous scattered dark glands; stipules lanceolate, acuminate,
glandular-serrate, early deciduous. Flowers appearing in April or early
in May when the leaves are about one-third grown, 2/3'--1' in diameter,
on slender puberulous pedicels 1/2' long, in 2--4-flowered umbels;
calyx-tube narrow-obconic, the lobes about as long as the tube,
oblong-ovate, acute or rounded at apex, glandular-serrate, glabrous or
puberulous on the outer surface, pubescent or tomentose on the inner
surface chiefly toward the base, reflexed after the unfolding of the
narrow oval or oblong-orbicular petals rounded and occasionally
emarginate at apex, contracted below into a long narrow claw, entire,
erose, or occasionally serrate, and white often marked with orange
toward the base. Fruit ripening in September and October, on stout
stems, globose or rarely ellipsoid, 3/4'--1' in diameter, with thick
deep red or sometimes yellow lustrous skin, and hard austere thin flesh;
stone turgid, 2/3'--3/4' long, compressed at the ends, abruptly
short-pointed or rounded at apex, rounded or truncate at base,
conspicuously ridge-margined on the ventral suture and broadly and
deeply grooved on the dorsal suture, thick-walled, usually conspicuously
or rarely obscurely rugose and pitted.

A tree 20 deg.--30 deg. high, without suckers from the roots, with a slender
often inclining trunk, frequently 5'--6' or occasionally 10'--12' in
diameter, dividing usually several feet above the ground into thick
spreading branches forming a broad round-topped head, and stout rigid
branchlets marked by minute pale lenticels, glabrous or slightly
puberulous during their first summer, rather dark red-brown, and usually
unarmed or on vigorous trees armed with stout spinescent lateral
chestnut-colored branchlets; or often a shrub, with many stems forming
thicket-like clumps. Winter-buds minute, obtuse, with chestnut-brown
scales slightly ciliate on the margins, those of the inner ranks
becoming oblong-lanceolate, acute, glandular-serrate, sometimes 1/2' in
length. Bark thin, dark brown, separating into large thin persistent
plates, and displaying the light brown inner layers.

Distribution. Low banks of streams in rich moist soil; southwestern
Illinois to Scott County, Iowa, and to eastern Kansas and northeastern
Oklahoma, and to central Kentucky and northwestern Tennessee; most
abundant and of its largest size in Missouri. The handsomest of American
Plum-trees, and hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts. Several
selected forms are grown and valued by pomologists. Passing into var.
_Mineri_ Bailey, with darker green duller leaves, and sometimes more
scaly bark. Southwestern Illinois to central Missouri; and into var.
_pubens_ Sarg. differing from the type in its pubescent leaves, petioles
and young branchlets. In the neighborhood of Webb City, Jasper County,
Missouri.

Often cultivated by pomologists in many selected forms.


                 10. Prunus Munsoniana Wight & Hedrick

[Illustration: Fig. 522]

Leaves elliptic to lanceolate, acute or acuminate at apex, gradually
narrowed and cuneate or rounded at base and finely glandular-serrate,
when they unfold densely villose-pubescent above and glabrous below, and
at maturity thin, light green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale on
the lower surface, 2-1/2'--4' long and 3/4'--1-1/4' wide, with a slender
midrib often red and usually pubescent or sparingly villose on the lower
side, and slender primary veins often furnished with small axillary
clusters of white hairs; petioles slender, usually biglandular toward
the apex, the groove on the upper side covered with white pubescence,
often bright red, 3/4' in length; stipules linear, glandular-serrate.
Flowers appearing in Texas before the leaves at the end of March and as
late as May after the appearance of the leaves at the northern limits of
its range, 1/2'--3/5' in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels 2/5'--1'
long, in 2--4-flowered umbel-like clusters; calyx-tube broad-obconic,
glabrous, obscurely nerved, the lobes ovate, acute or acuminate,
minutely glandular-serrate, glabrous or rarely slightly pubescent on the
outer surface, pubescent on the inner surface below the middle; petals
about 1/4' long, obovate to oblong-obovate, entire or sparingly erose,
white, about 1/4' long, abruptly contracted into a short claw. Fruit
ripening in July and August, subglobose to short-oblong, 3/4' long,
bright red with a slight bloom, marked by pale dots and occasionally by
yellow blotches, rarely yellow, with a thin skin and light or dark
yellow juicy aromatic fibrous flesh often of good quality; stone oval,
compressed, pointed at apex, truncate or obliquely truncate at base,
thick-margined and grooved on the ventral suture, grooved on the dorsal
suture, irregularly roughened on the surface, about 1/2' long.

A tree spreading into dense thickets, the oldest central stem sometimes
20 deg. high and 5' or 6' in diameter, diminishing in height and size to the
margin of the thicket, with erect, rarely slightly spinescent branches,
and slender glabrous red-brown lustrous branchlets marked by numerous
pale lenticels. Winter-buds obtuse, chestnut brown, glabrous, rarely
more than 1/8' long. Bark thin, usually smooth and reddish or
chestnut-brown on young stems, becoming gray or grayish brown and
separating into thin plate-like scales on older trunks.

Distribution. Usually in rich soil; southern Illinois (Alexander,
Gallatin, Pope, Johnson and Richland Counties); southwestern Kentucky;
central Tennessee; northern Mississippi; central Missouri to
southeastern Kansas, and through Arkansas to eastern Oklahoma, western
Louisiana (Natchitoches and Lincoln Parishes), and northern Texas (west
to Clay and Lampasas Counties); now occasionally naturalized from
cultivated trees in eastern Texas, and eastward to Georgia, eastern
Kentucky, southern Ohio, and in northern Missouri. Hardy in eastern
Massachusetts and western New York.

Cultivated in orchards, a tree sometimes 20 deg.--30 deg. tall with a trunk
6'--8' in diameter, and rather small wide-spreading branches forming a
handsome round-topped head. Selected forms of the wild plants are valued
by pomologists who have produced several hybrids by crossing _Prunus
Munsoniana_ with other American and with Old World species. The "Wild
Goose Plum," one of the best known forms of _Prunus Munsoniana_, has
flowered and produced fruit for many years in the Arnold Arboretum.


             11. Prunus angustifolia Marsh. Chickasaw Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 523]

Leaves lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, pointed at the ends, apiculate
at apex, and sharply serrate with minute glandular teeth, glabrous or at
first sometimes furnished with axillary tufts of long pale hairs, bright
green and lustrous on the upper, paler and rather dull on the lower
surface, 1'--2' long and 1/3'--2/3' wide; petioles slender, glabrous or
puberulous, biglandular near the apex with 2 conspicuous red glands,
bright red, 1/4'--1/2' in length; stipules linear or lobed,
glandular-serrate, 1/2' long. Flowers appearing before the leaves from
the beginning of March at the south to the middle of April at the north,
1/3' in diameter, on slender glabrous pedicels 1/4'--1/2' long, in
2--4-flowered umbels; calyx-tube campanulate, glabrous, the lobes
oblong, obtuse, entire ciliate on the margins with slender hairs,
pale-pubescent on the inner surface, reflexed at maturity; petals
obovate, rounded at apex, contracted at base into a short broad claw,
white or creamy white. Fruit ripening between the end of May and the end
of July, globose or subglobose, about 1/2' in diameter, bright red or
yellow, rather lustrous, nearly destitute of bloom, with a thin skin,
and juicy subacid flesh; stone turgid, rugose, compressed at the ends,
nearly 1/2' long, more or less thick-margined on the ventral suture and
grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, 15 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 8' in diameter,
slender spreading branches, and bright red and lustrous branchlets
glabrous or covered at first with short caducous hairs, becoming in
their second year dull, darker and often brown, marked with occasional
horizontal orange-colored lenticels, and frequently armed with long thin
spinescent lateral branchlets; spreading into thickets. Winter-buds
acuminate, 1/16' long, with chestnut-brown scales. Bark about 1/8'
thick, dark reddish brown and slightly furrowed, the surface broken into
long thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, although rather soft, not
strong, light brownish red with lighter colored sapwood. The fruit is
often sold in the markets of the middle and southern states.

Distribution. Widely naturalized especially in the south Atlantic and
Gulf states from southern Delaware and Kentucky to central Florida and
eastern Texas, occupying the margins of fields and other waste places
near human habitations usually in rich soil; probably native in central
Texas and Oklahoma. Passing into var. _varians_ Wight & Hedrick,
differing from the type in its usually larger leaves occasionally up to
2-1/2' in length and to 1' in width, in the longer pedicels of the
flowers and in the ovoid to ellipsoid often pointed stone of the red or
yellow later ripening fruit. A tree usually spreading into thickets,
occasionally 12 deg. high with a trunk 4' or 5' in diameter, small branches
and slender often spinescent chestnut-brown branchlets. Usually in
richer soil than the type, southwestern Kansas (Arkansas City, Desha
County), through eastern Oklahoma and southern Arkansas to northern and
central Texas (Cherokee County); now occasionally naturalized in the
eastern Gulf States and possibly indigenous in Dallas County, Alabama,
and Orange County, Florida.

A number of selected forms of this variety, including most of those
formerly referred to _Prunus angustifolia_, are grown and valued in
southern orchards but are not hardy in the north.


       12. Prunus pennsylvanica L. Wild Red Cherry. Bird Cherry.

[Illustration: Fig. 524]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, sometimes slightly falcate, acuminate or
rarely acute, and finely and sharply serrate with incurved teeth often
tipped with minute glands, when they unfold bronze-green, pilose below
and slightly viscid, soon becoming green and glabrous, and at maturity
bright and lustrous on the upper surface, rather paler on the lower
surface, 3'--4-1/2' long and 3/4'--1-1/4' wide; turning bright clear
yellow some time before falling in the autumn; petioles slender,
glabrous or slightly pilose, 1/2'--1' in length, and often glandular
above the middle; stipules acuminate, glandular-serrate, early
deciduous. Flowers appearing in early May when the leaves are about half
grown, or at the extreme north and at high altitudes as late as the 1st
of July, 1/2' in diameter, on slender pedicels nearly 1' long, in 4 or
5-flowered umbels or corymbs; calyx-tube broad-obconic, glabrous, marked
in the mouth of the throat by a conspicuous light orange-colored band,
the lobes obtuse, red at apex, and reflexed after the flowers open;
petals 1/4' long, nearly orbicular, contracted at base into a short
claw, creamy white. Fruit ripening from the 1st of July to the 1st of
September, globose, 1/4' in diameter, with a thick light red skin, and
thin sour flesh; stone oblong, thin-walled, slightly compressed, pointed
at apex, rounded at base, about 3/16' long, and ridged on the ventral
suture.

A tree, with bitter aromatic bark and leaves, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a
trunk often 18'--20' in diameter, regular slender horizontal branches
forming a narrow usually more or less rounded head, and slender
branchlets light red and sometimes slightly puberulous when they first
appear, soon glabrous, bright red, lustrous and covered with pale raised
lenticels in their first winter, and developing in their second year
short thick spur-like lateral branchlets and then covered with dull red
bark marked by bright orange-colored lenticels, the outer coat easily
separable from the brilliant green inner bark; at the extreme north
often a low shrub. Winter-buds ovoid to ellipsoid, acute, about 1/12'
long, with bright red-brown acute scales, ciliate on the margins. Bark
of young stems and of the branches smooth and thin, bright reddish
brown, becoming on old trunks 1/3'--1/2' thick, and separating
horizontally into broad persistent papery dark red-brown plates marked
by irregular horizontal bands of orange-colored lenticels and broken
into minute persistent scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light
brown, with thin yellow sapwood. The fruit is often used domestically
and in the preparation of cough mixtures.

Distribution. Newfoundland to the shores of Hudson's Bay, and westward
in British America to the eastern slopes of the coast range of British
Columbia in the valley of the Frazer River, and southward through New
England, New York, northern Pennsylvania, central Michigan, northern
Illinois, central Iowa, and on the Appalachian Mountains, North Carolina
and Tennessee; common in all the forest regions of the extreme northern
states, growing in moist rather rich soil; often occupying to the
exclusion of other trees large areas cleared by fire of their original
forest-covering; common and attaining its largest size on the western
slopes of the Big Smoky Mountains in Tennessee. Passing into var.
_saximontana_ Rehd. differing from the type in its shorter and broader,
more coarsely serrate leaves, usually fewer flowered sessile umbels,
larger fruit, and smaller size. The Rocky Mountain form; common from
Manitoba, the Flathead Lake region, Montana, and northern Wyoming,
southward through Colorado.


                13. Prunus emarginata Walp. Wild Cherry.

[Illustration: Fig. 525]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oblanceolate, rounded and usually obtuse or
sometimes acute at apex, cuneate and furnished at base with 1 or 2 and
sometimes 3 or 4 large dark glands, and serrate with minute subulate
glandular teeth, when they unfold puberulous or pubescent on the lower
surface and slightly viscid, and at maturity glabrous or pubescent below
(var. _mollis_ S. Wats.), 1'--3' long, 1/3'--1-1/2' wide, dark green
above and paler below; petioles usually pubescent, 1/8'--1/4' in length;
stipules lanceolate, acuminate, glandular-serrate, deciduous. Flowers
appearing when the leaves are about half grown, at the end of April at
the level of the ocean or as late as the end of June at high altitudes,
1/3'--1/2' in diameter, on slender pedicels from the axils of foliaceous
glabrous glandular-serrate bracts, in 6--12-flowered glabrous or
pubescent corymbs 1'--1-1/2' long; calyx-tube obconic, glabrous or
puberulous, bright orange-colored in the throat, the lobes short,
rounded, emarginate or slightly cleft at apex, sometimes slightly
glandular on the margins, reflexed after the flowers open; petals
obovate, rounded or emarginate at apex, contracted below into a short
claw, white faintly tinged with green. Fruit ripening from June to
August, on slender pedicels, in long-stalked corymbs often 2' long,
globose, 1/4'--1/2' in diameter, more or less translucent, with a thick
skin bright red at first when fully grown, becoming darker and almost
black, and thin bitter astringent flesh; stone ovoid, turgid about 1/8'
long, pointed and compressed at the ends, with thick brittle slightly
pitted walls, ridged and prominently grooved on the ventral suture and
rounded and slightly grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with exceedingly bitter bark and
leaves, a trunk 12'--14' in diameter, slender rather upright branches
forming a symmetric oblong head, and slender flexible branchlets coated
at first with pale pubescence, dark red-brown during their first winter,
bright red, conspicuously marked by large pale lenticels in their second
season, and furnished with short lateral branchlets; frequently a shrub
especially at high altitudes, with spreading stems 3 deg.--10 deg. tall forming
dense thickets. Winter-buds acute, 1/8' long, with chestnut-brown scales
often slightly scarious on the margins, those of the inner ranks
becoming acuminate, glandular-serrate above the middle, with bright red
tips, scarious, and 1/2' long. Bark about 1/4' thick, with a generally
smooth dark brown surface marked by horizontal light gray interrupted
bands and by rows of oblong orange-colored lenticels. Wood
close-grained, soft and brittle, brown streaked with green, with paler
sapwood of 8--10 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Usually near the banks of streams in low rich soil, or
less commonly on dry hillsides; valley of the upper Jocko River,
Montana, on the mountain ranges of Idaho and Washington and of southern
British Columbia to Vancouver Island, and southward on the coast and
interior ranges to the neighborhood of the bay of San Francisco, on the
western slopes of the Sierra Nevada up to altitudes of 5000 deg.--6000 deg.
above the sea to the head of Kern River, on the Santa Lucia, San Rafael,
and San Bernardino Mountains, California, on the Washoe Mountains,
Nevada, and the mountains of northern Arizona; of its largest size on
Vancouver Island, in western Oregon and Washington, and on the Santa
Lucia Mountains; on the coast ranges of middle California and on the
Sierra Nevada commonly a shrub 5 deg.--8 deg. high.


                 14. Prunus virginiana L. Choke Cherry.

[Illustration: Fig. 526]

Leaves oval, oblong or obovate, abruptly short-pointed at apex, cuneate,
rounded or rarely slightly cordate at base, and sharply often doubly
serrate with spreading subulate teeth, glabrous when they unfold or
furnished below with axillary tufts of pale hairs, and at maturity dark
green and lustrous on the upper surface, light green or pale on the
lower surface, 2'--4' long and 1'--2' wide; turning bright clear yellow
in the autumn before falling; petioles slender, biglandular near apex,
or on vigorous shoots sometimes many-glandular, 1/2'--1' in length;
stipules lanceolate, about 1/2' long, early deciduous. Flowers opening
from April to the end of June, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, on slender
glabrous pedicels from the axils of scarious caducous bracts, in erect
or nodding racemes 3'--6' in length; calyx-tube cup-shaped, globose, the
lobes short, obtuse, laciniate and more or less glandular on the
margins; petals orbicular, contracted into a short claw, white;
filaments and pistil glabrous, the short thick style abruptly enlarged
into a broad orbicular stigma. Fruit globose or occasionally slightly
elongated, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter, lustrous, bright red at first when
fully grown, becoming at maturity scarlet, dark vinous red or nearly
black, or rarely bright canary color (var. _leucocarpa_ S. Wats.), with
a thick lustrous skin, and dark juicy flesh, austere and astringent,
becoming at maturity less astringent and sometimes edible; stone
oblong-ovoid broadly ridged on one suture and acute on the other.

A tree occasionally 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a straight trunk sometimes
6'--8' in diameter, small erect or horizontal branches, and slender
glabrous red-brown or orange-brown lustrous branchlets marked by pale
lenticels, becoming dark red-brown in their second year; more often a
large or small shrub, at the north frequently not more than 2 deg.--3 deg. tall.
Winter-buds acute or obtuse, with pale chestnut brown scales rounded at
apex and more or less scarious on the margins, those of the inner rank
becoming lanceolate or ligulate, sharply and often glandular-serrate,
and 1/2'--1' in length. Bark strongly and disagreeably scented, about
1/8' thick, slightly and irregularly fissured, separating on the surface
into small persistent dark red-brown scales, and often marked by pale
irregular excrescences. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, not strong,
light brown, with thick lighter-colored sapwood of 15--20 layers of
annual growth.

Distribution. Margins of the forest, generally in rich rather moist
soil, and along highways and fence-rows; Newfoundland, through Labrador
to the shores of Hudson's Bay, and southward to the valley of the
Potomac River and northern Kentucky; in Buncombe and Iredell Counties,
North Carolina, and Talladega County, Alabama, and westward to
Saskatchewan, eastern North and South Dakota and Nebraska, northeastern
Missouri and Kansas; more often a tree southward and in cultivation.
Passing into the var. _melanocarpa_ Sarg. with rather thicker rarely
lanceolate leaves, and usually darker often less astringent rarely
yellow (f. _xanthocarpa_ Sarg.) fruit.

Distribution. Low valleys and the slopes of mountain ranges; Manitoba,
western North and South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas and Oklahoma, westward
to northern British Columbia, and southward in the Rocky Mountain region
through Wyoming, Montana and Idaho, Colorado, Utah and Nevada to
southern New Mexico and Arizona, and through Washington, Oregon and
California to San Diego County; in the rich soil of valleys a tree
sometimes 30 deg. tall; on dry mountain slopes a shrub 2 deg. or 3 deg. high. More
distinct is


                  Prunus virginiana var. demissa Sarg.

                        _Cerasus demissa_ Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 527]

Differing in its often cordate leaves covered below with pale
pubescence.

Distribution. Prairies and valleys of western Washington and Oregon,
southward to Siskiyou, Napa, Santa Cruz and Kern Counties, California,
in northern Nebraska, central Iowa, western Texas (Gamble's Ranch,
Armstrong County, with pubescent leaves cuneate at base), and in New
Mexico.

Passing into var. _demissa_ f. _pachyrrachis_ Sarg. (_Padus valida_
Woot. & Stanl.) differing in the cuneate or rounded base of the leaves,
villose pubescent on the midrib and veins below, in the stouter
pubescent rachis and pedicels, and in the pubescent branchlets usually
becoming glabrous at the end of their second season.

Distribution. Common on the mountains of southwestern New Mexico (Sierra
County) and rarely in southern California.


        15. Prunus serotina Ehrh. Wild Black Cherry. Rum Cherry.

                         _Prunus eximia_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 528]

Leaves oval, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, gradually or sometimes
abruptly acuminate at apex, cuneate at base, finely serrate with
appressed incurved callous teeth, and furnished at the very base with 1
or more dark red conspicuous glands, when they unfold slightly hairy
below on the midrib, and often bronze-green, and at maturity glabrous,
thick and firm, subcoriaceous, dark green and very lustrous above, paler
below, 2'--6' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a thin conspicuous midrib
rarely furnished toward the base with a fringe of rusty tomentum and
slender veins; in the autumn turning clear bright yellow before falling;
petioles slender, 1/2'--3/4' in length; stipules lanceolate, acuminate,
glandular-serrate, 1/2'--3/4' in length, early deciduous. Flowers
appearing when the leaves are about half grown, from the end of March in
Texas to the first week of June in the valley of the St. Lawrence River.
1/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous or puberulous pedicels from the
axils of minute scarious caducous bracts, in erect or ultimately
spreading narrow many-flowered racemes 4'--6' long; calyx-tube
saucer-shaped, glabrous or puberulous, the lobes short, ovate-oblong,
acute, slightly laciniate on the margins, reflexed after the flowers
open, persistent on the ripe fruit; petals broad-obovate, pure white.
Fruit ripening from June to October, in drooping racemes,
depressed-globose, slightly lobed, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, dark red when
fully grown, almost black when ripe, with a thin skin, and dark purple
juicy flesh of a pleasant vinous flavor; stone oblong-obovoid
thin-walled, about 1/3' long, acute at apex, gradually narrowed at base,
broadly ridged on the ventral suture and acute on the dorsal suture.

A tree, with bitter aromatic bark and leaves, sometimes 100 deg. high, with
a trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter, small horizontal branches forming a narrow
oblong head, and slender rather rigid glabrous branchlets at first pale
green or bronze color, soon becoming bright red or dark brown tinged
with red, red-brown or gray-brown and marked by minute pale lenticels
during their first winter, and bright red the following year; usually
much smaller and occasionally toward the northern limits of its range
shrub-like in habit. Winter-buds obtuse, or on sterile shoots acute,
with bright chestnut-brown broad-ovate scales keeled on the back and
apiculate at apex, those of the inner ranks becoming scarious at
maturity, acuminate, and 1/2'--2/3' long. Bark 1/2'--3/4' thick, broken
by reticulated fissures into small irregular plates scaly on the
surface, and dark red-brown, or near the Gulf-coast light gray or nearly
white. Wood light, strong, rather hard, close straight-grained, with a
satiny surface, light brown or red, with thin yellow sapwood of 10--12
layers of annual growth; largely used in cabinet-making and the interior
finish of houses. The bark, especially that of the branches and roots,
yields hydrocyanic acid used in medicine as a tonic and sedative. The
ripe fruit is used to flavor alcoholic liquors.

Distribution. Nova Scotia westward through the Canadian provinces to
Lake Superior, and southward through the eastern states to central (Lake
County) Florida, and westward to eastern South Dakota, southeastern
Nebraska, eastern Kansas, central Oklahoma and the valley of the east
fork of the Frio River, Texas; usually in rich moist soil; once very
abundant in all the Appalachian region, reaching its greatest size on
the slopes of the high Alleghany Mountains from West Virginia to
Georgia, and in Alabama; sometimes on low sandy soil, and often in New
England on rocky cliffs within reach of the spray of the ocean; not
common in the coast region of the southern states.

A form from the summits of Whitetop Mountain, Virginia, with larger and
rather thicker leaves pale below and rather larger fruit, has been
described as var. _montana_ Britt.


               16. Prunus alabamensis Mohr. Wild Cherry.

[Illustration: Fig. 529]

Leaves oval, broad-ovate, or occasionally obovate, acute, short-pointed
or rounded at apex, cuneate, rounded or rarely slightly obcordate at
base, and finely serrate with incurved teeth tipped with minute or
sometimes near the base of the blade with larger dark glands, when they
unfold coated below and on the upper side of the midrib with fine
pubescence, and at maturity thick and firm in texture, 4'--5' long,
about 2' wide, dark dull green and glabrous on the upper surface, dull
and covered on the lower surface with short simple or forked accrescent
hairs most abundant and sometimes rufescent on the slender midrib and
primary veins; petioles stout, tomentose, becoming pubescent, eglandular
or occasionally furnished near the apex with 1 or 2 large dark glands,
1/4'--1/2' in length; stipules lanceolate, acuminate, glandular-serrate,
bright red, 1/2' long, caducous. Flowers appearing during the first week
of May, when the leaves are about half grown, 1/4' in diameter, on
pubescent pedicels from the axils of ovate or obovate acuminate bright
pink caducous bracts, in spreading or erect slender pubescent racemes
3'--4' long; calyx-tube broad, cup-shaped, puberulous, with short almost
triangular lobes persistent on the fruit; petals white, nearly
orbicular. Fruit ripening late in September, subglobose to short-oblong,
1/3' in diameter, dark red or finally nearly black, with thin acid
flesh; stone ovoid somewhat compressed, pointed at the ends, 1/4' long,
ridged on the ventral suture with a broad low ridge, and slightly
grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely 10' in diameter,
spreading somewhat drooping branches, and slender branchlets coated at
first with pale tomentum, dark red-brown during their first season,
becoming nearly glabrous before winter, and much darker in their second
year. Bark of the trunk dark, rough, separating freely into small thin
scales.

Distribution. Summits of the low mountains of central Alabama; rare and
local.


                17. Prunus australis Beadl. Wild Cherry.

[Illustration: Fig. 530]

Leaves obovate, oval or elliptic, gradually narrowed and obtusely
short-pointed or sometimes acute at apex, rounded or occasionally
cuneate at the narrowed base, and finely serrate with slender teeth
tipped with minute dark red glands, when they unfold membranaceous, pale
yellow-green and glabrous above, with the exception of occasional pale
hairs along the midrib, and coated below with pale or ferrugineous
pubescence, and at maturity thin but firm, dark dull green above,
covered below with rufous hairs most abundant on the thin broad midrib,
and on the slender primary veins extending nearly to the margins of the
leaf, conspicuously reticulate-venulose, 2-1/2'--4' long and
1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles rusty-tomentose, biglandular at apex with
large dark glands, about 1/4' in length; stipules linear to
linear-lanceolate, glandular, bright rose color, 1/4'--1/2' long.
Flowers probably opening toward the end of April, on short pedicels from
the axils of minute rose-colored caducous bracts, in slender spreading
hoary-pubescent racemes 3'--4' long; the expanded flowers not known.
Fruit ripening and falling late in July, on pedicels 1/4' long, globose,
surrounded at base by the calyx-lobes and remnants of the stamens, dark
purple when fully ripe, and about 1/4' in diameter, with thin flesh;
stone ovoid, compressed, rounded at base, pointed at apex, about 1/6'
long and broad, ridged on the ventral suture, with a low broad ridge,
slightly grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, sometimes 60 deg. tall, with a trunk 12'--16' in diameter, spreading
or ascending branches forming an oblong head, and slender branchlets
coated at first with pale pubescence, becoming puberulous, dull
red-brown, and roughened by numerous small pale elevated lenticels at
the end of their first season, and glabrous or puberulous in their
second year. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, about 1/12' long, with acute
dark red-brown glabrous scales. Bark of young stems and of the branches
thin, silvery gray, and roughened by long horizontal lenticels, becoming
on older trunks 1/3' thick, ashy gray or brownish black, deeply fissured
and broken into thick persistent plate-like scales.

Distribution. Clay soil at Evergreen, Conecut County, Alabama; common.


                 18. Prunus virens Shrive. Wild Cherry.

                     _Padus virens_ Woot. & Stanl.
  _Prunus serotina_, ed. 1, in so far as relates to western Texas, New
                          Mexico and Arizona.

[Illustration: Fig. 531]

Leaves elliptic, ovate or rarely slightly obovate, acute, rounded or
occasionally acuminate or abruptly narrowed into a short obtuse point at
apex, rounded or broad-cuneate at base, finely crenately serrate,
glabrous, light green and lustrous on the upper surface, lighter green
and glabrous on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long and 3/4'--1' wide,
with a slender midrib, thin veins and reticulate veinlets; petioles
slender, glabrous or rarely slightly villose, without glands, 1/4'--1/2'
in length. Flowers appearing when the leaves are nearly fully grown from
the first to the middle of May, 1/4' in diameter, on slender glabrous
pedicels, in erect or spreading many-flowered glabrous or puberulous
racemes 3'--6' long; calyx-tube saucer-shaped, glabrous, 3/16' wide,
persistent under the fruit, the lobes short-pointed, acute, persistent;
petals broad-obovate, pure white. Fruit ripening in August and
September, in erect or spreading racemes, subglobose to short-oblong,
purplish black and lustrous at maturity, 1/4'--1/2' in diameter, with
thin juicy acrid flesh; stone compressed, slightly obovoid 1/4' in
diameter, with a low broad ridge on the ventral suture, and rounded on
the dorsal suture.

A tree in sheltered canyons sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 18' or
20' in diameter, small, usually drooping or occasionally wide-spreading
branches, and slender glabrous red-brown pendulous branchlets marked by
small pale lenticels, becoming gray-brown in their second year; on open
mountain slopes a shrub with numerous erect stems and usually smaller
leaves. Winter-buds acute or acuminate, 1/16'--1/8' long, with slightly
villose red-brown scales. Bark near the base of old trunks 1/4' thick,
nearly black, deeply fissured and broken on the surface into thin
persistent scales, higher on the trunk and on small stems thin, smooth,
reddish or gray-brown, lustrous and marked by many narrow oblong pale
horizontal lenticels.

Distribution. Guadalupe Mountains, western Texas, over the mountain
ranges of southern New Mexico and Arizona, extending northward in
Arizona to the canyons of the Colorado plateau south of the Colorado
River; widely and generally distributed at altitudes between 5000 deg. and
8000 deg., but nowhere abundant. Passing into var. _rufula_ Sarg., differing
in the rusty brown pubescence on the lower side of the midrib of the
leaves, in the pubescent petiole and lower part of the rachis, in the
puberulous ovary, and in the rusty brown pubescence of the young
branchlets.

Distribution. With the species on many of the mountain ranges of
southern New Mexico and Arizona at altitudes between 5400 deg. and 6000 deg.


         19. Prunus caroliniana Ait. Wild Orange. Mock Orange.

[Illustration: Fig. 532]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, mucronate, with entire thickened
slightly revolute margins, or rarely remotely spinulose-serrate,
glabrous, coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface,
paler on the lower surface, 2'--4-1/2' long and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, and
obscurely veined, with a narrow pale midrib; persistent until their
second year; petioles stout, broad, orange-colored; stipules foliaceous,
lanceolate, acuminate. Flowers appearing from February to April, on
slender pedicels about 1/2' long, from the axils of long-acuminate
scarious red-tipped bracts, in dense racemes shorter than leaves;
calyx-tube narrow-obconic, the lobes small, thin, rounded, undulate on
the margins, reflexed after the flowers open, deciduous; petals
boat-shaped, minute, cream-colored; stamens exserted, orange-colored,
with glabrous filaments and large pale anthers; ovary gradually narrowed
into a slender erect style enlarged above into a club-shaped stigma.
Fruit ripening in the autumn, remaining on the branches until after the
flowering period of the following year, oblong, short-pointed, black and
lustrous, 1/2' long, with a thick skin, and thin dry flesh; stone
short-ovoid, pointed, nearly cylindric, about 1/2' long, full and
rounded at base, with thin fragile walls, obscurely ridged on the
ventral suture and deeply grooved on the dorsal suture.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a straight or inclining trunk sometimes 10'
in diameter, slender horizontal branches forming a narrow oblong or
sometimes a broad head, and glabrous branchlets marked by occasional
pale lenticels, slightly angled, at first light green, becoming bright
red, and in the second season light brown or gray. Winter-buds
acuminate, 1/8' long, covered with narrow pointed dark chestnut-brown
scales rounded on the back. Bark about 1/8' thick, gray, smooth or
slightly roughened by longitudinal fissures, and marked by large
irregular dark blotches. Wood heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, light
red-brown or sometimes rich dark brown, with thick lighter colored
sapwood. The partially withered leaves and young branches are often
fatal to animals browsing upon them, owing to the considerable
quantities of hydrocyanic acid which they contain.

Distribution. Deep rich moist bottom-lands; valley of the Cape Fear
River, North Carolina, to the shores of Bay Biscayne and the valley of
the Kissimee River, Florida, and through southern Alabama, Mississippi,
and Louisiana to the valley of the Guadalupe River, Texas; in Bermuda;
in the Atlantic and eastern Gulf states usually only in the immediate
neighborhood of the sea, rarely ranging inland more than fifteen or
twenty miles; common along the borders of hummocks in the center of the
Florida peninsula and a characteristic tree on those in the region of
Lake Apopka, Orange County; in Alabama ranging inland to Dallas County
(Pleasant Hill, _T. B. Harbison_); most abundant and of its largest size
in the valleys of eastern Texas, and here often forming great
impenetrable thickets.

Often cultivated in the southern states as an ornamental plant and to
form hedges; and when cultivated occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a
trunk 3 deg. in diameter.


                       20. Prunus myrtifolia Urb.

                        _Prunus sphaerocarpa_ Sw.

[Illustration: Fig. 533]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-ovate, gradually or abruptly contracted into a
broad obtuse point, or less commonly rounded or rarely emarginate at
apex, cuneate at base, entire, with slightly thickened undulate margins,
glabrous, eglandular, subcoriaceous, yellow-green and lustrous on the
upper surface, paler on the lower surface, obscurely veined, 2'--4-1/2'
long and 1'--1-1/2' wide; persistent; petioles slender, orange-brown,
1/2' to 1' in length; stipules foliaceous, lanceolate, acuminate,
entire, 1/4' long, early deciduous. Flowers opening in Florida in
November, 1/8' in diameter, on thin orange-colored pedicels 1/4'--2/3'
long, in slender many-flowered erect racemes shorter than the leaves;
calyx-tube obconic, bright orange-colored on the outer surface, marked
by an orange band in the throat, the lobes thin, minute, acute,
laciniate on the margins, deciduous, much shorter than the obovate
rounded or acuminate white petals marked with yellow on the inner
surface toward the base, contracted below into a short claw, reflexed at
maturity; stamens exserted, with slender orange-colored subulate
filaments and small yellow anthers; ovary sessile, contracted into a
short stout style, terminating in a large club-shaped stigma. Fruit
produced in Florida very sparingly, ripening either in the spring or
early summer, subglobose to short-oblong, apiculate, orange-brown,
1/3'--1/2' long, with thin dry flesh; stone thin-walled, cylindric,
slightly narrowed at apex, and obscurely ridged on the ventral suture.

A glabrous tree, in Florida rarely 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in
diameter, thin upright branches and slender orange-brown branchlets,
becoming ashy gray or light brown tinged with red and marked by small
circular pale lenticels. Bark of the trunk thin, smooth or slightly
reticulate-fissured, light brown tinged with red. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, light clear red, with thick pale sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, rich hummock land, occasionally in the
neighborhood of small streams and ponds near the shore of Bay Biscayne
and on Long Key in the Everglades, Dade County; through the West Indies
to Brazil.


                   21. Prunus ilicifolia Walp. Islay.

[Illustration: Fig. 534]

Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acute, rounded or emarginate at apex,
narrowed and rounded or truncate at base, with thickened coarsely
spinosely toothed margins, the stout teeth near the base of the leaf
often tipped with large dark glands, thick and coriaceous, dark green
and lustrous above, paler and yellow-green below, 1'--2-1/2' long, and
1'--1-1/2' wide, with a slender yellow midrib and obscure veins;
deciduous during their second summer; petioles broad, 1/8'--1/2' in
length; stipules acuminate, obscurely denticulate, 1/4' long. Flowers
opening from March to May, 1/3' in diameter, on short slender pedicels
from the axils of acuminate scarious bracts 1/4' in length and mostly
deciduous before the opening of the flower-buds, in slender erect
racemes 1-1/2'--3' long; calyx-tube cup-shaped, orange-brown, the lobes
minute, acuminate, reflexed at maturity, deciduous, about one third as
long as the obovate white petals rounded above and narrowed below into a
short claw; stamens slightly exserted, with slender incurved filaments
and minute yellow anthers; ovary sessile, abruptly contracted into a
slender style usually bent near the summit at a right angle or rarely
erect, and surmounted by a large orbicular stigma. Fruit ripening in
November and December, subglobose, often compressed, 1/2'--2/3' in
diameter, dark red when fully grown, purple or sometimes nearly black at
maturity, with thin slightly acid astringent flesh; stone ovoid slightly
compressed, 1/2'--5/8' long, short-pointed at apex, with thin brittle
walls, light yellow-brown, conspicuously marked by reticulate
orange-colored vein-like lines and with 3 orange bands radiating from
the base to the apex along one suture, and with a single narrow band
along the other suture.

A glabrous tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 2 deg. in diameter or
more than 10 deg.--12 deg. long, stout spreading branches forming a dense
compact head, and branchlets at first yellow-green or orange color, soon
becoming gray or reddish brown and more or less conspicuously marked by
minute pale lenticels, and in their second or third years by the large
leaf-scars; usually much smaller and often a shrub sometimes only a foot
or two high. Winter-buds acuminate, with dark red scales contracted into
a long slender point, those of the inner ranks accrescent and persistent
on the young branchlets until these have reached a length of several
inches. Bark 1/3'--1/2' thick, dark red-brown, and divided by deep
fissures into small square plates. Wood heavy, hard, strong,
close-grained, light red-brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood of
8--10 layers of annual growth; occasionally used for fuel.

Distribution. Borders of streams and moist sandy soil in the bottoms of
canyons, and as a low shrub on dry hillsides and mesas from Solano County
and the shores of the Bay of San Francisco southward through the coast
ranges of California to the foothills of the San Bernardino Mountains,
and the valley of the San Jacinto River; in Lower California southward
to the western slopes of the San Pedro Martir Mountains.

Generally cultivated as an ornamental plant in California and
occasionally in western and southern Europe.


                        22. Prunus Lyonii Sarg.

                      _Prunus integrifolia_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 535]

Leaves ovate to lanceolate, acuminate or abruptly narrowed into a short
point at apex, cuneate, truncate or rounded at base, with thickened
revolute undulate entire or occasionally, especially on vigorous shoots,
remotely and minutely spinulose-dentate margins, glabrous, coriaceous,
dark green and lustrous above, paler below, reticulate-venulose, 2'--3'
long and 1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout midrib and obscure veins;
persistent; petioles stout, yellow, 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers
appearing from March to June, about 1/4' in diameter, on slender
pedicels from the axils of acuminate caducous bracts, in crowded
many-flowered glabrous racemes 3'--4' long; calyx-tube cup-shaped,
orange-brown, the lobes acute, apiculate, reflexed after the flowers
open, deciduous, about one third as long as the obovate petals rounded
and undulate above and narrowed below into a short claw; stamens
slightly exserted, with incurved filaments and small yellow anthers;
ovary raised on a short stipe, the style bent near the apex and
terminating in a large orbicular stigma. Fruit ripening late in the
autumn, on stout pedicels, in drooping few-fruited racemes, subglobose
to short-oblong, dark purple or nearly black at maturity, 1'--1-1/4' in
diameter, with thick luscious flesh sometimes 1/4' thick; stone ovoid to
obovoid, slightly compressed, thin-walled, about 3/4' long, pointed at
apex, pale yellow-brown, conspicuously marked by reticulate
orange-colored lines, and by 3 dark bands radiating from base to apex
along one suture, and by a single narrow line on the other suture.

A bushy tree, sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with one or several stout erect
or spreading stems 1 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, spreading branches forming a
broad compact head, and stout branchlets light yellow-green when they
first appear, becoming light and ultimately dark reddish brown, and much
roughened by the large elevated leaf-scars. Winter-buds acute or obtuse,
with dark red scales. Bark of the trunk 1/3'--1/2' thick and dark
reddish brown. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained, pale reddish brown,
with hardly distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Islands of southern California, in all situations from the
fertile valleys and canyons at the water's edge up to altitudes of 3000 deg.
on the dry interior ridges; in Lower California.




                          11. CHRYSOBALANUS L.


Trees or shrubs, with stout branchlets covered with pale lenticels, and
fibrous roots. Leaves alternate, entire, coriaceous, short-petiolate,
persistent; stipules minute, deciduous. Flowers perfect,
short-pedicellate, small, creamy white, in axillary or terminal
dichotomously branched slender canescent cymes, with conspicuous
deciduous bracts; calyx turbinate-campanulate, 5-lobed, the lobes
imbricated in the bud, without bracts, deciduous; disk thin, adnate to
the calyx-tube; petals 5, alternate with the lobes of the calyx,
spatulate, deciduous; stamens (in the arborescent species) indefinite in
a single continuous series, inserted with the petals on the margin of
the disk; filaments filiform, hairy, free or slightly united at base;
anthers ovoid, ovary sessile in the bottom of the calyx-tube, pubescent
or glabrous, 1-celled; style rising from the base of the ovary,
filiform, terminated by a minute truncate stigma; ovules 2, collateral,
ascending; raphe dorsal; the micropyle inferior. Fruit a fleshy 1-seeded
drupe with pulpy flesh, a coriaceous or crustaceous stone 5 or 6-angled
toward the base and imperfectly 5 or 6-valved, the valves
reticulate-veined. Seed erect; seed-coat chartaceous, light brown;
embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons thick and fleshy;
radicle inferior, very short.

Chrysobalanus is represented in the south Atlantic states by a shrubby
species confined to the coast region from Georgia to Alabama, and by an
arborescent species, an inhabitant of the shores of southern Florida,
and widely distributed through the maritime regions of tropical America,
and found in various forms on the coast of western tropical Africa. The
insipid fruit of the arborescent species is eaten by negroes; the seeds
contain a considerable quantity of oil; and the astringent bark, leaves
and roots have been used in medicine.

The generic name is from {chrysos} and {balanos}, in allusion to the
supposed golden fruit of one of the species.


                 1. Chrysobalanus icaco L. Cocoa Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 536]

Leaves broad-elliptic or round-obovate, rounded or slightly emarginate
at apex, cuneate at base, glabrous, coriaceous, obscurely
reticulate-veined, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, light
yellow-green on the lower surface, 1'--3-1/2' long and 1'--2-1/2' wide,
with a broad conspicuous midrib rounded on the upper side and thin
primary veins, standing on the branches at an acute angle and appearing
to be pressed against them; petioles stout, 1/8'--1/4' in length;
stipules acuminate, 1/8' long. Flowers 1/3' long, on short thick
club-shaped hoary-tomentose pedicels, in cymes 1'--2' in length;
appearing in Florida continuously during the spring and summer months on
the growing branches; calyx hoary-tomentose, the lobes nearly
triangular, acute, more or less pubescent on the inner surface and about
half as long as the narrow white petals; ovary hoary-pubescent; style
long and slender, clothed nearly to the apex with pale hairs. Fruit
nearly globose or oval-ovoid, 1-1/2'--1-3/4' in diameter, with a smooth
bright pink, yellow, or creamy white skin, white sweet juicy flesh often
1/4' thick, and more or less adherent to the stone rounded at base,
acute or acuminate at apex, 5 or 6-angled below the middle, about 1'
long and twice as long as broad, indehiscent or finally separating into
5 or 6 valves, the walls composed of a thin red-brown dry outer layer
and a thick interior layer of hard woody fibre; seed-coat lined with a
thick white reticulated fibrous coat.

Usually a broad shrub 10 deg.--12 deg. high, forming dense thickets, with erect
branches and dark red-brown branchlets thickly covered for four or five
years with lenticels, occasionally on the borders of low hummocks
arborescent with reclining or rarely erect stems 20 deg.--30 deg. long and 1 deg. in
diameter, or on the margins of ocean beaches often not more than 1 deg. or
2 deg. tall. Bark dark red-brown and scaly, separating into long thin
scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, light brown often
tinged with red, with thin lighter colored sapwood of about 10 layers of
annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, saline shores, river banks and low hummocks, Cape
Canaveral to Bay Biscayne, and on the west coast from the mouth of the
Caloosahatchie River to the southern keys; through the West Indies to
southern Brazil, and on the tropical west coast of Africa. Passing into


                Chrysobalanus icaco var. pellocarpa DC.

[Illustration: Fig. 537]

Differing from the type in its rather larger leaves spreading and less
crowded on the branches, its oblong to oblong-obovoid dark purple or
nearly black usually rather smaller fruit, and in its long-acuminate and
more prominently angled stone.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. or rarely 50 deg. high, with an erect trunk 12'--16' in
diameter, erect and spreading branches forming a wide open head, and
slender branchlets marked by scattered pale lenticels; often smaller and
occasionally a shrub. Bark gray slightly tinged with red and covered
with small closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Florida, banks of streams and borders of the Everglades,
near Little River to the Everglade keys, Dade County; on the Bahama
Islands and in Jamaica.




                           XXIII. LEGUMINOSAE.


Trees or shrubs, with alternate usually compound leaves, regular or
papilionaceous usually perfect flowers; stamens 10 or indefinite, with
diadelphous or distinct filaments and 2-celled anthers, the cells
opening longitudinally; ovary superior, 1 or many-celled, inserted on
the bottom of the calyx. Fruit a legume. Of the four hundred and thirty
genera of the Pea-family now recognized and widely distributed in all
temperate and tropical regions, eighteen have arborescent
representatives in the United States.


          CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT GENERA.

  Subfamily 1. Mimosoideae. Calyx 4--6-toothed, the teeth valvate in the
        bud; petals as many as the teeth of the calyx, valvate in the
        bud; ovules numerous, suspended in 2 ranks from the inner angle
        of the ovary, superposed, anatropous, the micropyle superior;
        stamens much exserted; leaves twice pinnate; cotyledons oval or
        orbicular, flat; radicle straight.
    Stamens numerous (more than 10); seeds without albumen.
      Filaments more or less united into a tube.
        Filaments united.
          Valves of the legume not separating at maturity from the
                margins.
                                                       1. Pithecolobium.
          Valves of the legume separating at maturity from the
                persistent margins.
                                                            2. Lysiloma.
      Filaments free or the inner ones slightly united at base.
                                                              3. Acacia.
    Stamens 10; filaments free; seeds with albumen.
      Legume plano-compressed, dehiscent; flowers in globose heads.
                                                             4. Leucaena.
      Legume terete or compressed, indehiscent; flowers in cylindric
            spikes.
                                                            5. Prosopis.
  Subfamily 2. Caesalpinioidae. Calyx 5-lobed or toothed, the divisions
        usually valvate in the bud; corolla imperfectly papilionaceous
        or nearly regular; petals 5, imbricated in the bud, the upper
        petal inside and inclosed by the others; stamens 10 or less;
        filaments free; anthers introrse; ovules numerous (_sometimes 2
        in one species of Gleditsia_), superposed, anatropous, the
        micropyle superior; seeds albuminous.
    Flowers imperfectly papilionaceous; calyx 5-toothed; legume flat,
          wing-margined; leaves simple
                                                              6. Cercis.
    Flowers regular.
      Flowers polygamous or dioecious.
        Calyx-tube elongated, 5-lobed; petals 5; stamens 10, shorter
              than the petals; legume thick and woody; leaves twice
              pinnate.
                                                         7. Gymnocladus.
        Calyx-tube short, 3--5-lobed; petals 3--5; stamens 3--5, longer
              than the petals; legume leathery; leaves once and twice
              pinnate.
                                                           8. Gleditsia.
      Flowers perfect.
        Legume linear, torulose, acuminate at the ends, the valves
              contracted between the seeds; rachis of the leaf
              spinescent.
                                                         9. Parkinsonia.
        Legume oblong, compressed; rachis of the leaf not spinescent.
                                                          10. Cercidium.
  Subfamily 3. Papilionatae. Calyx of 5 more or less united sepals;
        corolla of 5 irregular petals, papilionaceous, the upper petal
        (_standard_) larger than the others and inclosing them in the
        bud, usually turned backward or spreading, the 2 lateral petals
        (_wings_) oblong, exterior to the 2 lower connivent more or less
        united petals (_keel_) inclosing the stamens and pistil; stamens
        10, 9 of them united into a tube cleft on the upper side, the
        10th and upper stamen separate, or all distinct; ovary 1 or
        many-celled by cross partitions; ovules amphitropous, the
        micropyle superior; seeds usually without albumen; leaves once
        pinnate.
    Stamens distinct.
      Flowers in racemes; legume terete, contracted between the seeds.
                                                            11. Sophora.
      Flowers in panicles; legume compressed.
                                                         12. Cladrastis.
    Stamens diadelphous (9 and 1).
      Flowers in racemes.
        Leaves glandular-dotted.
          Leaves many-foliolate; petals free and distinct.
                                                       13. Eysenhardtia.
          Leaves simple; wings and keel-petals adnate to the tube of the
                stamens.
                                                              14. Dalea.
        Leaves without glandular dots.
          Legume compressed; stipules becoming spinescent, persistent.
                                                            15. Robinia.
          Legume turgid, the valves unequally convex by the growth of
                the seeds.
            Leaves 10--15-foliolate, without stipules or stipels; petals
                  purple or violet.
                                                             16. Olneya.
            Leaves 3-foliolate, with minute stipules and gland-like
                  stipels; petals usually scarlet.
                                                          17. Erythrina.
      Flowers in axillary panicles; pod linear, longitudinally 4-winged.
                                                      18. Ichthyomethia.




                         1. PITHECOLOBIUM Mart.


Trees or shrubs, with slender branches armed with the persistent
spinescent stipules. Leaves petiolate, bipinnate, the pinnae
few-foliolate, their rachis generally marked by numerous glands between
the pinnae and between the leaflets. Flowers perfect or polygamous, from
the axils of minute bracts, in pedunculate globose heads or oblong
cylindric spikes, their peduncles in terminal panicles or axillary
fascicles; calyx campanulate, short-toothed; corolla funnel-shaped, the
petals as many as the teeth of the calyx, joined for more than half
their length; stamens numerous, united at base into a tube free from the
corolla; anthers minute, versatile; ovary stipitate, contracted into a
slender filiform style, with a minute terminal stigma. Legume
compressed, 2-valved, dehiscent, the valves continuous or interrupted
within. Seeds compressed, suspended transversely; funicle filiform or
expanded into a fleshy aril; hilum near the base of the seed; seed-coat
thin or thick, marked on each of the 2 surfaces of the seed by a faint
oval ring or oblong depression; embryo filling the cavity of the seed;
the radicle included or slightly exserted.

Pithecolobium with more than a hundred species is widely distributed
through the tropical and subtropical regions of the two worlds, and is
most abundant in tropical America. Of the four species found within the
territory of the United States three are arborescent.

The generic name, from {pithex} and {ellobion}, relates to the contorted
fruit of some of the species.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Pinnae with 1 pair of leaflets; valves of the legume much contorted
        after opening; seed surrounded by the enlarged ariloid funicle.
                                                  1. P. unguis-cati (D).
  Pinnae with more than 1 pair of leaflets; valves of the legume not
        contorted after opening; funicle of the seed not enlarged and
        ariloid.
    Pinnae with 3--5 pairs of leaflets; legume short-stalked, the valves
          submembranaceous; seeds not in separate compartments.
                                                  2. P. brevifolium (E).
    Pinnae with 2--3 pairs of leaflets; legume sessile, the valves thick
          and woody, tardily dehiscent; seeds in separate compartments.
                                                   3. P. flexicaule (E).


             1. Pithecolobium unguis-cati Mart. Cat's Claw.

                       _Zygia Unguis-Cati_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 538]

Leaves persistent, long-petiolate, with a single pair of bifoliolate
pinnae and a slender petiole 1/2'--1' long and slightly and abruptly
enlarged at base; rachis glandular between the short stout petiolules
and between the orbicular or broad-oblong leaflets, rounded and rarely
emarginate at apex, rounded on one side and cuneate on the other of the
oblique base, entire, thin or somewhat coriaceous, reticulate-veined,
bright green and lustrous on the upper surface and paler on the lower
surface, 1/2'--2' long, and 1/2'--1-1/2' wide. Flowers polygamous, pale
yellow, glabrous or slightly puberulous, opening in Florida in March and
continuing to appear until midsummer, in globular heads on slender
peduncles 1'--1-1/2' long fascicled in the axils of upper leaves or
collected in ample terminal panicles, their bracts lanceolate,
acuminate, chartaceous, 1/4' long, caducous; calyx rather less than
1/12' long, broadly toothed, one quarter as long as the acuminate petals
barely exceeding the tube formed by the union of the filaments; stamens
purple, 1/2' long; ovary glabrous, long-stalked, minute or rudimentary
in the sterile flower. Fruit slightly torulose, stipitate, rounded or
acute at apex, 2'--4' long, 1/4'--1/2' wide, the valves
reticulate-veined, thickened on the margins, bright reddish brown and
after opening greatly and variously contorted; seeds irregularly obovoid
or sometimes nearly triangular, compressed or thickened, dark
chestnut-brown, lustrous, marked by faint oval rings, 1/3' long,
surrounded at base by the enlarged bright red ariloid funicle; seed-coat
thin, cartilaginous.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a slender trunk 7'--8' in
diameter, ascending and spreading branches forming a low flat irregular
head, and slender somewhat zigzag branchlets slightly striately angled
when they first appear, becoming terete, light gray-brown or dark
reddish brown, covered with minute pale lenticels, and armed with the
straight persistent rigid stipular spines broad at base and 1/4' long,
or rarely minute; more often a shrub, with many vine-like almost
prostrate stems. Bark of the trunk 1/4' thick, reddish brown and divided
by shallow fissures into small square plates. Wood very heavy, hard,
close-grained, rich red varying to purple, with thin clear yellow
sapwood. The bark is astringent and diuretic, and was once used in
Jamaica as a cure for many diseases.

Distribution. Florida, Captive and Sanibel Islands and Caloosa, Lee
County to the southern keys; most abundant in its arborescent form on
the larger of the eastern keys, and probably of its largest size in
Florida on Elliott's Key; often forming shrubby thickets; on the
Bahamas, and common and widely distributed through the Antilles to
Venezuela and New Granada.


             2. Pithecolobium brevifolium Benth. Huajillo.

                        _Zygia brevifolia_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 539]

Leaves 2'--3' long, 2' wide, with eight to ten 10--20-foliolate pinnae
and slender terete petioles 1' in length and furnished near the middle
with a dark oblong gland, when they unfold coated with pale tomentum and
at maturity glabrous with the exception of the puberulous petiole and
rachis; persistent or tardily deciduous; leaflets oblong-linear, obtuse
or acute at apex, oblique at base, very short-petiolulate, light green
on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, 1/6'--1/4' long.
Flowers white to violet-yellow, in globose or oblong heads 1/2' in
diameter, on thin pubescent peduncles bracteolate at apex, coated at
first, like the flower-buds, with thick white tomentum, developed
usually in pairs from the axils of lanceolate acute scarious deciduous
bracts, and arranged in short terminal racemes; calyx shortly 5-lobed,
puberulous on the outer surface, about 1/24' long and one fourth the
length of the puberulous petals persistent with the stamens at the base
of the mature legume; stamens nearly 1/2' long. Fruit ripening at
midsummer and often persistent on the branches after opening until the
trees flower the following year, straight, slightly torulose,
short-stalked, contracted at apex into a short slender point, 4'--6'
long and 2/3' wide, its valves thin, thick-margined, reddish brown on
the outer surface, yellow tinged with red on the inner surface,
reticulate-veined; seeds suspended by a slender coiled and somewhat
dilated funicle, compressed, ovoid to nearly orbicular, dark
chestnut-brown, very lustrous, 1/4' long, and faintly marked by large
oval depressions; seed-coat thin, cartilaginous.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 5'--6' in diameter, slender
upright branches forming a narrow irregular head, and branchlets
slightly striately angled, covered with minute white lenticels, light
gray and puberulous when they first appear, becoming dark brown in their
second year, and armed with stout rigid stipular spines sometimes 1/2'
long and persistent for many years; more often a shrub, sometimes only
2 deg.--3 deg. tall. Bark of the trunk smooth, light gray somewhat tinged with
red, and often marked by large pale blotches. Wood dark-colored, hard,
and heavy.

Distribution. Bluffs and bottom-lands of the lower Rio Grande, and on
the upper Nueces River in Uvalde County, Texas; usually a low shrub
spreading into broad clumps, but occasionally in the rich and
comparatively moist soil of the banks of river-lagoons a slender tree;
in Mexico more abundant, and of its largest size from the mouth of the
Rio Grande to the Sierra Madre of Nuevo Leon.


               3. Pithecolobium flexicaule Coult. Ebony.

                       _Zygia flexicaulis_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 540]

Leaves persistent, 1-1/2'--2' long, 2-1/2'--3' wide, long-petiolate with
slender puberulous petioles glandular near the middle and furnished at
apex with small orbicular solitary glands, and 4--6 usually 6-foliolate
pinnae, the lowest pair often the shortest; leaflets oblong-ovate,
rounded at apex, reticulate-veined, thin or subcoriaceous, glabrous,
dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, 1/4'--1/3' long; petiolules short and broad. Flowers light
yellow or cream color, very fragrant, sessile in the axils of minute
caducous bracts, appearing from June until August, in cylindric dense or
interrupted spikes 1-1/2' long, on stout pubescent peduncles fascicled
in the axils of the upper leaves of the previous year; corolla four or
five times as long as the calyx and like it puberulous on the outer
surface, and about as long as the tube formed by the union of the
filaments; stamens 1/8' long; ovary glabrous, sessile. Fruit ripening in
the autumn and remaining on the branches until after the flowering
season of the following year, sessile, tardily dehiscent, thick,
straight or slightly falcate, oblique at base, rounded and contracted
into a short broad point at apex, pubescent, 4'--6' long and 1'--1-1/4'
wide, with thick woody valves lined with a thick pithy substance
inclosing and separating the seeds; seeds suspended on a very short
straight funicle, bright red-brown, 1/2' long and 1/4' wide, irregularly
obovoid, faintly marked by short oblong depressions; seed-coat thick,
crustaceous.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
separating 8 deg.--10 deg. from the ground into short spreading branches forming
a wide round head, and stout zigzag branchlets, puberulous, light green
or dark reddish brown when they first appear, becoming in their second
year glabrous or rarely puberulous, dark reddish brown or light gray,
and armed with the persistent stipular pale chestnut-brown spines
1/4'--1/2' long. Wood exceedingly heavy, hard, compact, close-grained,
dark rich red-brown slightly tinged with purple, with thin clear bright
yellow sapwood; almost indestructible in contact with the ground and
largely used for fence-posts; valued by cabinet-makers and for fuel, and
considered more valuable than that of any other tree of the lower Rio
Grande valley. The seeds are palatable and nutritious, and are boiled
when green or roasted when ripe by the Mexicans, who use their thick
shells as a substitute for coffee.

Distribution. Shores of Matagorda Bay, Texas, to the Sierra Nevada of
Nuevo Leon, and in Lower California; common on the bluffs of the
Gulf-coast and on both banks of the lower Rio Grande; south of the Rio
Grande one of the commonest and most beautiful trees of the region.




                           2. LYSILOMA Benth.


Trees or shrubs, with slender unarmed branchlets, abruptly bipinnate
long-petiolate persistent leaves, their petioles marked by large
conspicuous glands, and small leaflets in many pairs; stipules large,
membranaceous, persistent or deciduous. Flowers perfect or rarely
polygamous, minute, usually white or greenish white, from the axils of
minute bractlets more or less dilated at apex, in globose many-flowered
heads, on axillary solitary or fascicled peduncles; calyx campanulate,
5-toothed; corolla funnel-shaped, of 5 petals united for more than half
their length; stamens generally 12--30, exserted; filaments filiform,
united at base into a tube free from the corolla; anthers minute, ovoid,
versatile; ovary sessile, contracted into a slender subulate style, with
a minute terminal stigma. Legume broad, straight, compressed,
submembranaceous, the valves at maturity separating from the undivided
margins, continuous within, their outer layer thin and papery,
dark-colored, the inner rather thicker, pale yellow. Seeds compressed,
transverse, suspended by a long slender funicle, the hilum near the
base; seed-coat thin, crustaceous; radicle slightly exserted.

Lysiloma with about ten species inhabits tropical America from southern
Florida and the Bahama Islands, the West Indies, Mexico and Lower
California, to Central America and Bolivia. Several of the species
produce valuable timber.

The generic name, from {lysis} and {loma}, refers to the separation of
the valves from the margins of the legume.


              1. Lysiloma bahamensis Benth. Wild Tamarind.

[Illustration: Fig. 541]

Leaves 4'--5' long, glabrous or sometimes slightly puberulous, with
slender petioles 1' long, marked near the middle with an elevated gland,
enlarged and slightly glandular at base, and 2--6 pairs of short-stalked
40--80-foliolate pinnae; stipules foliaceous, ovate or ovate-oblong,
acuminate, auriculate and semicordate at base, 1/2' long, usually
caducous; leaflets obliquely ovate or oblong, obtuse or acute, more or
less united at base by the greater development of one of the sides,
sessile or short-petiolulate, entire, reticulate-veined, light green,
paler on the lower than on the upper surface, 1/4'--1/2' long, and
1/8'--1/4' wide. Flowers about 1/3' long, in heads appearing in Florida
early in April, coated before the flowers open with thick pale tomentum,
and after the exsertion of the stamens 2/3' in diameter, on peduncles
3/4'--1-1/2' long, solitary or fascicled in the axils of upper leaves,
their bracts and bractlets acute, membranaceous, caducous; calyx
5-toothed, pilose on the outer surface, especially above the middle,
1/12' long, and half as long as the 5-lobed corolla with reflexed lobes;
stamens about 20, twice as long as the corolla, united for one fourth of
their length into a slender tube. Fruit ripening in the autumn and
persistent on the branches until after the flowering period of the
following year, stipitate, gradually narrowed and acute at the ends,
4'--5' long, 1' broad, with a slender stem 1'--2' long, in clusters of 2
or 3 on short peduncles abruptly and conspicuously enlarged at the apex;
valves thin and papery, bronze-green when fully grown, becoming dark
red-brown, separating slowly from the margins; seeds oval or obovoid,
dark brown, lustrous, 1/2' long.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, stout spreading
branches forming a wide flat head, and glabrous or somewhat pilose
conspicuously verrucose branchlets, bright red-brown when they first
appear, becoming pale or light reddish brown in their second year. Bark
of the trunk of young trees and of the branches smooth, light gray
tinged with pink, becoming on old trunks 1/4'--1/2' thick, dark brown
and separating into large plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, not
strong, tough, close-grained, rich dark brown tinged with red, with
nearly white sapwood 1'--1-1/2' thick, of 4 or 5 layers of annual
growth; in Florida occasionally used and valued for boat and
shipbuilding.

Distribution. Florida; shores of Bay Biscayne near Miami, and the
Everglade Keys, Dade County, common, and on Key Largo, Elliott's,
Plantation, and Boca Chica Keys, not common; on the Bahama Islands and
in Cuba.




                            3. ACACIA Adans.


Trees or shrubs, with slender branches armed with spinescent stipules or
infrastipular spines. Leaves alternate on young branchlets and fascicled
in earlier axils, bipinnate, with usually small leaflets, persistent.
Flowers perfect or polygamous, small, in the axils of minute linear
bractlets more or less dilated and often peltate at apex, in globose
heads or cylindric spikes on axillary solitary or fascicled peduncles;
calyx campanulate, 5 or 6-toothed; petals as many as the divisions of
the calyx, more or less united; stamens numerous, usually more than 50,
exserted, free or slightly and irregularly united at base, inserted
under or just above the base of the ovary; filaments filiform; anthers
small, attached on the back, versatile; ovary contracted into a long
slender style terminating in a minute stigma. Legume nearly cylindric or
flat, indehiscent, continuous or divided within. Seeds transverse,
compressed; seed-coat thick, crustaceous, marked on each face of the
seed by an oval depression or ring; radicle straight, included, or
slightly exserted.

Acacia with more than four hundred species is widely distributed through
Australia, where it is most largely represented, tropical and southern
Africa, northern Africa, southwestern China, the warmer regions of
southern Asia, the islands of the south Pacific, tropical and temperate
South America, the West Indies, Central America and Mexico to the
southwestern boundaries of the United States where ten or twelve species
occur; of these five are arborescent. Acacia is astringent, and many
species yield valuable tan bark. Gum arabic is produced by different Old
World species; many of the species yield hard heavy durable wood, and
some of the Australian Acacias are large and valuable timber-trees. Many
species are cultivated for their graceful foliage and handsome fragrant
flowers.

The generic name, from {akakia}, relates to the spines with which the
branches are usually armed.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers in globose heads; corolla 5-lobed; ovary sessile; stipules
        persistent, becoming spines.
    Legume cylindric, glabrous, its sutures conspicuously thickened and
          grooved; seeds in 2 ranks.
                                                   1. A. Farnesiana (E).
    Legume flattened, pubescent, its sutures not thickened, slightly
          grooved; seeds in 1 rank.
                                                     2. A. tortuosa (E).
  Flowers in short, often interrupted, spikes; legume flattened,
        pubescent, its sutures thickened; seeds in one rank.
                                                     3. A. Emoriana (E).
  Flowers in elongated slender spikes; corolla of 5 petals only slightly
        united at base; ovary stalked; stipules caducous; branchlets
        armed with infrastipular spines.
    Legume 1'--1-1/4' wide, straight or slightly contracted between the
          seeds, not becoming twisted and contorted at maturity; seeds
          narrow-obovoid or ovoid; leaflets green, glabrous, with
          prominent veinlets.
                                                     4. A. Wrightii (E).
    Legume 1/2'--3/4' wide, often conspicuously contracted between the
          seeds, becoming twisted and contorted at maturity; seeds
          nearly orbicular; leaflets blue-green, pubescent, with obscure
          veinlets.
                                                5. A. Greggii (E, G, H).


             1. Acacia Farnesiana Willd. Huisache. Cassie.

[Illustration: Fig. 542]

Leaves 2'--4' long, with 2--8, usually 4 or 5, pairs of pinnae, generally
somewhat puberulous on the short petiole and rachis; in Texas mostly
falling at the beginning of winter; pinnae sessile or short-stalked,
remote or close together, with 10--25 pairs of linear acute leaflets
tipped with a minute point, unequal at base, sessile or
short-petiolulate, glabrous or puberulous, bright green, 1/8'--1/4'
long. Flowers bright yellow, very fragrant, 1/16' long, opening during
the summer and autumn from the axils of minute clavate pilose bractlets,
in heads 2/3' in diameter, on axillary thin puberulous peduncles,
solitary or most often 2 or 3 together and 1'--1-1/2' in length, with
two minute dentate connate bracts forming an involucral cup immediately
under the flower-head; calyx about half as long as the petals and like
them somewhat pilose on the outer surface; stamens two or three times as
long as the corolla; ovary short-stipitate, covered with long pale
hairs. Fruit oblong, cylindric or spindle-shaped, thick, turgid,
straight or curved, slightly contracted between the seeds,
short-stalked, narrowed at apex into a short thick point, 2'--3' long,
1/2'--2/3' broad, dark red-purple, lustrous, and marked by broad
light-colored bands along the thickened grooved sutures, the outer coat
of the walls thin and papery, inclosing a thick pithy pulp-like
substance surrounding the seeds, each in a separate thin-walled
compartment; seeds ovoid, thick, flattened on the inner surface by
mutual pressure, 1/4' long, suspended transversely in 2 ranks on a short
straight funicle, light brown, lustrous, and faintly marked by large
oval rings.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a straight trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
separating 6 deg.--8 deg. from the ground into numerous long pendulous branches
forming a wide round spreading head, and slender terete or slightly
striate angled branchlets, glabrous or at first puberulous, and armed
with straight rigid terete spines developed from the persistent stipules
and sometimes 1-1/2' long. Bark of the trunk thin, reddish brown,
irregularly broken by long reticulated ridges, exfoliating in large thin
scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, rich reddish brown, with thin
pale sapwood; in India used for the knees of small vessels and in
agricultural implements.

Distribution. Now widely spread by cultivation through the tropical and
subtropical regions of the two worlds and probably a native of America
from western Texas to northern Chile; growing in Texas apparently
naturally in the arid and almost uninhabited region between the Nueces
and Rio Grande; naturalized and now covering great areas in the valley
of the Guadalupe River near Victoria, Victoria County, Texas.

Largely cultivated in southern Europe for its fragrant flowers used in
the manufacture of perfumery, as an ornament of gardens in all warm
countries, and in India as a hedge plant.


                       2. Acacia tortuosa Willd.

[Illustration: Fig. 543]

Leaves generally less than 1' long, short-petiolate, with a slender
puberulous rachis and usually 3 or 4 pairs of pinnae; early deciduous;
pinnae sessile or short-stalked, remote, with 10--15 pairs of linear
somewhat falcate leaflets, acute, tipped with a minute point,
subsessile, light green, glabrous, 1/20'--1/16' long. Flowers minute,
bright yellow, very fragrant, in the axils of clavate pilose bracts, in
heads 1/4'--3/8' in diameter, appearing in March with or just before the
unfolding leaves, on clustered or solitary slender puberulous peduncles
1/2'--3/4' long, and furnished at apex with 2 minute connate bracts;
calyx only about one third as long as the corolla, with short puberulous
lobes; corolla puberulous at apex, less than half as long as the
filaments; ovary covered with short close pubescence. Fruit elongated,
linear, slightly compressed, somewhat constricted between the seeds,
dark red-brown and cinereo-puberulous, 3'--5' long and about 1/4' wide;
seeds in 1 series, obovoid, compressed, dark red-brown, lustrous, about
1/4' long, faintly marked by large oval rings.

A tree, occasionally 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a straight trunk 5'--6' in
diameter, stout wide-spreading branches forming an open irregular head,
and slender somewhat zigzag slightly angled reddish brown branchlets
roughened by numerous minute round lenticels, villose with short pale
hairs, and armed with thin terete puberulous spines occasionally 3/4'
long; in Texas usually shrubby, with numerous stems forming a symmetric
round-topped bush only a few feet high. Bark dark brown or nearly black,
and deeply furrowed.

Distribution. Valley of the Rio Cibolo to Eagle Pass on the Rio Grande,
Maverick County, Texas; and in northern and southern Mexico, the West
Indies, Venezuela, and on the Galapagos Islands; in Texas probably
arborescent only on the plains of the Rio Grande near Spofford, Kinney
County.


                       3. Acacia Emoriana Benth.

[Illustration: Fig. 544]

Leaves 3-1/2'--4' long, with a slender petiole and rachis,
villose-pubescent early in the season, becoming nearly glabrous; and 4
or 5 pairs of pinnae; falling late in the autumn; pinnae on slender stalks
1/4' in length, with 5--7 pairs of oblong leaflets rounded and apiculate
at apex, obliquely rounded at base, short-petiolulate, pointing forward,
when they unfold densely villose above and on the margins, and
hoary-tomentose below, becoming glabrous, gray-green rather darker above
than below, 1/3' long. Flowers subsessile, puberulous, in interrupted
spikes, 3/4'--1' in length, densely hoary-tomentose when they first
appear late in March, on villose peduncles 1/2'--1' in length, and
furnished near the apex with lanceolate caducous bracts; calyx about
half the length of the ovate acute petals ciliate on the margins, about
1/12' long and much shorter than the stamens; ovary stipitate, glabrous.
Fruit fully grown in July, stipitate much compressed, rounded and
sometimes slightly emarginate at apex, gradually narrowed and obliquely
cuneate at base, with much thickened revolute undulate margins, densely
pubescent early in the season, becoming puberulous, 5' or 6' long,
1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide and many-seeded, or nearly orbicular and 1 or
2-seeded; seeds in one series, oval, the two sides unsymmetric,
obliquely pointed at base, rounded at apex, compressed, dark
chestnut-brown and lustrous, 1/2' long and 1/4' wide.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, usually smaller, with slender red-brown
branchlets pubescent or puberulous when they first appear, becoming
glabrous in their second year, and armed with small curved stipular
spines; often a shrub.

Distribution. Texas; creek banks and canyons, near Montell and Uvalde,
Uvalde County, and rocky banks of Devil's River, Valverde County (_E. J.
Palmer_).


                 4. Acacia Wrightii Benth. Cat's Claw.

[Illustration: Fig. 545]

Leaves 1'--2' long, slightly pubescent, especially on the petiole and
rachis, with 1--3 pairs of pinnae, slender petioles 1-1/3' in length, and
eglandular or glandular with small convex glands, and linear acute
caducous stipules 1/16' long; pinnae short-stalked, with 2--5 pairs of
obovate-oblong leaflets, obliquely rounded and often apiculate at apex,
sessile or short-petiolulate, 2 or sometimes 3-nerved, glabrous, or
rarely pubescent, reticulate-veined, rigid, bright green and rather
paler on the lower surface than on the upper surface, 1/4'--5/6' long.
Flowers light yellow, fragrant, appearing from the end of March to the
end of May, on slender pubescent pedicels from the axils of minute
caducous bracts, in narrow spikes 1-1/2' long, often interrupted below
the middle, on slender fascicled pubescent or sometimes glabrous
peduncles; calyx obscurely 5-lobed, pubescent on the outer surface, half
as long as the spatulate petals slightly united at base, and ciliate on
the margins; stamens 1/4' long; ovary long-stalked, covered with long
pale hairs. Fruit fully grown early in the summer, deciduous in the
autumn, slightly falcate, compressed, stipitate, oblique at base,
rounded and short-pointed at apex, 2'--4' long, 1'--1-1/4' wide, with
thick straight or irregularly contracted margins and thin papery walls
conspicuously marked by narrow horizontal reticulate veins; seeds
narrow-obovoid, compressed, 1/4' long, suspended transversely on a long
slender funicle, light brown, marked by large oval depressions.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 10'--12' in
diameter, spreading branches forming a low wide or irregular head, and
branchlets when they first appear somewhat striately angled, glabrous,
pale yellow-brown or dark red-brown, turning pale gray in their second
year, and armed with occasional stout recurved infrastipular
chestnut-brown spines 1/4' long, compressed toward the broad base and
sharp-pointed, or rarely unarmed. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick,
divided by shallow furrows into broad ridges separating on the surface
into thin narrow scales. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, bright
clear brown streaked with red and yellow, with thin clear yellow sapwood
of 6 or 7 layers of annual growth; valued and largely used as fuel.

Distribution. Valley of the Guadalupe River in the neighborhood of New
Braunfels, Comal County, Texas, to the Sierra Madre of Nuevo Leon; most
abundant and of its largest size south of the Rio Grande on dry gravelly
mesas and foothills.


          5. Acacia Greggii A. Gray. Cat's Claw. Una de Gato.

[Illustration: Fig. 546]

Leaves 1'--3' long, pubescent or puberulous, with 1--3 pairs of pinnae, a
short slender petiole furnished near the middle with a minute oblong
chestnut-brown gland, and linear caducous stipules 1/16' long; pinnae
short-stalked, with 4--5 pairs of obovate oblique leaflets rounded or
truncate at apex and unequally contracted at base into a short
petiolule, thick and rigid, 2--3-nerved, inconspicuously
reticulate-veined, hoary-pubescent, 1/16'--1/4' long. Flowers fragrant,
bright creamy yellow, in dense oblong pubescent spikes, on a peduncle
1/2'--2/3' long, and fascicled usually 2 or 3 together toward the end of
the branches; calyx obscurely 5-lobed, puberulous on the outer surface,
half as long as the petals slightly united at base and pale-tomentose on
the margins; stamens 1/4' long; ovary long-stalked, covered with long
pale hairs. Fruit fully grown at midsummer and hanging unopened on the
branches until winter or the following spring, compressed, straight or
slightly falcate, obliquely narrowed at base into a short stalk, acute
or rounded at apex, more or less contracted between the seeds, 2'--4'
long, 1/2'--3/4' wide, curling and often contorted when fully ripe, the
valves thin and membranaceous, thick-margined, light brown,
conspicuously transversely reticulate-veined; seeds nearly orbicular,
compressed, dark brown and lustrous, 1/4' in diameter, marked by small
oval depressions.

A tree, rarely 30 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' in diameter, numerous
spreading branches, and striately angled puberulous or in Texas glabrous
pale brown branchlets faintly tinged with red and armed with stout
recurved infrastipular spines flat at base, and 1/4' long and broad.
Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, furrowed, the surface separating
into thin narrow scales. Wood heavy, very hard, strong, close-grained,
durable, rich brown or red, with thin light yellow sapwood of 5 or 6
layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry gravelly mesas, the sides of low canyons and the banks
of mountain streams; valley of the Rio Grande, western Texas, through
southern New Mexico and Arizona to southern California, ranging
northward in Arizona to the rim of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado
River, and to Clark County, Nevada; in northern Mexico, and in Lower
California to the eastern base of the San Pedro Martir Mountains.




                           4. LEUCAENA Benth.


Trees or shrubs, with slender unarmed branches. Leaves persistent,
abruptly bipinnate, with numerous pinnae and small leaflets in many
pairs, petiolate, the petioles often furnished with a conspicuous gland
below the lower pair of pinnae; stipules minute and caducous, or becoming
spinescent and persistent. Flowers minute, white, mostly perfect,
sessile or short-pedicellate, in the axils of small peltate bracts
villose at apex, in globose many-flowered pedunculate heads, the
peduncles in axillary fascicles or in leafless terminal racemes; calyx
tubular-campanulate, minutely 5-toothed; petals 5, free, acute or
rounded at apex, narrowed at base; stamens 10, free, inserted under the
ovary, exserted; filaments filiform; anthers oblong, versatile; ovary
stipitate, contracted into a long slender style, with a minute terminal
slightly dilated stigma. Legume many-seeded, stipitate, linear,
compressed, dehiscent, the valves thickened on the margins, rigid, thin,
continuous within, their outer coat thin and papery, dark-colored, the
inner rather thicker, woody, pale brown. Seeds obovoid, compressed,
transverse, the hilum near the base, suspended on a long slender
funicle; seed-coat thin, crustaceous, brown and lustrous; embryo
inclosed on its two sides by a thin layer of horny albumen; radicle
slightly exserted.

Leucaena with nine or ten species is confined to the warmer parts of
America from western Texas to Venezuela and Peru, and to the islands of
the Pacific Ocean from New Caledonia to Tahiti, where one species has
been recognized. Of the indigenous species found in the territory of the
United States, three are arborescent. _Leucaena glauca_ L., a small tree
or shrub, cultivated in all warm countries, and a native probably of
tropical America, is now naturalized on Key West, Florida.

The generic name, from {leuchaino}, refers to the color of the flowers.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Peduncles bibracteolate at apex; stipules becoming spinescent.
    Leaves 10--14-pinnate; pinnae with 15--30 pairs of leaflets; blade of
          the bract of the flower produced into a short point.
                                                      1. L. Greggii (E).
    Leaves 2--4-pinnate; pinnae with 4--8 pairs of leaflets; blade of the
          bract of the flower produced into a long slender villose tip.
                                                       2. L. retusa (E).
  Peduncles without bracts; stipules minute, caducous; leaves
        30--36-pinnate; pinnae with 30--60 pairs of leaflets.
                                                 3. L. pulverulenta (E).


                      1. Leucaena Greggii S. Wats.

[Illustration: Fig. 547]

Leaves 6'--7' long and broad, with a slender rachis furnished on the
upper side with a single elongated bottle-shaped gland between the
stalks of each pair of pinnae; pinnae 10--14, remote, short-stalked, with
15--30 pairs of leaflets; stipules gradually narrowed into a long
slender point, becoming rigid and spinescent, 1/3' to nearly 1/2' long
and persistent for two or three years; leaflets lanceolate, acute or
acuminate, often somewhat falcate, nearly sessile or short-petiolulate,
full and rounded toward the base on the lower margin, nearly straight on
the upper margin, gray-green, ultimately nearly glabrous, 1/4'--1/3'
long, about 1/8' wide, with a narrow midvein and obscure lateral nerves.
Flowers on slender pedicels, in heads 3/4'--1' in diameter, on stout
peduncles 2'--3' long furnished at apex with 2 irregularly 3-lobed
bracts, and solitary or in pairs; calyx coated with hairs only near the
apex, much shorter than the spatulate glabrous more or less boat-shaped
petals; ovary villose with a few short scattered hairs. Fruit 6'-8'
long, 1/3'--1/2' wide, narrowed below into a short stout stipe,
acuminate and crowned at apex with the thickened style, 1/3'--3/4' long,
cinereo-pubescent until nearly fully grown, becoming nearly glabrous at
maturity, much compressed, with narrow wing-like margins; seeds
conspicuously notched by the hilum, 1/2' long and 1/3' wide.

A tree, 15 deg.-20 deg. high, with a stem 4'--5' in diameter, and stout zigzag
red-brown branchlets marked by numerous pale lenticels, coated at first
with short spreading lustrous yellow deciduous hairs found also on the
young petioles and lower surface of the unfolding leaflets, the
peduncles of the flower-heads and their bracts. Bark about 3/8' thick,
dark brown, divided into low ridges and broken on the surface into small
closely appressed persistent scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained,
rich brown streaked with red, with thin clear sapwood.

Distribution. Mountain ravines and the steep banks of streams; western
Texas from the valley of the upper San Saba River to that of Devil's
River; and southward into Mexico.


                        2. Leucaena retusa Benth.

[Illustration: Fig. 548]

Leaves 3' or 4' long and 4' or 5' wide, with a slender petiole and
rachis and 2-4 pairs of pinnae 6'-10' long, remote, long-stalked, with
4-8 pairs of short-stalked leaflets furnished between their stems with a
single globose white gland found also occasionally on the upper side of
the rachis between the stems of the pinnae; stipules ovate, gradually
narrowed into a long slender tip, 1/2' in length, often persistent
through the season; leaflets obliquely obovate or elliptic, rounded and
apiculate at apex, obliquely rounded or cuneate at the unsymmetric base,
entire, short-petiolulate, villose-pubescent like the rachis and petiole
when they first appear, soon, glabrous, and at maturity thin,
blue-green, 3/4'--1' long and 1/3'--1/2' wide, with a slender midrib,
and prominent veins extending obliquely toward the apex of the leaflet,
those of the lowest pair more prominent and starting from near its base.
Flowers short-stalked in the axil of a peltate bract, its blade produced
into a long slender villose tip, appearing continuously from April until
October in dense globose heads 3/4' in diameter, on villose
bibracteolate axillary, single or fascicled peduncles 1-1/2'--3' in
length; calyx thin, tubular, 5-toothed at apex; petals narrow-oblong,
hardly longer than the calyx; stamens 10, shorter than the bract of the
flower; anthers glabrous. Fruit solitary or clustered, on a puberulous
peduncle 3'-5' in length, 6'-10' long, 1/3'--1/2' wide, gradually
narrowed below into a stout stipe, the acuminate apex terminating in the
thickened persistent style, glabrous and dark reddish brown; seeds 1/3'
long and 1/4' wide.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a trunk 6'-8' in diameter, and
slender branchlets pubescent when they first appear, becoming puberulous
and orange-brown or reddish brown at the end of their first season; more
often a shrub.

Distribution. Texas; steep rocky hillsides, and on the summits of
limestone bluffs; (Uvalde, Valverde, Kemble, Real and Jeff Davis
Counties).


                 3. Leucaena pulverulenta Benth. Mimosa.

[Illustration: Fig. 549]

Leaves 4'-7' long and 3'-4' wide, with a slender petiole usually marked
by a large dark oblong gland between the somewhat enlarged base and the
lowest pair of the 30-36 nearly sessile crowded pinnae, each with 30-60
pairs of leaflets, and minute caducous stipules, when they unfold
covered like the peduncles and flower-buds with dense hoary tomentum,
and at maturity puberulous on the petiole and rachis; leaflets linear,
acute, rather oblique at base by the greater development of the upper
side, sessile or very short-petiolulate, pale bright green, 1/6'--1/4'
long. Flowers sessile, fragrant, in heads 1/2' in diameter, appearing in
succession as the branches grow from early spring to midsummer, on
slender peduncles 1'--1-1/2' long and fascicled in the axils of upper
leaves; calyx one fourth as long as the acute petals and like them
pilose on the outer surface; stamens twice as long as the petals; ovary
coated with long pale hairs. Fruit conspicuously thick-margined, 4'-14'
long, long-stalked, tipped with a short straight or recurved point,
usually in pairs on a peduncle thickened at apex; seeds 5/16' long.

A tree, 50 deg.-60 deg. high, with a straight trunk 18'-20' in diameter,
separating 20 deg.-30 deg. from the ground into slender spreading branches
forming a loose round head, and branchlets at first more or less
striately grooved and thickly coated with pulverulent caducous tomentum,
becoming at the end of a few weeks terete, pale cinnamon-brown and
puberulous. Bark about 1/4' thick, bright cinnamon-brown, and roughened
by thick persistent scales. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained, rich
dark brown, with thin clear yellow sapwood of 2 or 3 layers of annual
growth; considered valuable, and sometimes manufactured into lumber.

Distribution. Rich moist soil of river banks and the borders of lagoons
and small streams; valley of the lower Rio Grande; in Texas only for a
few miles near its mouth; more abundant from Matamoras to Monterey in
Nuevo Leon; and southward to the neighborhood of the City of Mexico.

Occasionally planted as a shade and ornamental tree in the towns of the
lower Rio Grande valley and in New Orleans, Louisiana.




                        5. PROSOPIS L. Mesquite.


Trees or shrubs, with branches without a terminal bud and armed with
geminate supra-axillary persistent spines, and small obtuse axillary
buds covered with acute apiculate dark brown scales. Leaves alternate on
branches of the year and fascicled in earlier axils, deciduous, usually
2 rarely 3-4-pinnate, with many-foliolate pinnae; petioles glandular at
apex with a minute gland, and tipped with the small spinescent rachis;
stipules linear, membranaceous or spinescent, deciduous. Flowers
greenish white, nearly sessile, in axillary pedunculate spikes; calyx
campanulate, 5-toothed, or slightly 5-lobed, deciduous; petals 5,
connate below the middle or ultimately free, glabrous or tomentose on
the inner surface toward the apex, sometimes puberulous on the outer
surface; stamens 10, free, inserted with the petals on the margin of a
minute disk adnate to the calyx-tube, those opposite the lobes of the
calyx rather longer than the others; filaments filiform; anthers oblong,
versatile, their connective tipped with a minute deciduous gland, the
cells opening by marginal sutures; ovary stipitate, villose; style
filiform, with a minute terminal stigma. Legume linear, compressed, or
subterete, straight or falcate, or contorted or twisted into a more or
less regular spiral, indehiscent; the outer coat thin, woody, pale
yellow, inclosing a thick spongy inner coat of sweet pulp containing the
seeds placed obliquely and separately inclosed, their envelopes forming
nut-like joints. Seeds oblong, compressed, the hilum near the base;
seed-coat crustaceous, light brown, lustrous; embryo surrounded by a
layer of horny albumen; radicle short, slightly exserted.

Prosopis is distributed in the New World from southern Kansas to
Patagonia, and in the Old World is confined to tropical Africa, and to
southwestern and tropical Asia. Sixteen or seventeen species have been
distinguished. Of the three species found in the territory of the United
States two are small trees.

Prosopis produces hard durable wood, particularly valuable as fuel, and
the pods are used as fodder.

The generic name is from {prosopis}, employed by Dioscorides as a name
of the Burdock.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Legume compressed or ultimately convex; pinnae 12--22-foliolate.
                                           1. P. juliflora (C, E, G, H).
  Legume thick, spirally twisted; pinnae 10--16-foliolate.
                                           2. P. pubescens (E, F, G, H).


           1. Prosopis juliflora DC. Mesquite. Honey Locust.

[Illustration: Fig. 550]

Leaves with 2 or rarely 4 pinnae, and slender terete petioles abruptly
enlarged and glandular at base; stipules linear, acute, membranaceous,
deciduous. Flowers appearing in successive crops from May to the middle
of July, fragrant, about 1/12' long, on short pedicels, in slender
cylindric spikes 1-1/2'--4' long, on stout peduncles 1/2'--3/4' in
length; calyx glabrous or puberulous, about one fourth as long as the
narrowly oblong acute petals, glabrous or puberulous on the outer
surface and covered on the inner surface toward the apex with hoary
tomentum; stamens twice as long as the corolla, the dark-colored
connective of the anther-cells furnished at apex with a stalked gland;
ovary short-stalked, clothed with silky hairs. Fruit in drooping
clusters, linear, at first flat, becoming subterete at maturity,
constricted between the 10-20 seeds, straight or falcate, contracted at
the ends, 4'--9' long, 1/4'--1/2' wide; seeds about 1/4' long.

A low tree, with a large thick taproot descending frequently to the
depth of 40 deg.-50 deg., and furnished with radiating horizontal roots
spreading in all directions and forming a dense mat, a trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, divided a short distance above the ground into many
irregularly arranged crooked branches forming a loose straggling head,
and slender branchlets at first pale yellow-green, turning darker in
their second year, furnished in the axils of the leaves of their first
season with short spur-like excrescences covered with chaffy scales, and
armed with stout straight terete supra-axillary persistent spines
1/2'--2' long, or rarely unarmed; more often a shrub, with numerous
stems only a few feet high. Bark of the trunk thick, dark reddish brown,
divided by shallow fissures, the surface separating into short thick
scales. Wood heavy, close-grained, rich dark brown or sometimes red,
with thin clear yellow sapwood; almost indestructible in contact with
the soil, and largely used for fence-posts, railway-ties, the
underpinnings of buildings, and occasionally in the manufacture of
furniture, the fellies of wheels, and the pavements of city streets; the
best fuel of the region, and largely made into charcoal. The ripe pods
supply Mexicans and Indians with a nutritious food, and are devoured by
most herbivorous animals. A gum, resembling gum-arabic, exudes from the
stems.

Distribution. Western Texas and eastern New Mexico, and on the island of
Jamaica; eastward and westward diverging into two extreme forms. These
are


                Prosopis juliflora var. glandulosa Cock.

[Illustration: Fig. 551]

Leaves 8'--10' long, 2-pinnate, with long slender petioles, the pinnae
12--20-foliolate; leaflets distant, linear, mostly acute, glabrous, dark
green, often 2' long and 1/8'--1/4' wide. Flowers with a usually
glabrous calyx. Fruit occasionally conspicuously constricted between the
seeds (f. _constricta_ Sarg.).

A round-topped tree, often 20 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter,
and long gracefully drooping branches forming a symmetrical round-topped
head.

Distribution. Eastern Texas to western Louisiana (near Shreveport, Caddo
Parish), western Oklahoma and southern Kansas, and southward into
northern Mexico. The common Mesquite of eastern Texas; reappearing with
rather shorter and more crowded leaflets in Arizona, southern
California, and Lower California.


                 Prosopis juliflora var. velutina Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 552]

Leaves 5'--6' long, often fascicled, 2--4-pinnate, cinereo-pubescent,
with short petioles, the pinnae 12-22-foliolate; leaflets oblong or
linear-oblong, obtuse or acute, crowded, pale green, 1/4'--1/2' long.
Flowers in densely-flowered spikes 2'--3' long; calyx villose.

A tree, often 50 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg. in diameter, covered with rough
dark brown bark, and heavy irregularly arranged usually crooked
branches.

Distribution. Dry valleys of southern Arizona and of Sonora.


      2. Prosopis pubescens Benth. Screw Bean. Screw Pod Mesquite.

[Illustration: Fig. 553]

Leaves canescently pubescent, 2'--3' long, with a slender petiole
1/3'--2/3' in length, and pinnae 1-1/2'--2' long and 10--16-foliolate;
stipules spinescent, deciduous; leaflets oblong or somewhat falcate,
acute, sessile or short-petiolulate, often apiculate, conspicuously
reticulate-veined, 1/3'--2/3' long, 1/8' wide. Flowers beginning to open
in early spring, and produced in successive crops from the axils of
minute scarious bracts, in dense or interrupted cylindric spikes 2'--3'
long; calyx obscurely 5-lobed, pubescent on the outer surface, one third
to one fourth as long as the narrow acute petals coated on the inner
surface near the apex with thick white tomentum, and slightly puberulous
on the outer surface; ovary and young fruit hoary-tomentose. Fruit
ripening throughout the summer and falling in the autumn, in dense
racemes, sessile, twisted with from 12--20 turns into a narrow straight
spiral 1'--2' long; seeds 1/16' long.

A tree, 25 deg.-30 deg. high, with a slender trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
and terete branches canescently pubescent or glabrate when they first
appear, becoming glabrous and light red-brown in their third year, and
armed with stout spines 1/3'--1/2' long. Bark of the trunk thick, light
brown tinged with red, separating in long thin persistent ribbon-like
scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, close-grained, not strong, light
brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood of 6 or 7 layers of annual
growth; used as fuel and occasionally for fencing. The sweet, nutritious
legumes are valued as fodder.

Distribution. Sandy or gravelly bottom-lands; valley of the Rio Grande
in western Texas, and through New Mexico and Arizona to southern Utah
and Nevada, and to San Diego County, California, and northern Mexico;
attaining its largest size in the United States in the valleys of the
lower Colorado and Gila Rivers, Arizona.




                              6. CERCIS L.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, slender unarmed branchlets prolonged
by an upper axillary bud, marked by numerous minute pale lenticels, and
in their first winter by small elevated horizontal leaf-scars showing
the ends of two large fibro-vascular bundles, and small scaly obtuse
axillary buds covered by imbricated ovate chestnut-brown scales. Leaves
simple, entire, 5--7-nerved with prominent nerves, long-petiolate,
deciduous; petioles slender, terete, abruptly enlarged at apex; stipules
ovate, acute, small, membranaceous, caducous. Flowers appearing in early
spring before or with the leaves on thin jointed pedicels, in simple
fascicles or racemose clusters produced on branches of the previous or
earlier years, or on the trunk, with small scale-like bracts often
imbricated at the base of the inflorescence, and minute bractlets; calyx
disciferous, short-turbinate, purplish, persistent, the tube oblique at
base, campanulate, enlarged on the lower side, 5-toothed, the short
broad teeth imbricated in the bud; corolla subpapilionaceous; petals
nearly equal, rose color, oblong-ovate, rounded at apex, unguiculate,
slightly auricled on one side of the base of the blade, the upper petal
slightly smaller and inclosed in the bud by the wing-petals encircled by
the broader slightly imbricated keel-petals; stamens 10, inserted in 2
rows on the margin of the thin disk, free, declinate, those of the inner
row opposite the petals and rather shorter than the others; filaments
enlarged and pilose below the middle, persistent until the fruit is
grown; anthers uniform, oblong, attached on the back near the base;
ovary short-stalked, inserted obliquely in the bottom of the calyx-tube;
style filiform, fleshy, incurved, with a stout obtuse terminal stigma;
ovules 2-ranked, attached to the inner angle of the ovary. Legume
stalked, oblong or broad-linear, straight on the upper edge, curved on
the lower edge, acute at the ends, compressed, tipped with the thickened
remnants of the style, many-seeded, 2-valved, the valves
coriaceo-membranaceous, many-veined, tardily dehiscent by the dorsal and
often by the wing-margined ventral suture, dark red-purple and lustrous
at maturity. Seeds suspended transversely on a slender funicle, ovoid or
oblong, compressed, the small depressed hilum near the apex; seed-coat
crustaceous, bright reddish brown; embryo surrounded by a thin layer of
horny albumen, compressed; cotyledons oval, flat, the radicle short,
straight or obliquely incurved, slightly exserted.

Cercis is confined to eastern and western North America, southern
Europe, and to southwestern, central and eastern Asia. Of the eight
species now distinguished, three occur in North America. Two of these
are arborescent.

The generic name is from {kerkis}, the Greek name of the European
species, from a fancied resemblance of the fruit to the weaver's
implement of that name.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers in sessile clusters; leaves ovate, acute, cordate or truncate
        at base.
                                                1. C. canadensis (A, C).
  Flowers fascicled or slightly racemose; leaves reniform.
                                                   2. C. reniformis (C).


              1. Cercis canadensis L. Redbud. Judas-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 554]

Leaves broad-ovate, acute or acuminate and often abruptly contracted at
apex into a short broad point, truncate or more or less cordate at base,
entire, glabrous with the exception of axillary tufts of white hairs, or
sometimes more or less pubescent below, 3'--5' long and broad; turning
in the autumn before falling bright clear yellow; petioles 2'--5' in
length. Flowers 1/2' long, on pedicels 1/3'--1/2' in length and
fascicled 4-8 together; rarely white (var. _alba_ Rehdr.). Fruit fully
grown in the south by the end of May and at the north at midsummer, and
then pink or rose color, 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long, falling late in the autumn
or in early winter; seeds about 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 40 deg.-50 deg. high, with a straight trunk usually separating
10 deg.-12 deg. from the ground into stout branches covered with smooth light
brown or gray bark, and forming an upright or often a wide flat head,
and slender glabrous somewhat angled branchlets, brown and lustrous
during their first season, becoming dull and darker the following year
and ultimately dark or grayish brown. Bark of the trunk about 1/2' thick
and divided by deep longitudinal fissures into long narrow plates, the
bright red-brown surface separating into thin scales. Wood heavy, hard,
not strong, close-grained, rich dark brown tinged with red, with thin
lighter colored sapwood of 8-10 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Borders of streams and rich bottom-lands, forming,
especially west of the Alleghany Mountains, an abundant undergrowth to
the forest; valley of the Delaware River, New Jersey, central and
southern Pennsylvania southward to northern Florida, northern Alabama
and southern Mississippi (Crystal Springs, Copiah County), and westward
to southwestern Ontario (Point Pelee, Essex County), and through
southern Michigan to southern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska, eastern
Kansas, western Oklahoma (Major and Dewey Counties), Louisiana, and the
valley of the Brazos River, Texas; and on the Sierra Madre of Nuevo
Leon; common and of its largest size in southwestern Arkansas, Oklahoma
and eastern Texas, and in early spring a conspicuous feature of the
landscape.

Often cultivated as an ornamental tree in the northeastern states, and
occasionally in western Europe.


                   2. Cercis reniformis Engl. Redbud.

                        _Cercis texensis_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 555]

Leaves reniform, when they unfold light green and slightly pilose, and
at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface,
paler, glabrous or pubescent on the lower surface, and 2'--3' in
diameter; petioles 1-1/2'--2' in length. Flowers about 1/2' long, on
slender pedicels 1/2'--3/4' in length and fascicled in sessile clusters,
or occasionally racemose. Fruit 2'--4' long, 1/2'--1' wide; seeds 1/4'
long.

A slender tree, occasionally 20 deg. or rarely 40 deg. high, with a trunk 6'-12'
in diameter, and glabrous branchlets marked by numerous minute white
lenticels, light reddish brown during their first and second years,
becoming dark brown in their third season; more often a shrub, sending
up numerous stems and forming dense thickets only a few feet high. Bark
of the trunk and branches thin, smooth, light gray. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained brown streaked with yellow, with thin lighter colored
sapwood of 5 or 6 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Limestone hills and ridges; neighborhood of Dallas, Dallas
County, Texas to the Sierra Madre of Nuevo Leon; common in the valley of
the upper Colorado River, Texas; of its largest size on the mountains of
northeastern Mexico.




                          7. GYMNOCLADUS Lam.


Trees, with stout unarmed blunt branchlets with a thick pith, prolonged
by axillary buds, rough deeply fissured bark, thick fleshy roots, and
minute buds depressed in pubescent cavities of the bark, 2 in the axil
of each leaf, superposed, remote, the lower and smaller sterile and
nearly surrounded by the enlarged base of the petiole, their scales 2,
ovate, rounded at apex, coated with thick dark brown tomentum, infolded
one over the other, accrescent with the young shoots. Leaves deciduous,
unequally bipinnate; pinnae many-foliolulate, with 1 or 2 pairs of the
lowest pinnae reduced to single leaflets; pinnae and leaflets usually
alternate; leaflets thin, ovate, entire, petiolulate; stipules
foliaceous, early deciduous. Flowers regular, dioecious, greenish white,
long-pedicellate, the slender pedicels from the axils of long lanceolate
scarious caducous bracts, bibracteolate near the middle; staminate
flowers in a short terminal racemose corymb; pistillate flowers in
elongated terminal racemes, on pedicels much longer than those of the
staminate flowers; calyx tubular, elongated, 10-ribbed, lined with a
thin glandular disk, 5-lobed, the lobes, lanceolate, acute, nearly
equal, erect; petals 4 or 5, oblong, rounded or acute at apex,
pubescent, as long as the calyx-lobes or rather longer and twice as
broad, inserted on the margin of the disk, spreading or reflexed;
stamens 10, free, inserted with the petals, erect, included; filaments
filiform, pilose, those opposite the petals shorter than the others;
anthers oblong, uniform, small and sterile in the pistillate flower;
ovary sessile or slightly stipitate, acute; styles short, erect,
obliquely dilated into 2 broad lobes stigmatic on their inner surface,
rudimentary or 0 in the sterile flower; ovules numerous, suspended from
the angle opposite the posterior petals. Legume oblong, subfalcate,
turgid or slightly compressed, several-seeded, 2-valved, tardily
dehiscent, the thin tough woody valves thickened on the margins into
narrow wings, pulpy between the seeds. Seeds ovoid or slightly obovoid,
suspended by a long slender funicle; seed-coat thick, bony, brown and
opaque, of 3 layers; embryo surrounded by a thin layer of horny albumen;
cotyledons ovate, orange-colored, thick and fleshy, the radicle short,
erect.

Gymnocladus, with two species, is confined to eastern North America and
to central China.

Gymnocladus is slightly astringent and purgative, and the detersive pulp
surrounding the seeds of the Asiatic species is used in China as a
substitute for soap.

The generic name, from {gymnos} and {klados}, relates to the stout
branchlets destitute of spray.


    1. Gymnocladus dioicus K. Koch. Kentucky Coffee-tree. Mahogany.

[Illustration: Fig. 556]

Leaves 1 deg.--3 deg. long, 18'--24' wide, obovate, 5--9 pinnate, the pinnae
6--14-foliolate, covered when they unfold with hoary tomentum except on
the upper surface of the ovate acute leaflets, often mucronate,
especially while young, cuneate or irregularly rounded at base, pink at
first, soon becoming bronze-green and lustrous, glabrous on the upper
surface with the exception of a few scattered hairs along the midrib,
and at maturity thin, obscurely veined, dark green above, pale
yellow-green and glabrous below, with the exception of a few short hairs
scattered along the narrow midrib, 2'--2-1/2' long and 1' wide, or those
replacing the lowest or occasionally the 2 lower pairs of pinnae
sometimes twice as large; turning bright clear yellow in the autumn
before falling; petioles abruptly and conspicuously enlarged at base, at
first hoary-tomentose, becoming glabrous at maturity; stipules
lanceolate or slightly obovate, glandular-serrate toward the apex, 1/3'
long. Flowers: inflorescence of the staminate tree 3'--4' long, the
lower branches usually 3 or 4-flowered; inflorescence of the pistillate
tree 10'--12' long, the flowers on stout pedicels 1'--2-1/2' long or
twice to five times as long as those of the staminate flowers; flowers
hoary-tomentose in the bud; calyx 2/3' long, covered on the outer
surface when the flowers open with pale hairs and on the inner surface
with hoary tomentum; petals keeled, pilose on the back, slightly
grooved, tomentose on the inner surface; anthers bright orange color;
ovary hairy. Fruit 6'--10' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, dark red-brown,
covered with a glaucous bloom, on stout stalks 1'--2' in length,
remaining unopened on the branches through the winter; seeds separated
by a thick layer of dark-colored sweet pulp, 3/4' long.

A tree, 75 deg.--110 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, usually
dividing 10 deg.--15 deg. from the ground into 3 or 4 principal stems spreading
slightly and forming a narrow round-topped head, or occasionally sending
up a tall straight shaft destitute of branches for 70 deg.--80 deg., and
branchlets coated when they first appear with short dense pubescence
faintly tinged with red, bearing at their base the conspicuous
orange-green obovate pubescent bud-scales, 1/4'--1/3' thick at the end
of their first season, very blunt, dark brown, often slightly pilose,
marked by orange-colored lenticels, and roughened by the large pale
broadly heart-shaped leaf-scars displaying the ends of 3 or 4
conspicuous fibro-vascular bundles. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1' thick,
deeply fissured, dark gray tinged with red, and roughened by small
persistent scales. Wood heavy although not hard, strong, coarse-grained,
very durable in contact with the soil, rich light brown tinged with red,
with thin lighter colored sapwood of 5 or 6 layers of annual growth;
occasionally used in cabinet-making and for fence-posts, rails, and in
construction. The seeds were formerly used as a substitute for coffee; a
decoction of the fresh green pulp of the unripe fruit is used in
homoeopathic practice.

Distribution. Bottom-lands in rich soil; central and western New York
and Franklin County, Pennsylvania, through southern Ontario and southern
Michigan to southeastern Minnesota, northeastern and southern Iowa,
southeastern South Dakota, eastern and northeastern Nebraska, eastern
Kansas, southwestern Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma (with isolated
stations in Woods and Custer Counties and in the western parts of
Cimarron County); in Eastern Kentucky, and western and middle Tennessee;
nowhere common.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens and parks of the eastern United
States, and of northern and central Europe.




                            8. GLEDITSIA L.


Trees, with furrowed bark, slender terete slightly zigzag branchlets
thickened at the apex and prolonged by axillary buds, thick fibrous
roots, the trunk and branches often armed with stout simple or branched
spines or abortive branchlets developed from supra-axillary or
adventitious buds imbedded in the bark. Winter-buds minute, 3 or 4
together, superposed, the 2 or 3 lower without scales and covered by the
scar left by the falling of the petiole, the upper larger, nearly
surrounded by the base of the petiole and covered by small scurfy
scales. Leaves long-petiolate, often fascicled in earlier axils,
abruptly pinnate or bipinnate, the pinnae increasing in length from the
base to the apex of the leaf, the lowest sometimes reduced to single
leaflets; deciduous; leaflets thin, their margins irregularly crenate,
without stipels; stipules minute, caducous. Flowers regular, polygamous,
minute, green or white on short pedicels, in axillary or lateral simple
or fascicled racemes, with minute scale-like caducous bracts; calyx
campanulate, lined with the disk, 3--5-lobed, the narrow lobes nearly
equal; petals as many as the lobes of the calyx, nearly equal; stamens
6--10, inserted with the petals on the margin of the disk, exserted;
filaments free, filiform, erect; anthers uniform, much smaller and
abortive in the pistillate flower; ovary subsessile, rarely
bicarpellary, rudimentary or 0 in the staminate flower; styles short;
stigma terminal, more or less dilated, often oblique; ovules 2 or many,
suspended from the angle opposite the posterior petal. Legume
compressed, many-seeded, elongated, straight and indehiscent, or
1--3-seeded, ovoid and tardily dehiscent. Seeds transverse, ovoid to
suborbicular, flattened, attached by a long slender funicle; seed-coat
thin, crustaceous, light brown; embryo surrounded by a layer of horny
orange-colored albumen; cotyledons subfoliaceous, compressed; radicle
short, erect, slightly exserted.

Gleditsia is confined to eastern North America, where three species
occur, southwestern Asia, China, Formosa, Japan, and west tropical
Africa. It produces strong, durable, coarse-grained wood. In Japan the
pods are used as a substitute for soap.

The generic name is in honor of Johann Gottlieb Gleditsch (1714--1786),
professor of botany at Berlin.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Legume linear-oblong, elongated, many-seeded, indehiscent.
    Legume 12'--18' long, with pulp between the seeds; ovary
          hoary-tomentose.
                                               1. G. triacanthos (A, C).
    Legume 4'--5' long, without pulp between the seeds.
                                                       2. G. texana (C).
  Legume oval, oblique, 1--3-seeded, without pulp, tardily dehiscent;
        ovary glabrous.
                                                  3. G. aquatica (A, C).


               1. Gleditsia triacanthos L. Honey Locust.

[Illustration: Fig. 557]

Leaves 7'--8' long, 18--28-foliolulate or sometimes bipinnate, with 4--7
pairs of pinnae, those of the upper pair 4'--5' long, when they unfold
hoary-tomentose, and at maturity pubescent on the petiole and rachis,
the short stout petiolules, and the under surface of the midrib of the
oblong-lanceolate leaflets, unequal at base, acute or slightly rounded
at apex, remotely crenulate-serrate, dark green and lustrous above, dull
yellow-green below, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/2' wide; turning in the autumn
pale clear yellow. Flowers appearing in June when the leaves are nearly
fully grown from the axils of leaves of previous years; the staminate in
short many-flowered pubescent racemes 2'--2-1/2' long and often
clustered; the pistillate in slender graceful few-flowered usually
solitary racemes 2-1/2'--3-1/2' long; calyx campanulate, narrowed at
base, the acute lobes thickened, revolute and ciliate on the margins,
villose with pale hairs, rather shorter than and half as wide as the
erect acute petals; filaments pilose toward the base; anthers green;
pistil rarely of 2 carpels, hoary-tomentose. Fruit 12'--18' long, dark
brown, pilose and slightly falcate, with straight thickened margins, 2
or 3 together in short racemes on stalks 1'--1-1/2' long, their walls
thin and tough, contracting in drying by a number of corkscrew twists,
and falling late in the autumn or early in winter; seeds oval, 1/3'
long, separated by thick succulent pulp.

A tree, 75 deg.--140 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. or occasionally 5 deg.--6 deg. in
diameter, slender spreading somewhat pendulous branches forming a broad
open rather flat-topped head, and branchlets marked by minute lenticels,
at first light reddish brown and slightly puberulous, soon becoming
lustrous and red tinged with green, and in their second year greenish
brown and armed with stout rigid long-pointed simple or 3-forked spines
at first red, and bright chestnut-brown when fully grown, or rarely
unarmed (var. _inermis_ Pursh.). Bark of the trunk 1/2'--3/4' thick,
divided by deep fissures into long narrow longitudinal ridges and
roughened on the surface by small persistent scales. Wood hard, strong,
coarse-grained, very durable in contact with the ground, red or bright
red-brown, with thin pale sapwood of 10--12 layers of annual growth;
largely used for fence-posts and rails, for the hubs of wheels, and in
construction.

Distribution. Borders of streams and intervale lands, in moist fertile
soil, usually growing singly or occasionally covering almost exclusively
considerable areas; less commonly on dry sterile gravelly hills; western
slope of the Alleghany Mountains of Pennsylvania, westward through
southern Ontario and southern Michigan to southeastern Minnesota,
southern Iowa, southeastern South Dakota, eastern Nebraska, eastern
Kansas, and Oklahoma to the Salt Fork of the Arkansas River (near Alva,
Woods County) and to creek valleys near Cache, Comanche County (_G. W.
Stevens_), and southward to northern Alabama, Mississippi and western
Florida and to the valley of the Brazos River, eastern Texas; and in the
canyon of Paloduro Creek near Canyon, Randall County, northwestern Texas
(_E. J. Palmer_); in Pennsylvania and West Virginia occasionally on the
eastern slopes of the Appalachian Mountains; attaining its largest size
in the valleys of small streams in southern Indiana and Illinois; now
often naturalized in the region east of the Alleghany Mountains. The
var. _inermis_, the prevailing form in Taney County, southern Missouri.

Often cultivated as an ornamental and shade tree in all countries of
temperate climates.


                   2. Gleditsia texana Sarg. Locust.

[Illustration: Fig. 558]

Leaves 6'--7' long, 12--22-foliolulate, with a slender rachis at first
puberulous, ultimately glabrous, or often bipinnate, usually with 6 or 7
pairs of pinnae, the lower pairs frequently reduced to single large
leaflets; leaflets oblong-ovate, often somewhat falcate, rounded or
acute or apiculate at apex, obliquely rounded at base, finely crenately
serrate, thick and firm in texture, dark green and lustrous above, pale
below, 1/2'--1' long, with a short petiolule coated while young, like
the base of the slender orange-colored midrib, with soft pale hairs.
Flowers appearing toward the end of April, the staminate dark
orange-yellow, in slender glabrous often clustered racemes lengthening
after the flowers begin to open and finally 3'--4' in length; calyx
campanulate, with acute lobes thickened on the margins,
villose-pubescent and rather shorter and narrower than the puberulous
petals; stamens with slender filaments villose near the base and green
anthers; pistillate flowers unknown. Fruit 4'--5' long, 1' wide,
straight, much compressed, rounded and short-pointed at apex, full and
rounded at the broad base, thin-walled, dark chestnut-brown, puberulous,
slightly thickened on the margins, many-seeded, without pulp; seeds
oval, compressed, dark chestnut-brown, very lustrous, 1/2' long.

A tree, 100 deg.--120 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 2-1/2 deg. in
diameter, ascending and spreading branches forming a narrow head, and
comparatively slender more or less zigzag branchlets roughened by
numerous small round lenticels, light orange-brown when they first
appear, gray or orange-brown during their first year, ashy gray the
following season, and unarmed. Bark thin and smooth.

Distribution. Only in a single grove on the bottom-lands of the Brazos
River, near the town of Brazoria, Brazoria County, Texas.


               3. Gleditsia aquatica Marsh. Water Locust.

[Illustration: Fig. 559]

Leaves 5'--8' long, 12--20-foliolate, or bipinnate, with 3 or 4 pairs of
pinnae; leaflets ovate-oblong, usually rounded or rarely emarginate at
apex, unequally cuneate at base, slightly and remotely crenate or often
entire below the middle, glabrous with the exception of a few hairs on
the short stout petiolule, dull yellow-green and lustrous on the upper
surface, dark green on the lower surface, about 1' long and 1/3'--1/2'
wide. Flowers appearing in May and June after the leaves are fully grown
on short stout purple puberulous pedicels, in slender racemes 3'--4'
long; calyx-tube covered with orange-brown pubescence, the lobes narrow,
acute, slightly pilose on the two surfaces, as long as but narrower than
the green erect petals rounded at apex; filaments hairy toward the base;
anthers large, green; ovary long-stipitate, glabrous. Fruit fully grown
in August, pendent in graceful racemes, obliquely ovoid, long-stalked,
crowned with a short stout tip, thin, 1'--2' long, 1' broad, without
pulp, its valves thin, tough, papery, bright chestnut-brown, lustrous
and somewhat thickened on the margins; seeds 1 or rarely 2 or 3, flat,
nearly orbicular, orange-brown, 1/2' in diameter.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a short trunk 2 deg.--2-1/2 deg. in diameter,
usually dividing a few feet from the ground into stout spreading often
contorted branches forming a wide irregular flat-topped head, and
glabrous orange-brown branchlets becoming in their second year gray or
reddish brown, marked by occasional large pale lenticels, and armed with
usually flattened simple or short-branched straight or falcate sharp
rigid spines 3'--5' long, about 1/2' broad at the base, and dark
red-brown and lustrous. Bark 1/8'--1/4' thick, smooth, dull gray or
reddish brown, and divided by shallow fissures into small plate-like
scales. Wood heavy, very hard and strong, coarse-grained, rich bright
brown tinged with red, with thick light clear yellow sapwood of about 40
layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Eastern South Carolina to Florida, through the coast
region of the Gulf states to the valley of the Brazos River, Texas, and
northward through western Louisiana and southern Arkansas to
northwestern Mississippi, middle Kentucky and Tennessee, the bottoms of
the Mississippi at La Pointe, Saint Charles County, Missouri, western
and southern Illinois and southwestern Indiana; rare east of the
Mississippi River and only in deep river swamps; very abundant and of
its largest size westward on rich bottom-lands; in Louisiana and
Arkansas often occupying extensive tracts submerged during a
considerable part of the year.




                           9. PARKINSONIA L.


Trees or shrubs, with smooth thin bark and terete branches often armed
with simple or 3-forked spines. Leaves abruptly bipinnate, alternate or
fascicled from earlier axils, short-petiolate, the rachis short and
spinescent, with 2--4 secondary elongated rachises bearing numerous
minute opposite entire leaflets without stipels; stipules short,
persistent and spinescent, or caducous. Flowers perfect on thin
elongated jointed pedicels from the axils of minute caducous bracts, in
slender axillary solitary or fascicled racemes; calyx short-campanulate,
5-lobed, the lobes slightly imbricated or subvalvate in the bud, narrow,
membranaceous, nearly equal, becoming reflexed, deciduous; petals bright
yellow, unguiculate, much longer than the lobes of the calyx, spreading,
the upper petal rather broader than the others and glandular at the base
of the claw; stamens 10, inserted in 2 rows on the margin of the thin
disk, free, slightly declinate, those of the outer row opposite the
sepals and rather longer than the others; filaments villose below the
middle, the upper filament enlarged at base and gibbous on the upper
side; anthers uniform, versatile; ovary short-stipitate, pilose,
contracted into a slender filiform incurved style infolded in the bud
and tipped with a minute stigma; ovules numerous, suspended from the
inner angle of the ovary. Legume linear, torulose, acuminate at the
ends, 2-valved, the valves thin, convex by the growth of the seeds,
contracted between and beyond them, longitudinally striate. Seeds
oblong, suspended longitudinally on a slender funicle; hilum minute,
near the apex; seed-coat thin, crustaceous, light brown; embryo inclosed
on the sides only by thick layers of horny albumen; cotyledons oval,
flat, slightly fleshy, the radicle very short and straight.

Parkinsonia, with four species, is confined to the warm parts of America
and to southern Africa. Two species occur within the limits of the
United States.

The genus is named for John Parkinson (1567--1650), an English botanical
author, and herbalist to James I.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers in long slender racemes; petals imbricated in the bud; stamens
        shorter than the petals; legume 1--8-seeded, 12'--18' long;
        leaves 7'--8' long; rachis of the pinnae flat, wing-margined,
        50--60-foliolate; branches with spines.
                                                  1. P. aculeata (G, H).
  Flowers in short racemes; petals valvate in the bud; stamens longer
        than the petals; legume 1--2-seeded; leaves about 1' long;
        rachis of the pinnae terete, 8--12-foliolate; branches without
        spines.
                                               2. P. microphylla (G, H).


             1. Parkinsonia aculeata L. Retama. Horse Bean.

[Illustration: Fig. 560]

Leaves of two forms, short-petiolate, persistent, light green and
glabrous, except for a few hairs on the lower part of the young
secondary rachis, 12'--18' long; primary leaves on young branches, with
2--4 pinnae, and a spinescent rachis developing into a stout ridged
persistent short-pointed chestnut-brown spine 1'--1-1/2' long and marked
near the base by the prominent scars left by the fall of the pinnae;
stipules persistent, appearing as lateral spiny branches on the spines;
secondary leaves fascicled from the axils of the primary leaves, nearly
sessile with a short terete spinescent rachis and 2 pinnae; pinnae flat,
12'--18' in length, wing-margined, acute at apex, with 25--30 pairs of
ovate or obovate petiolulate leaflets, 1/16'--1/8' long. Flowers
appearing on the growing branches during the spring and summer, and in
the tropics throughout the year, on slender pedicels 1/3'--1/2' in
length, in slender erect racemes 5'--6' long; petals bright yellow, the
upper one marked near the base on the inner surface with conspicuous red
spots; stamens shorter than the petals. Fruit hanging on pedicels
1/2'--3/4' in length, in graceful racemes, 2'--4' long, long-pointed,
dark orange-brown, slightly pilose, compressed between the remote seeds;
seeds 1/3' long, nearly terete, with thick albumen and a bright yellow
embryo.

A tree, 18 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in diameter,
usually separating 6 deg.--8 deg. from the ground into slender spreading
somewhat pendulous branches forming a wide graceful head, and slightly
zigzag branchlets puberulous and yellow-green during their first season,
becoming glabrous, gray or light orange color and roughened by lenticels
in their second and third years. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick,
brown tinged with red, the generally smooth surface broken into small
persistent plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, with very
thick lighter colored sapwood tinged with yellow.

Distribution. Low moist soil, valley of the lower Rio Grande, Texas;
common in northern Mexico and in the valley of the lower Colorado River,
Arizona; widely distributed in Lower California; naturalized on Key
West, the Bahamas, the West Indian islands, and in many other tropical
countries.

Cultivated in most warm countries as an ornament of gardens, and to form
hedges.


                    2. Parkinsonia microphylla Torr.

[Illustration: Fig. 561]

Leaves 1' long, pale, densely tomentose when they unfold, pubescent at
maturity, deciduous at the end of a few weeks; petiole 1/4' long; rachis
short, rarely spinescent; leaflets in 4--6 pairs, distant, entire,
sessile, broad-oblong or nearly orbicular, obtuse or somewhat acute at
apex, oblique at base, 1/6' long; stipules caducous. Flowers opening in
May or early June before the leaves, on slender pedicels, in racemes 1'
or less long from the axils of leaves of the previous year, pale yellow;
stamens longer than the petals. Fruit persistent on the branches for at
least a year, frequently 1 or 2, rarely 3-seeded, 2'--3' long, slightly
puberulous, especially toward the base, with a long acuminate often
falcate apex; seeds compressed, 1/3' long, with a bright green embryo.

An intricately branched tree, occasionally 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk a
foot in diameter, and stout pale yellow-green rigid branchlets
terminating in a stout spine, covered at first with deciduous tomentum,
slightly puberulous during their first and second seasons, and often
marked by the persistent scales of undeveloped buds. Bark dark orange
color, generally smooth, although sometimes roughened by scattered
clusters of short pale gray horizontal ridges, becoming on old trees
1/4' thick; more often a shrub, frequently only a few feet tall. Wood
heavy, hard, close-grained, dark orange-brown streaked with red, with
thick light brown or yellow sapwood of 25--30 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Deserts of southern Arizona and adjacent regions of
California and Sonora, and in northern Lower California; known to attain
the size and habits of a tree only in the neighborhood of Wickenburg,
Maricopa County, Arizona.




                           10. CERCIDIUM Tul.


Trees or shrubs, with stout tortuous branches, covered with bright green
bark and armed with slender straight axillary spines, and minute obtuse
buds. Leaves alternate, abruptly pinnate, petiolate, early deciduous;
pinnae 2 or occasionally 3, 6--8-foliolate; stipules inconspicuous or 0;
leaflets ovate or obovate, without stipels. Flowers perfect in short
few-flowered axillary racemes, solitary or fascicled, with minute
membranaceous early deciduous bracts; calyx 5-lobed, the lobes equal,
acute, reflexed at maturity, their margins scarious, slightly revolute;
petals orbicular or short-oblong, unguiculate, bright yellow, the upper
petal broader and longer clawed than the others, slightly auriculate at
base of the blade, the claw conspicuously glandular at base; stamens 10,
inserted with the petals on the margin of the disk, free, slightly
declinate, exserted; filaments filiform, pilose below, the upper
filament enlarged at base and gibbous on the upper side; anthers
uniform, ovoid, versatile; ovary short-stalked, inserted at the base of
the calyx-tube; styles slender, involute, infolded in the bud, with a
minute terminal stigma; ovules suspended from the angle of the ovary
opposite the posterior petal. Legume linear-oblong, compressed or
somewhat turgid, straight or slightly contracted between the seeds,
thickened on the margins, the ventral suture acute, or slightly grooved,
tipped with the remnants of the style, tardily dehiscent, 2-valved, the
valves membranaceous or subcoriaceous, obliquely veined. Seeds suspended
longitudinally on a long slender funicle, ovoid, compressed, the minute
hilum near the apex; seed-coat thin, crustaceous; embryo compressed,
light green, covered on the sides only by a thin layer of horny albumen;
cotyledons oval, flat, rather fleshy; radicle very short, erect, near
the hilum.

Cercidium is confined to the warmer parts of the New World, where it is
distributed with four or five species from the southern borders of the
United States through Mexico, Central America, and Venezuela to Mendoza.
Of the three species found within the territory of the United States two
are small trees.

Cercidium produces hard wood sometimes used as fuel.

The generic name, from {kerkidion}, refers to the fancied resemblance of
the legume to the weaver's instrument of that name.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Legume compressed, with straight margins; leaflets green, slightly
        glandular.
                                                     1. C. floridum (E).
  Legume somewhat turgid, the margins often slightly contracted between
        the seeds; leaflets glaucous.
                                                2. C. Torreyanum (G, H).


           1. Cercidium floridum Benth. Green-barked Acacia.

[Illustration: Fig. 562]

Leaves 1'--1-1/2' long, with 2 or rarely 3 pinnae, a broad pubescent
petiole and rachis, and oval or somewhat obovate dull green puberulous
minutely glandular leaflets about 1/16' in length, rounded or slightly
emarginate at apex, and when they unfold covered on the lower surface
with scattered white hairs; petiolules short, stout, pubescent;
appearing in April and deciduous in October. Flowers opening with the
leaves, and produced in successive crops during three or four months,
3/4' in diameter, on slender pedicels, in 4 or 5-flowered racemes
1-1/2'--2' long, with small acute minute membranaceous caducous bracts.
Fruit compressed, oblong, straight or slightly falcate, acute, narrowly
and acutely margined on the ventral suture, glabrous, 2 or 3-seeded,
2'--2-1/2' long, 1/2' broad, tardily dehiscent, the valves papery,
yellow tinged with brown on the outer surface, and bright orange color
within; seeds 1/3' long.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short crooked trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
stout spreading branches covered with thin smooth bright green bark,
forming a low wide head, and branchlets light or dark olive-green,
slightly puberulous at first, soon glabrous, marked by occasional black
lenticels, and armed with slender spines 1' or less in length. Bark
1/16' thick, light brown tinged with red, with numerous short horizontal
light gray ridge-like excrescences. Wood light, soft, close-grained,
pale yellow tinged with green, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Shores of Matagorda Bay to Hidalgo and Valverde Counties,
Texas, and in northern Mexico; not common in Texas; very abundant and a
conspicuous feature of vegetation in Mexico from the mouth of the Rio
Grande to the foothills of the Sierra Madre.


     2. Cercidium Torreyanum Sarg. Green-barked Acacia. Palo Verde.

[Illustration: Fig. 563]

Leaves few and scattered, 1' long, hoary-tomentose when they first
appear, puberulous at maturity, with a slender petiole and 2 pinnae, with
2 or 3 pairs of oblong obtuse glaucous leaflets narrowed toward the
somewhat oblique base, 1/12'--1/6' long; unfolding in March and April
and falling almost immediately when fully grown. Flowers 3/4' in
diameter, on slender pedicels 3/4'--1' long, in 4 or 5-flowered racemes
about 1' in length, with small acute membranaceous caducous bracts.
Fruit ripening and falling in July, 3'--4' long, 1/4'--1/3' wide,
2--8-seeded, slightly turgid, often somewhat contracted between the
seeds, frequently grooved on the ventral suture; seeds turgid, 1/3'
long.

A low intricately branched tree, leafless for most of the year, 25 deg.--30 deg.
high, with a short often inclining trunk 18'--20' in diameter, stout
spreading branches covered with yellow or olive-green bark, forming a
wide open irregular head, and glabrous slightly zigzag light yellow or
pale olive-green and glaucous branchlets armed with thin straight or
curved spines 1/4' long. Bark thin, smooth, pale olive-green, becoming
near the base of old trunks reddish brown, 1/8' thick, furrowed and
separating into thick plate-like scales. Wood heavy, not strong, soft,
close-grained, light brown, with clear light yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Sides of low canyons and depressions, and sandhills of the
desert; valley of the lower Gila River, Arizona, to the Colorado Desert
of southern California, and southward into Sonora and Lower California;
when in flower in early spring the conspicuous and most beautiful
feature of the vegetation of the Colorado Desert.




                             11. SOPHORA L.


Trees or shrubs, with minute scaly buds, unarmed terete branches
prolonged by an upper axillary bud, and fibrous roots. Leaves unequally
pinnate, with numerous small or few and ample thin or coriaceous
leaflets; stipules minute, deciduous; stipels often 0. Flowers in
terminal or axillary racemes, with linear minute deciduous bracts and
bractlets; calyx broad-campanulate, often slightly turbinate or obconic
at base, obliquely truncate, the short teeth nearly equal or the 2 upper
subconnate and often somewhat larger than the others; disk cupuliform,
glandular, adnate to the calyx-tube; corolla papilionaceous; petals
white or violet blue, unguiculate; standard obovate or orbicular,
usually shorter than the oblong, suberect keel-petals, as long or rather
longer than the oblong-oblique wings, overlapping each other at the
back, barely united; stamens free, or 9 of them slightly united at base,
uniform; anthers attached on the back near the middle; ovary
short-stipitate, contracted into an incurved style, with a minute
truncate or slightly rounded capitate stigma; ovules numerous, suspended
from the inner angle of the ovary, superposed, amphitropous. Legume
terete, much contracted between the seeds, woody or fleshy, usually
many-seeded, each seed inclosed in a separate cell, indehiscent. Seed
oblong or oval, sometimes somewhat compressed; seed-coat thick,
membranaceous or crustaceous; cotyledons thick and fleshy; radicle short
and straight or more or less elongated and incurved.

Sophora is scattered over the warmer parts of the two hemispheres, with
about twenty species of trees, shrubs or herbs; of the six North
American species two are small trees. Several of the species produce
valuable wood, and from the pods and flower-buds of the Chinese _Sophora
japonica_ L., a dye is obtained used to dye white cloth yellow and blue
cloth green. This tree is often cultivated as an ornament of parks and
gardens in northern China, Japan, the eastern United States, and in
western, central, and southern Europe.

The generic name is from _Sophera_, the Arabic name of some tree with
pea-shaped flowers.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers violet blue, in terminal racemes; the upper calyx-lobes larger
        than the others and united; legume woody; seeds without albumen;
        leaves coriaceous, persistent.
                                           1. S. secundiflora (C, E, H).
  Flowers white, in axillary racemes; calyx-lobes equal; legume fleshy;
        seeds with albumen; leaves thin, deciduous.
                                                      2. S. affinis (C).


           1. Sophora secundiflora DC. Frijolito. Coral Bean.

[Illustration: Fig. 564]

Leaves persistent, covered when they unfold, especially on the lower
surface of the leaflets, with silky white hairs, and at maturity 4'--6'
long, with a stout puberulous petiole slightly enlarged at base, and
7--9 oblong-elliptic leaflets rounded, emarginate or sometimes mucronate
at apex, gradually contracted at base into a short thick petiolule,
coriaceous, lustrous and dark yellow-green above, rather paler below,
glabrous or sometimes slightly puberulous along the under side of the
stout midrib, entire, with thickened margins, conspicuously
reticulate-veined, 1'--2-1/2' long, 1/2'--1-1/2' wide, without stipels.
Flowers with a powerful and delicious fragrance, appearing with the
young leaves in very early spring, 1' long, on stout pedicels sometimes
1' in length, from the axils of subulate deciduous bracts 1/2' or more
long, and bibracteolate with 2 acute bractlets, in terminal 1-sided
canescent racemes 2'--3' in length; calyx campanulate, slightly enlarged
on the upper side, the 3 lower teeth triangular and nearly equal, the 2
upper rather larger and united almost throughout; petals shortly
unguiculate, violet blue or rarely white, the broad erect standard
marked on the inner surface near the base with a few darker spots; ovary
coated with long silky white hairs. Fruit terete, 1'--7' long, 1/2'
thick, stalked, crowned with the thickened remnants of the style,
covered with thick hoary tomentum, indehiscent, 1--8-seeded, with hard
woody walls 1/4' thick; seeds short-oblong, rounded, 1/2' long, bright
scarlet, with a small pale hilum and a bony seed-coat; albumen 0;
cotyledons thick, orange-colored, filling the cavity of the seed;
radicle short and straight.

A tree, 25 deg.--35 deg. high, with a straight trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
separating several feet from the ground into a number of upright
branches forming a narrow head, and branchlets coated when they first
appear with fine hairy tomentum, becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous in
their second year and pale orange-brown; more often a shrub, with low
clustered stems. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, orange-colored,
streaked with red, with thick bright yellow sapwood of 10--12 layers of
annual growth. The seeds contain a poisonous alkaloid, sophorin, with
strong narcotic properties.

Distribution. Borders of streams, forming thickets or small groves, in
low rather moist limestone soil; shores of Matagorda Bay, Texas, to the
mountain canyons of New Mexico, and to those of Nuevo Leon and San Luis
Potosi; of its largest size in the neighborhood of Matagorda Bay; south
and west, especially west of the Pecos River, rarely more than a shrub.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of the southern states.


                       2. Sophora affinis T. & G.

[Illustration: Fig. 565]

Leaves deciduous, coated when they unfold with hoary pubescence, 6'--9'
long, with a slender puberulous petiole, and 13--19 elliptic, acute or
obtuse slightly mucronate leaflets contracted into short stout pubescent
petiolules, entire or with slightly wavy thickened margins, thin, pale
yellow-green and glabrous above, paler and covered with scattered hairs
or nearly glabrous below, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/2' wide, with a
prominent orange-colored midrib, slender primary veins, and conspicuous
reticulate veinlets. Flowers 1/2' long, appearing in early spring with
the young leaves, on slender canescent pedicels nearly 1/2' long, from
the axils of minute deciduous bracts, in slender pubescent semipendent
racemes, 3'--5' long, from the axils of the leaves at the end of the
branches; calyx short-campanulate, abruptly narrowed at base, somewhat
enlarged on the upper side, slightly pubescent, especially on the
margins of the short nearly triangular teeth; petals short-unguiculate,
white tinged with rose color; standard nearly orbicular, slightly
emarginate, reflexed, as long and twice as broad as the ovate auriculate
wing-petals and the keel-petals; ovary conspicuously stipitate, villose.
Fruit 1/2'--3' long, indehiscent, black, more or less pubescent, crowned
with the thickened remnants of the style, 4--8-seeded, or rarely
1-seeded and then subglobose, with thin fleshy rather sweet walls;
persistent on the branches during the winter; seeds oval, slightly
compressed, with a thin crustaceous bright chestnut-brown seed-coat;
cotyledons surrounded by a thin layer of horny albumen, bright green;
radicle long and incurved.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter, dividing into a
number of stout spreading branches forming a handsome round-topped head,
and slender terete slightly zigzag branchlets, orange-brown or dark
brown and slightly puberulous when they first appear, becoming bright
green marked by narrow brown ridges, and in their second year by the
elevated tomentose leaf-scars. Winter-buds depressed, almost surrounded
by the base of the petiole, with broad scales coated on the outer
surface with dark brown tomentum and on the inner surface with thicker
pale tomentum, and persistent on the base of the growing shoot. Bark of
the trunk about 1/8' thick, dark reddish brown, and broken into numerous
oblong scales, the surface exfoliating in thin layers. Wood heavy, very
hard and strong, light red in color, with thick bright clear yellow
sapwood of 10--12 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Usually on limestone hills, or on the borders of streams,
ravines, or depressions in the prairie, often forming small groves;
valley of the Red River at Shreveport, Caddo Parish, Louisiana, to the
valley of the Arkansas River, Arkansas, and to southern Oklahoma
(Choctaw and Love Counties), and southward in Texas to the valley of the
San Antonio and upper Guadalupe Rivers (Kerrville, Kerr County).




                          12. CLADRASTIS Raf.


A tree, with copious watery juice, smooth gray bark, slender slightly
zigzag terete branchlets without a terminal bud, fibrous roots, and
naked axillary buds 4 together, superposed, flattened by mutual pressure
into an acuminate cone, and inclosed collectively in the hollow base of
the petiole, the largest and upper one only developing, the lowest
minute and rudimentary. Leaves unequally pinnate, petiolate, with a
stout terete petiole abruptly enlarged at base, 7--11-foliolate,
deciduous; leaflets usually alternate, broadly oval, the terminal one
rhombic-ovate, contracted at apex into a short broad point, cuneate at
base, entire, petiolulate, without stipels, covered at first like the
young shoots with fine silvery pubescence, and on the midrib with
lustrous brown tomentum, at maturity thin, glabrous, dark yellow-green
on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, the midrib and numerous
primary veins conspicuous, light yellow below; stipules 0. Flowers on
slender puberulous pedicels, bibracteolate near the middle, with
scarious caducous bractlets, in long gracefully nodding stalked terminal
panicles, the lower branches racemose, and often springing from the
axils of 1-flowered pedicels, the main axis slightly zigzag, and, like
the branches, covered at first with a glaucous bloom and slightly
pilose; bracts lanceolate, scarious, pale, caducous; calyx
cylindric-campanulate, enlarged on the upper side, and obliquely obconic
at base, puberulous, 5-toothed, the teeth imbricated in the bud, nearly
equal, short and obtuse, the 2 upper slightly united; disk cupuliform,
adnate to the interior of the calyx-tube; corolla papilionaceous; petals
white, unguiculate; standard nearly orbicular, entire or slightly
emarginate, reflexed above the middle, barely longer than the straight
oblong wing-petals, slightly biauriculate at the base of the blade,
marked on the inner surface with a pale yellow blotch; keel-petals free,
oblong, nearly straight, obtuse, slightly subcordate or biauriculate at
base; stamens 10, free; filaments filiform, slightly incurved near the
apex, glabrous; anthers versatile; ovary linear, stipitate, bright red,
villose with long pale hairs, contracted into a long slender glabrous
slightly incurved subulate style; stigma terminal, minute; ovules
numerous, suspended from the inner angle of the ovary, superposed.
Legume glabrous, short-stalked, linear-compressed, the upper margin
slightly thickened, tipped with the remnants of the persistent style,
4--6-seeded, ultimately dehiscent, the valves thin and membranaceous.
Seeds short-oblong, compressed, attached by a slender funicle; without
albumen; seed-coat thin, membranaceous, dark brown; embryo filling the
cavity of the seed; cotyledons fleshy, oblong, flat; radicle short,
inflexed.

Four species are now known. One inhabits the southern United States, two
occur in western China and one in Japan.

_Cladrastis_, from {klados} and {thraustos}, relates to the brittleness
of the branches.


          1. Cladrastis lutea K. Koch. Yellow Wood. Virgilia.

[Illustration: Fig. 566]

Leaves 8'-12' in length, with leaflets 3'--4' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide,
the terminal leaflet rather shorter than the others and 3'--3-1/2' wide;
turning bright clear yellow rather late in the autumn some time before
falling. Flowers appearing about the middle of June, slightly fragrant,
in panicles 12'--14' long and 5'--6' wide. Fruit fully grown by the
middle of August, ripening in September and soon falling.

A tree, sometimes 50 deg.-60 deg. high, with a trunk 1-1/2 deg.--2 deg. or exceptionally
4 deg. in diameter, usually divided 6 deg.--7 deg. from the ground into 2 or 3
stems, slender wide-spreading more or less pendulous brittle branches
forming a wide graceful head, and zigzag branchlets clothed with
pubescence when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous, during their
first season light brown tinged more or less with green, very smooth and
lustrous, and covered by numerous darker colored lenticels, bright
red-brown in their first winter and marked by large elevated leaf-scars
surrounding the buds, and dark dull brown the following year. Bark of
the trunk 1/8'--1/4' thick, with a silvery gray or light brown surface
and rather darker colored than that of the branches. Wood heavy, very
hard, strong and close-grained, with a smooth satiny surface, bright
clear yellow changing to light brown on exposure, with thin nearly white
sapwood; used for fuel, occasionally for gun-stocks, and yielding a
clear yellow dye.

Distribution. Limestone cliffs and ridges generally in rich soil, and
often overhanging the banks of mountain streams; Cherokee County, North
Carolina, and the western slopes of the high mountains of eastern
Tennessee; central Tennessee and Kentucky; near Florence, Lauderdale
County, and cliffs of the Warrior River, Tuscaloosa County, Alabama;
Forsythe, Taney County, and Eagle Rock, Barry County, Missouri; rare and
local; most abundant in the neighborhood of Nashville, Tennessee, and in
Missouri.

Often planted in the eastern United States as an ornamental tree, and
hardy as far north as New England; and rarely in western and southern
Europe; usually only flowering in alternate years.




                       13. EYSENHARDTIA H. B. K.


Small glandular-punctate trees or shrubs, with slender terete
branchlets. Leaves alternate, equally pinnate, petiolate; leaflets
oblong, mucronate or emarginate at apex, short-petiolulate, numerous,
stipellate; stipules subulate, caducous. Flowers short-pedicellate, in
long spicate racemes, terminal or axillary, with subulate caducous
bracts; calyx-tube campanulate, conspicuously glandular-punctate,
5-toothed, the acute teeth nearly equal, persistent; disk cupuliform,
adnate to the base of the calyx-tube; corolla subpapilionaceous; petals
erect, free, nearly equal, oblong-spatulate, rounded at apex,
unguiculate, creamy white; standard concave, slightly broader than the
wing and keel-petals; stamens 10, inserted with the petals, the superior
stamen free, shorter than the others united to above the middle into a
tube; anthers uniform, oblong; ovary subsessile, contracted into a long
slender uncinate style geniculate and conspicuously glandular below the
apex; stigma introrse, oblique; ovules 2 or 3, rarely 4, attached to the
inner angle of the ovary, superposed. Legume small, oblong or
linear-falcate, compressed, tipped with the remnants of the style,
indehiscent, pendent. Seeds usually solitary, rarely 2, oblong-reniform,
without albumen; seed-coat coriaceous; embryo filling the cavity of the
seed; cotyledons flat, fleshy; radicle superior, short and erect.

Eysenhardtia is confined to the warmer parts of the New World, and is
distributed from western Texas and southern New Mexico and Arizona to
southern Mexico, Lower California, and Guatemala. Four species are
distinguished; of these three species occur within the territory of the
United States, and in northern Mexico, and one species is found only in
Guatemala. Lignum nephriticum formerly celebrated in Europe for its
reputed medical properties and for the fluorescence of its infusion in
spring water is the wood of the shrubby _Eysenhardtia polystachya_ Sarg.
of western Texas and Mexico.

Of the North American species one is a small tree.

The generic name is in honor of Karl Wilhelm Eysenhardt (1794--1825),
Professor of Botany in the University of Koenigsberg.


                  1. Eysenhardtia orthocarpa S. Wats.

[Illustration: Fig. 567]

Leaves 4'--5' long, with a pubescent rachis grooved on the upper side,
10--23 pairs of leaflets, and small scarious deciduous stipules;
leaflets oval, rounded or slightly emarginate at apex, with a stout
petiolule and minute scarious deciduous stipels, pale gray-green,
glabrous or slightly puberulous on the upper surface, conspicuously
glandular, with chestnut-brown glands, and pubescent especially on the
prominent midrib on the lower surface, reticulate-veined, 1/2'--2/3'
long, 1/8'--1/4' wide, with thickened slightly revolute margins. Flowers
opening in May, nearly 1/2' long, on slender pubescent pedicels, in
axillary pubescent spikes 3'--4' long; calyx many-ribbed, pubescent,
conspicuously glandular, half as long as the white petals ciliate on the
margins, and of nearly equal size and shape. Fruit 1/2' long, pendent,
nearly straight or slightly falcate, thickened on the edges, with
usually a single seed near the apex; seed compressed, light reddish
brown, 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
separating 3 deg. or 4 deg. above the ground into a number of slender branches,
and branchlets coated when they first appear with ashy gray pubescence
disappearing during the second year, and then reddish brown and
roughened by numerous glandular excrescences; or more often a low rigid
shrub. Bark of the trunk about 1/16' thick, light gray, and broken into
large plate-like scales, exfoliating on the surface into thin layers.
Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, light reddish brown, with thin clear
yellow sapwood of 7 or 8 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry gravelly soil, on arid slopes and dry ridges; valley
of the upper Guadalupe River, western Texas, to the Santa Catalina and
Santa Rita Mountains, southern Arizona, and southward into northern
Mexico; arborescent in the United States only near the summit of the
Santa Catalina Mountains.




                              14. DALEA L.


Glandular-punctate herbs, small shrubs, or rarely trees. Leaves
alternate, unequally pinnate, or simple in the arborescent species;
stipules generally minute, subulate, deciduous. Flowers in racemes,
their bracts membranaceous or setaceous, broad, concave above,
glandular-dentate; calyx 5-toothed or lobed, persistent, the divisions
nearly equal; corolla papilionaceous; petals unguiculate; standard
cordate, free, inserted in the bottom of the tubular disk connate to the
calyx-tube, rather shorter than the wing- and keel-petals, the claws
adnate to and jointed upon the staminal tube; stamens 10, sometimes 9
through the suppression of the superior stamen, united into a tube cleft
above and cup-shaped toward the base; anthers uniform, often surmounted
by a gland; ovary sessile or short-stalked, contracted into a slender
subulate style, with a minute terminal stigma; ovules 4--6 attached to
the inner angle of the ovary, superposed. Legume ovoid, sometimes
conspicuously ribbed, more or less inclosed in the calyx, membranaceous,
indehiscent, 1-seeded; seed reniform, without albumen; testa coriaceous;
embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons broad and flat;
radicle superior, accumbently reflexed.

Dalea is confined to the New World, where it is distributed from the
central, western, and southwestern regions of the United States through
Mexico and Central America to Peru, Chile, and the Galapagos Islands;
usually herbs or low undershrubs, one species of the United States
occasionally assumes the habit and attains the size of a small tree.

The generic name is in honor of Samuel Dale (1659--1739), an English
botanist and writer on the materia medica.


                 1. Dalea spinosa A. Gray. Smoke Tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 568]

Leaves few, simple, irregularly scattered near the base of the spinose
branchlets, cuneate or linear-oblong, sessile or nearly sessile, marked
by few large glands, especially on the entire wavy margins,
hoary-pubescent, 3/4'--1' long, 1/8'--1/2' wide, with a broad midrib and
three pairs of lateral ribs, on vigorous young shoots or seedling plants
remotely and coarsely serrate; remaining only for a few weeks on the
branches; stipules minute, ovate, acute, pubescent. Flowers 1/2' long,
appearing in June on short pedicels from the axils of minute bracts, in
racemes 1'--1-1/2' long, their rachis slender, spinescent,
hoary-pubescent; calyx-tube 10-ribbed, with usually 5 glands between the
dorsal ribs, the lobes short, ovate, rounded or more or less ciliate on
the margins, reflexed at maturity; petals dark violet blue, standard
cordate, reflexed, furnished at base of the blade with two conspicuous
glands, wing- and keel-petals attached to the staminal tube by their
base only and nearly equal in size, rounded at apex, more or less
irregularly lobed at base; ovary pubescent, glandular punctate. Fruit
ovoid, pubescent, glandular, twice as long as the calyx, tipped with the
remnants of the recurved style; seed 1/8' long, pale brown irregularly
marked with dark spots.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short stout contorted trunk sometimes 20'
in diameter and divided near the ground into several upright branches,
and branchlets reduced to slender sharp spines coated with fine
pubescence, bearing minute nearly triangular scarious caducous bracts,
marked by occasional glandular fistules, and developed from stouter
branches hoary-pubescent when young, becoming glabrous in their third
year and covered with pale brown bark roughened with lenticels and as it
exfoliates showing the pale green inner bark; more often a low rigid
intricately branched shrub. Bark of the trunk dark gray-brown, nearly
1/4' thick, deeply furrowed, and roughened on the surface by small
persistent scales. Wood light, soft, rather close-grained, walnut-brown
in color, with nearly white sapwood of 12--15 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Valley of the lower Gila River, Arizona, through the
Colorado Desert to San Felipe and Palm Springs, Riverside County,
California, and southward into Sonora and Lower California.




                         15. ROBINIA L. Locust.


Trees or shrubs, with slender terete or slightly many-angled zigzag
branchlets, without a terminal bud, minute naked subpetiolar
depressed-globose axillary buds 3 or 4 together, superposed, protected
collectively in a depression by a scale-like covering lined on the inner
surface with a thick coat of tomentum and opening in early spring, its
divisions persistent during the season on the base of the branchlet
developed usually from the upper bud. Leaves unequally pinnate,
petiolate, deciduous; leaflets entire, penniveined, stipellate,
reticulate-venulose, petiolulate; stipules setaceous, becoming
spinescent at maturity, persistent. Flowers on long pedicels, in short
pendulous racemes from the axils of leaves of the year, with small
acuminate caducous bracts and bractlets; calyx campanulate, 5-toothed or
cut, the upper lobes shorter than the others, cohering for part of their
length; corolla papilionaceous, petals shortly unguiculate, inserted on
a tubular disk glandular on the inner surface and connate with the base
of the calyx-tube; standard large, reflexed, barely longer than the
wing- and keel-petals, naked on the inner surface, obcordate, reflexed;
wings oblong-falcate, free; keel-petals incurved, obtuse, united below;
stamens 10, inserted with the petals, the 9 inferior united into a tube
often enlarged at base and cleft on the upper side, the superior stamen
free at the base and connate in the middle with the staminal tube, or
finally free; anthers ovoid; ovary inserted at the base of the calyx,
linear-oblong, stipitate; style subulate, inflexed, bearded along the
inner side near the apex, with a small terminal stigma; ovules numerous,
suspended from the inner angle of the ovary, in two ranks, superposed.
Legumes in drooping many-fruited racemes, many-seeded, linear,
compressed, almost sessile, 2-valved, the seed-bearing suture
narrow-winged; valves thin and membranaceous. Seed oblong-oblique,
transverse, attached by a stout persistent incurved funicle enlarged at
the point of attachment to the placenta; seed-coat thin, crustaceous;
albumen thin, membranaceous; cotyledons oval, fleshy; radicle short,
much reflexed, accumbent.

Robinia with seven or eight species is confined to the United States and
Mexico; of the species found in the United States three are arborescent.

The generic name commemorates the botanical labors of Jean and Vespasien
Robin, arborists and herbalists of the kings of France in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Legume without glandular hairs; flowers white.
                                              1. R. Pseudoacacia (A, C).
  Legume glandular-hispid (in the arborescent form of No. 2); flowers
        rose color.
    Glands not viscid.
                                              2. R. neo-Mexicana (F, H).
    Glands exuding a clammy sticky substance.
                                                      3. R. viscosa (A).


       1. Robinia Pseudoacacia L. Locust. Acacia. Yellow Locust.

[Illustration: Fig. 569]

Leaves 8'--14' long, with a slender puberulous petiole, and 7--19
leaflets; turning pale clear yellow late in the autumn just before
falling; stipules 1/2' long, linear, subulate, membranaceous, at first
pubescent and tipped with small tufts of caducous brown hairs, becoming
straight or slightly recurved spines persistent for many years and
ultimately often more than 1' in length; leaflets oval, rounded or
slightly truncate and minutely apiculate at apex, when they unfold
covered with caducous silvery pubescence, at maturity very thin, dull
dark blue-green above, pale below, glabrous with the exception of the
slight pubescence on the under side of the slender midrib, 1-1/2'--2'
long and 1/2'--3/4' wide; petiolules stout, 1/8'--1/4' in length;
stipules minute, linear, membranaceous, early deciduous. Flowers opening
in May or early in June, filled with nectar, very fragrant, on slender
pedicels 1/2' long and dark red or red tinged with green, in loose
puberulous racemes 4'--5' long; calyx conspicuously gibbous on the upper
side, ciliate on the margins, dark green blotched with red, especially
on the upper side, the lower lobe acuminate and much longer than the
nearly triangular lateral and upper lobes; petals pure white, with a
large pale yellow blotch marking the inner surface of the standard.
Fruit ripening late in the autumn, 3'--4' long and 1/2' wide, with
bright red-brown valves, usually 4--8-seeded, mostly persistent until
the end of winter or early spring; seeds 3/16' long, dark orange-brown,
with irregular darker markings.

A tree, 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, small brittle
usually erect branches forming a narrow oblong head, and slender terete
or sometimes slightly many-angled branchlets marked by small pale
scattered lenticels, coated at first with short appressed silvery white
deciduous pubescence, pale green and puberulous during their first
summer, becoming light reddish brown and glabrous or nearly glabrous
toward autumn. Bark of the trunk 1'--1-1/2' thick, deeply furrowed, dark
brown tinged with red, and covered by small square persistent scales.
Wood heavy, exceedingly hard and strong, close-grained, very durable in
contact with the ground, brown or rarely light green, with pale yellow
sapwood of 2 or 3 layers of annual growth; formerly extensively used in
shipbuilding, for all sorts of posts, in construction and turnery;
preferred for treenails, and valued as fuel.

Distribution. Slopes of the Appalachian Mountains, central and southern
Pennsylvania, to northern Georgia; in southern Illinois; now widely
naturalized in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains, and
perhaps indigenous as a low shrub in northeastern and western Arkansas
and in Oklahoma; nowhere common; in the Appalachian forest growing
singly or in small groups up to altitudes of 3500 deg.; most abundant and of
its largest size on the western slopes of the Alleghanies of West
Virginia; often spreading by underground stems into broad thickets of
small and often stunted trees.

Formerly much planted as an ornamental and timber tree in the eastern
states; very frequently used in Europe, with numerous seminal varieties
of peculiar foliage or habit, for the decoration of parks and gardens,
and to shade the streets of cities.


                2. Robinia neo-mexicana A. Gray. Locust.

In its typical form a shrub only a few feet high. The hairs on the fruit
not glandular-hispid.

Distribution. Mountain canyons and plains, Grant County, New Mexico.
Passing into


               Robinia neo-mexicana var. luxurians Dieck.

[Illustration: Fig. 570]

Leaves 6'--12' long, with a stout pubescent petiole, and 15--21
leaflets; stipules chartaceous, covered with long silky brown hairs,
becoming at maturity stout slightly recurved flat brown or bright red
spines sometimes 1' or more long; leaflets elliptic-oblong, rounded or
sometimes slightly emarginate at the mucronate apex, cuneate or
sometimes rounded at base, 1-1/2' long, and 1' broad, coated at first on
the lower surface and on the margins with soft brown hairs, and
silvery-pubescent on the upper surface, and at maturity thin, pale
blue-green, conspicuously reticulate-veined, and glabrous with the
exception of the slightly puberulous lower side of the slender midrib
and stout petiolule; stipels membranaceous, 1/4' long, often recurved,
sometimes persistent through the season. Flowers appearing in May, 1'
long, on slender pedicels 1/2' in length and covered with stout
glandular hairs, in short compact many-flowered glandular-hispid
long-stemmed racemes; corolla pale rose color or sometimes almost white
(f. _albiflora_ Kusche), with a broad standard and wing-petals. Fruit
3'--4' long, about 1/3' wide, glandular-hispid, with a narrow wing;
seeds dark brown, slightly mottled, 1/16' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, and
branchlets at first pale and coated with rusty brown glandular hairs
increasing in length during the summer, and slightly puberulous, bright
reddish brown, often covered with a glaucous bloom, and marked by a few
small scattered pale lenticels during their first winter. Bark of the
trunk thin, slightly furrowed, light brown, the surface separating into
small plate-like scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, strong,
close-grained, yellow streaked with brown, with light yellow sapwood of
4 or 5 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Banks of mountain streams; valley of the Purgatory River,
Colorado, through northern New Mexico and Arizona to southern Utah; on
the Santa Catalina and Santa Rita Mountains, southern Arizona up to
altitudes of 7000 deg.; probably of its largest size near Trinidad, Las
Animas County, Colorado.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern states, and
in western Europe.

x _Robinia Holdtii_ Beiss, a hybrid of _Robinia neo-mexicana_ var.
_luxurians_ and _R. Pseudoacacia_, has appeared in a Colorado nursery
and is occasionally cultivated.


                3. Robinia viscosa Vent. Clammy Locust.

[Illustration: Fig. 571]

Leaves 7'--12' long, with a stout nearly terete dark glandular-hispid
clammy petiole, and 13--21 leaflets; stipules subulate, chartaceous,
often deciduous or developing into short slender spines; leaflets ovate,
sometimes acuminate, mucronate, rounded or pointed at apex, and cuneate
at base, when they unfold covered below with soft white pubescence, and
slightly puberulous above, and at maturity dark green and glabrous on
the upper surface, pale and pubescent on the lower surface, especially
on the slender yellow midrib and primary veins and on the stout
glandular-hispid petiolule, 1-1/2'--2' long and 2/3' wide; stipels
slender, deciduous. Flowers 2/3' long, almost inodorous, appearing in
June, on slender hairy pedicels from the axils of large lanceolate
acuminate dark-red bracts contracted at apex into a long setaceous point
exserted beyond the flower-buds and mostly deciduous before the flowers
open, in short crowded glandular-hispid racemes; calyx dark red, coated
on the outer surface and on the margins of the subulate lobes with long
pale hairs; corolla pale rose or flesh color, with a narrow standard
marked on the inner face by a pale yellow blotch, and broad wing-petals.
Fruit narrow-winged, glandular-hispid, 2'--3-1/2' long; seeds 1/8' long,
dark reddish brown and mottled.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' in diameter, slender
spreading branches, and dark reddish brown branchlets covered with
conspicuous dark glandular hairs exuding, like those on the petioles and
legumes, a clammy, sticky substance, during the first winter bright
red-brown, covered with small black lenticels and very sticky, becoming
in their second year light brown and dry; or a shrub, often only 5 deg.--6 deg.
tall. Bark of the trunk 1/8' thick, smooth, dark brown tinged with red.
Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, brown, with light yellow sapwood of 2
or 3 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Mountains of North and South Carolina up to altitudes of
3000 deg., and now naturalized in many parts of the United States east of
the Mississippi River and as far north as eastern Massachusetts.

Often planted as an ornament of parks and gardens in all countries with
a temperate climate.




                          16. OLNEYA A. Gray.


A tree, with thin scaly bark, and stout terete hoary-canescent slightly
angled branchlets armed with stout infrastipular spines. Leaves equally
or unequally pinnate, hoary-canescent, persistent, 10--15-foliolulate,
destitute of stipules and stipels, short-petiolate, often fascicled in
earlier axils; leaflets oblong or obovate, entire, obtuse, often
mucronate at apex, cuneate at base, rigid, short-petiolulate,
reticulate-veined, with a broad conspicuous midrib. Flowers on stout
pedicels rather longer than the calyx, in short axillary few-flowered
hoary-canescent racemes, with acute minute bracts and bractlets
deciduous before the expansion of the flowers; calyx hoary-canescent,
the lobes ovate, obtuse, almost equal, the two upper lobes connate
nearly throughout; disk cupuliform, adnate to the tube of the calyx;
corolla papilionaceous; petals unguiculate, purple or violet, inserted
on the disk; standard orbicular, deeply emarginate, reflexed, furnished
at base of the blade with two infolded ear-shaped appendages covering 2
prominent callosites; wing-petals oblique, oblong, slightly auriculate
at base of blade on the upper side, free, as long as the broad obtuse
incurved keel-petals; stamens 10, the superior stamen free, filling the
slit in the tube formed by the union of the others; filaments filiform;
anthers of the same length, oblong, uniform; ovary sessile or slightly
stipitate, pilose; style inflexed, bearded above the middle; stigma
thick and fleshy, depressed-capitate; ovules numerous, suspended from
the inner angle of the ovary, superposed. Legume oblique, compressed,
glandular-hairy, light brown, 2-valved, often tipped with the remnants
of the long persistent style, 1--5-seeded, the valves thick and
coriaceous, becoming unequally and interruptedly convex at maturity.
Seeds broad-ovoid, slightly angled on the ventral side, suspended by a
short thick funicle, without albumen; seed-coat thin, membranaceous,
bright chestnut-brown and lustrous; embryo filling the cavity of the
seed; cotyledons thick and fleshy, accumbent on the short incurved
radicle.

The genus is represented by a single species of southern Arizona,
California, and northwestern Mexico.

_Olneya_ is in memory of Stephen T. Olney (1812--1878), author of a
catalogue of the plants of Rhode Island.


                  1. Olneya tesota A. Gray. Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 572]

Leaves 1'--2-1/2' long, with leaflets 1/2'--3/4' in length, appearing in
June and persistent until the following spring. Flowers unfolding with
the leaves, nearly 1/2' long. Fruit light brown, very glandular, fully
grown at midsummer, ripening before the end of August, 2'--2-1/2' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 18' in
diameter and usually divided 4 deg.--6 deg. above the ground into a number of
stout upright branches, and slender branchlets thickly coated at first
with hoary-canescent pubescence disappearing early in their second year,
and then pale green and more or less spotted and streaked with red,
becoming pale brown in their third season, their spines straight or
slightly curved, very sharp and rigid, 1/8'--1/4' long, and persistent
at least during two years. Bark of the trunk thin, exfoliating in long
longitudinal dark red-brown scales. Wood very heavy, hard and strong,
although brittle, rich dark brown striped with red, with thin clear
yellow sapwood; valued as fuel and sometimes manufactured into canes and
other small objects.

Distribution. Sides of low depressions and arroyos in the desert; valley
of the Colorado River south of the Mohave Mountains, California, to
southwestern Arizona, and to Sonora and Lower California; most abundant
and of its largest size in Sonora.




                            17. ERYTHRINA L.


Trees or shrubs with erect terete stems and branches, often armed with
recurved prickles, or rarely herbaceous. Leaves alternate, pinnately
3-foliolate; stipules small, the stipels gland-like. Flowers
papilionaceous, showy, in pairs or fascicled on the rachis of axillary
leafless racemes, or in terminal racemes furnished at base with
leaf-like bracts; calyx oblique, truncate or 5-toothed; corolla usually
scarlet; petals free; standard broad or elongated, erect or spreading,
nearly sessile or raised on a long stalk; wing-petals small or wanting,
longer or shorter than the keel-petals; stamens 10, united into a tube
split on the upper side, the tenth and upper stamen separate or all 10
united; anthers uniform; ovary stipitate, 1-celled; styles subulate,
incurved, naked; stigmas small, terminal; ovules numerous, amphitropous,
the micropyle superior. Fruit a stipitate linear-falcate pod narrowed at
ends, compressed or subterete, constricted or undulate between the
seeds, 2-valved; seeds reniform, attached by an oblong basal hilum,
exalbuminous.

From twenty-five to thirty species are recognized, all inhabitants of
tropical and semitropical regions. In the gardens of warm countries
several of the species are cultivated for the beauty of their large and
brilliant flowers.

The name is from {erythros}, in allusion to the color of the flowers.


               1. Erythrina herbacea var. arborea Chapm.

[Illustration: Fig. 573]

Leaves persistent, usually 6'--8' long, with a slender petiole and
rachis occasionally armed with small recurved prickles; leaflets thin,
deltoid to hastate, concave-cuneate at the broad base, the lateral lobes
broad and rounded and much shorter than the elongated terminal lobe
gradually narrowed and rounded at apex, thin, yellow-green, smooth and
glabrous, 2-1/4'--3-1/2' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/4' wide; petiolules
slender, about 1/4' in length, with minute gland-like stipels. Flowers
2'--2-1/4' long on short slender pedicels, in narrow leafless racemes
8'--13' long, the lower flowers fading before those at the apex of the
raceme open; calyx dark red, truncate and ciliate at the mouth, 1/4' in
length; corolla scarlet; the standard narrow, oblanceolate, gradually
narrowed into the long base, about 1/4' long, closely infolded and then
more or less falcate; wing-petals slightly longer than the calyx and
longer than the keel-petals; stamens diadelphous. Fruit compressed,
constricted between the seeds, apiculate at apex, from 4'--6' long,
gradually narrowed into a stout stipitate base often 3/4' in length;
seeds compressed, bright scarlet, lustrous, 5/12' long and about 1/6'
wide, with a dark hilum.

A tree, rarely 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk occasionally a foot in
diameter, small erect and spreading branches, and slender yellow-green
branchlets armed with short broad recurved spines; more often shrubby
and, except in size and habit, not distinguishable from _Erythrina
herbacea_ L., an herb with slender spreading stems occasionally 3 deg. long,
and common in sandy soil from the coast region of North Carolina to
Florida, western Mississippi and Louisiana, and in the valley of the
lower Rio Grande, Texas. Bark thin red-brown marked by longitudinal rows
of large circular elevated lenticle-like excrescences.

Distribution. Florida, coast region from Miami, Dade County, to the
southern shores of Tampa Bay, and on the southern keys.




                      18. ICHTHYOMETHIA P. Brown.


Trees or shrubs with thin scaly bark and stout terete branchlets without
a terminal bud. Leaves unequally pinnate, long-petiolate; leaflets
opposite. Flowers papilionaceous, on slender pedicels enlarged at the
end, bibracteolate, in lateral panicles, appearing before the leaves;
bracts and bractlets minute, scarious; calyx campanulate, 2-lipped, the
upper lip emarginate, the lower 3-lobed, persistent, the lobes
imbricated in the bud, short and broad; petals inserted on an annular
glandular disk adnate to the interior of the calyx-tube, unguiculate,
white tinged with red, rarely yellowish white; stamens 10, the filament
of the upper stamen free at base only, united above with the others into
a long tube; anthers oblong, uniform, versatile; ovary sessile,
contracted into a filiform incurved style, with a capitate stigma;
ovules numerous, suspended from the inner angle of the ovary, 2-ranked.
Legume linear, compressed, raised on a stalk longer than the calyx,
slightly contracted between the numerous seeds, tomentose-canescent or
glabrate, thin-walled, indehiscent, longitudinally 4-winged, the wings
developed from the dorsal and ventral sutures, broad or narrow,
continuous or interrupted by the abortion of some of the ovules,
membranaceous, their margins undulate or irregularly cut; seeds oval,
compressed, without albumen, laterally attached by a short thick
funicle; seed-coat thin, crustaceous, red-brown, not lustrous; embryo
filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons plano-convex, oval, fleshy;
radicle short, inflexed.

Seven or eight species are now recognized, inhabitants of tropical
America where they are distributed from southern Florida, through the
West Indies to southern Mexico and Guatemala. Piscidia from the bark of
the roots of Ichthyomethia is sometimes used medicinally.

The generic name, from {ichthys} and {methy}, indicates the Carib use of
one of the species.


        1. Ichthyomethia piscipula A. S. Hitch. Jamaica Dogwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 574]

Leaves 4'--9' long, 5--11-foliolate, with stout petioles; leaflets oval,
obovate or broad-oblong, obtuse or short-acuminate at apex, rounded or
cuneate at base, with thick pubescent petiolules, when they first appear
coated like the petioles with rufous hairs, at maturity coriaceous,
glabrous and dark green above, pale and more or less clothed below with
rufous or canescent pubescence along the elevated conspicuous midrib,
and numerous thin veins arching and united at the entire undulate
thickened margins, or covered with soft pubescence below; deciduous in
spring. Flowers opening in May, 3/4' long, on slender pedicels sometimes
1-1/2' in length, in canescent ovoid densely flowered or elongated
thyrsoid panicles, with short 3--12-flowered branches, from the axils of
the fallen leaves of the previous year; calyx canescent, 5-lobed; petals
white tinged with red, the standard hoary-canescent on the outer
surface, marked with a green blotch on the inner surface, its claw as
long as the calyx; ovary sericeous. Fruit ripening in July and August,
broad-winged, light brown, 3'--4' long and 1'--1-1/2' across the wings.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk often 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, stout
erect sometimes contorted branches forming an irregular head, and
branches coated when they first appear with thick rufous pubescence
disappearing during their first summer, becoming glabrous or glabrate,
bright reddish brown, conspicuously marked by oblong longitudinal
lenticels, and large elevated horizontal slightly obcordate leaf-scars
marked by the ends of numerous small scattered fibro-vascular bundles.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with thin hoary-pubescent
scales. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, gray more or less blotched
with olive and covered with small square scales. Wood very heavy, hard,
close-grained, clear yellow-brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood,
very durable in contact with the ground; largely used in Florida in
boat-building, and for firewood and charcoal. In the West Indies the
bark of the roots, young branches and powdered leaves were used by the
Caribs to stupefy fish and facilitate their capture.

Distribution. One of the commonest of the tropical trees of Florida from
the shores of Bay Biscayne to the southern keys, and on the west coast
from the neighborhood of Peace Creek to Cape Sable; on many of the
Antilles and in southern Mexico. Sterile branches collected by _C. T.
Simpson_ in the neighborhood of Cape Sable indicate that a second
species occurs in Florida.




                          XXIV. ZYGOPHYLLACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with hard resinous wood, and opposite pinnate leaves,
with stipules. Flowers perfect, regular; calyx 5-lobed, the lobes
imbricated in the bud; petals as many as the calyx-lobes, imbricated in
the bud, hypogynous; stamens twice as many as the petals, hypogynous;
filaments distinct; anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; ovary 5-celled; styles united, terminating in a minute
5-lobed or entire stigma; ovules numerous, suspended, anatropous; raphe
ventral. Fruit capsular, angled or winged, separating at maturity into 5
indehiscent carpels. Seeds solitary or in pairs in each cell; seed-coat
thick and fleshy; embryo straight or nearly so; cotyledons oval,
foliaceous; radicle short, superior.

Of the fourteen genera of this family, mostly confined to the warmer
parts of the northern hemisphere, one only, Guaiacum, has an arborescent
representative in the United States.




                      1. GUAIACUM L. Lignum-vitae.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, and stout terete alternate branchlets
often with swollen nodes. Leaves petiolate, abruptly pinnate, with 2--14
entire reticulate-veined leaflets, and minute mostly deciduous stipules.
Flowers terminal, solitary or umbellate-fascicled, pedicellate, from the
axils of minute deciduous bracts; calyx-lobes slightly united at base,
unequal, deciduous; petals broad-obovate, more or less unguiculate;
stamens inserted on the inconspicuous elevated disk opposite to and
alternate with the petals; filaments filiform, naked or bearing at base
on the inner surface a minute membranaceous scale; anthers oblong; ovary
raised on a short thick stalk, obovoid or clavate, 5-lobed, contracted
into a slender subulate acute style; ovules 8--10 in each cell,
suspended in pairs from the inner angle. Fruit fleshy, 5-celled, smooth,
coriaceous, narrowed at base into a short stem, with 5 wing-like angles,
ventrally and sometimes dorsally dehiscent. Seeds suspended, ovoid;
seed-coat easily separable from the hard bony nucleus closely invested
with a thin indistinct tegumen.

Guaiacum is confined to the New World, and is distributed from southern
Florida through the Antilles, Mexico, and Central America to the Andes
of Peru. Seven or eight species are distinguished.

Guaiacum produces heavy close-grained wood, the cells of the heartwood
filled with dark-colored resin. The lignum-vitae of commerce, largely
used for the sheaths of ship-blocks, mallets, skittle-balls, ten-pin
balls, etc., is produced principally by _Guaiacum officinale_ L., of the
Antilles and South America, and by _Guaiacum sanctum_ L. Guaiacum resin
is a stimulating diaphoretic sometimes used in the treatment of gout and
rheumatism.

The generic name is from the Carib Guaiaco or Guayacon, the aboriginal
name of the Lignum-vitae.


                         1. Guaiacum sanctum L.

[Illustration: Fig. 575]

Leaves 3' or 4' long, with 3 or 4 pairs of obliquely oblong or obovate
mucronate subsessile leaflets, membranaceous, light green and puberulous
below when they first appear, becoming subcoriaceous, glabrous, dark
green and lustrous on both surfaces, 1' long and nearly 1/2' wide,
persistent until the appearance of the new growth in March or early
April of the following year; stipules acuminate, tipped with a short
mucro, pubescent, 1/8' long, usually caducous, but sometimes persistent
during the season. Flowers 2/3' in diameter, opening almost immediately
after the appearance of the new growth, and continuing to open during
several weeks, solitary on a slender pubescent pedicel shorter than the
leaves and usually produced 3 or 4 together at the end of the branches
from the axils of the upper leaves, their bracts acuminate, minute, the
2 lateral rather smaller than the others; calyx-lobes obovate, slightly
pubescent, especially on the outer surface near the base, and smaller
than the blue petals twisted below from left to right, and thus
appearing to be obliquely inserted; filaments naked; ovary obovoid,
prominently 5-angled, glabrous, contracted at base into a short stout
stalk. Fruit broad-obovoid, 3/4' long, 1/2' wide, bright orange color,
opening at maturity by the splitting of the thick rather fleshy valves;
seeds black, with a thick fleshy scarlet aril-like outer coat.

A gnarled round-headed tree, sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short stout
trunk occasionally 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, slender pendulous branches,
and branchlets conspicuously enlarged at the nodes, slightly angled,
pubescent when they first appear, becoming in their second year
glabrous, nearly white, and roughened by numerous small excrescences.
Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/8' thick, separating on the surface
into thin white scales. Wood dark green or yellow-brown, with thin clear
yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Keys of southern Florida from Key West eastward; on the
Bahama Islands and on several of the Antilles.




                           XXV. MALPIGIACEAE.


Trees, shrubs or vines with opposite simple entire often stipulate
persistent leaves; stipules deciduous or 0. Flowers usually perfect or
dimorphous, on pedicels articulate near their base from the axils of a
bract and furnished below the articulation with two bractlets, in
terminal racemes, corymbs or umbels; calyx 5-lobed, the lobes generally
imbricated in the bud, usually glandular; petals 5, convolute in the
bud, unguiculate; disk inconspicuous; stamens usually 10; filaments
generally united at base; anthers short, 2-celled, introrse; ovary of 3
rarely of 2 carpels more or less united into a 3-celled ovary; styles
usually 3, distinct, rarely united; stigma terminal or sublateral,
inconspicuous; ovule solitary, between orthotropous and anatropous,
often uncinate, ascending on the pendulous funicle; raphe ventral;
micropyle superior. Fruit drupaceous or samaroid; seeds without albumen,
suspended from below the apex of the cell; testa thin; embryo curved or
coiled, rarely straight; cotyledons often unequal; radicle short,
superior.

This family of nearly sixty genera is confined to tropical and
subtropical America, with one arborescent species in the United States.




                           1. BYRSONIMA Rich.


Trees, or shrubs often scandent, with astringent bark and leaves;
stipules usually connate, rarely partly connate or free. Flowers in
terminal racemes; lobes of the calyx furnished on the back with two
glands; petals unguiculate, their slender claws reflexed in anthesis,
the limb concave, penniveined; stamens 10, filaments short, united and
bearded at base; ovary 3-celled; styles 3, distinct, oblong or subulate,
gradually narrowed into the acute stigma. Fruit a 3-celled drupe;
endocarp bony or woody, angled; seeds ovoid to subglobose; embryo
circinate, with slender coiled cotyledons; radicle oblong.

Byrsonima with nearly one hundred species is widely distributed in
tropical America from southern Florida, where one species occurs, and
the Bahama Islands through the West Indies, Mexico, Brazil and Bolivia.

The generic name is from {byrs}, a hide, in allusion to the use of the
bark in tanning.


                        1. Byrsonima lucida DC.

[Illustration: Fig. 576]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded or occasionally abruptly short-pointed at
apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, coriaceous, glabrous, dark
green and lustrous above, paler, dull and reticulate-venulose beneath,
1'--1-1/2' long and 1/4'--1/2' wide, with thickened revolute margins, a
slender midrib and obscure primary veins; petioles stout, 1/8'--1/4' in
length; stipules free, minute, acute, deciduous. Flowers 1/4' in
diameter, appearing throughout the year on slender puberulous pedicels
1/4' to nearly 1/2' long from the axils of acuminate caducous bracts a
third longer than their acuminate bractlets, in terminal 5--12-flowered
erect racemes 3/4'--1-1/2' in length; calyx cup-shaped, persistent under
the fruit, with short nearly triangular lobes much shorter than the
white petals turning yellow, pink or rose color; styles elongated and
persistent on the fruit. Fruit subglobose, greenish, about 1/4' in
diameter, the flesh thin and dry; stone woody, rugose, thick-walled,
lustrous on the inner surface; seed ovoid, acute, filling the cavity of
the stone, pale yellow.

A small tree, rarely 20 deg. high with a trunk 10' in diameter, covered with
pale bark, spreading branches forming a flat-topped head and slender
terete pale gray branchlets; more often a many-stemmed shrub.

Distribution. Florida, in sandy soil on the Everglade Keys, Dade County,
and on several of the southern keys; on the Bahamas and many of the
Antilles; in Florida arborescent on Long Key in the Everglades, and on
Big Pine Key.




                             XXVI. RUTACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, abounding in a pungent or bitter aromatic volatile oil,
with simple or compound usually glandular-punctate leaves, without
stipules or rarely with stipular spines. Flowers regular, perfect or
unisexual, in paniculate or corymbose cymes; calyx 3--5-lobed, the lobes
more or less united at base, imbricated in the bud; petals 3--5,
imbricated in the bud; stamens as many or twice as many as the petals;
filaments distinct or united below; anthers introrse, 2-celled, the
cells opening longitudinally; pistils 1--4, separate or united into a
compound ovary sessile or stipitate on a glandular disk; styles mostly
united; ovules usually 2 in each cell of the ovary, pendulous,
anatropous or amphitropous; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit of
2-valved carpels, a samara, drupe or capsule. Seeds solitary or several;
seed-coat bony or crustaceous, furrowed or punctate; embryo axile in
fleshy albumen; radicle short, superior.

Of this large family, widely distributed over the warm and temperate
parts of the earth's surface, four genera only have arborescent
representatives in the United States. _Citrus Aurantium_ L., the
Bitter-sweet Orange, a native of Asia, has long been naturalized in the
peninsula of Florida, where other species of this genus have escaped
from cultivation and are now growing spontaneously.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit of 1--5, 2-valved 1-seeded carpels; flowers dioecious or
        polygamous.
                                                         1. Xanthoxylum.
  Fruit of 3 or 4-winged indehiscent 1-seeded carpels; flowers perfect.
                                                            2. Helietta.
  Fruit a winged samara; flowers polygamous.
                                                              3. Ptelea.
  Fruit a 1-seeded drupe; flowers perfect or polygamous.
                                                              4. Amyris.




                           1. XANTHOXYLUM L.


Trees or shrubs, with acrid aromatic bark, pellucid aromatic-punctate
fruit and foliage, scaly buds, and usually stipular spines. Leaves
alternate, unequally or rarely equally pinnate; leaflets generally
opposite, often oblique at the base, entire or crenulate. Flowers small,
dioecious or polygamous, in axillary or terminal broad or contracted
pedunculate cymes; calyx and petals hypogynous; disk small or obscure;
stamens as many as the petals and alternate with them, hypogynous,
effete, rudimentary or wanting in the female flower; filaments filiform
or subulate; pistils 1--5, oblique, raised on the summit of a fleshy
gynophore, connivent, sometimes slightly united below, rudimentary,
simple or 2--5-parted in the sterile flower; ovaries 1-celled; styles
short and slender, more or less united toward the summit; stigmas
capitate; ovules collateral, pendulous from the inner angle of the cell.
Fruit of 1--5 coriaceous or fleshy 1-seeded carpels, broad-obovoid,
sessile or stipitate, ventrally dehiscent. Seed solitary oblong or
globose, suspended on a slender funicle, often hanging from the carpel
at maturity; seed-coat black, shining, conspicuously marked by the broad
hilum; cotyledons oval or orbicular, foliaceous.

Xanthoxylum is widely distributed through tropical and extratropical
regions and is most abundant in tropical America. It is represented in
North America by one shrub and by four arborescent species of the
southern states. The resin contained in the bark, especially in that of
the roots, is a powerful stimulant and tonic occasionally used in
medicine.

The generic name is from {xanthos} and {xylon}.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers in axillary contracted cymes; branches armed with stipular
        spines.
                                                    1. X. Fagara (D, E).
  Flowers in terminal cymes.
    Calyx-lobes and petals 5; leaves unequally pinnate.
      Leaves deciduous; branches armed with stout spines.
                                               2. X. clava-Herculis (C).
      Leaves persistent; branches without spines.
                                                       3. X. flavum (D).
    Calyx-lobes and petals 3; leaves equally pinnate, persistent.
                                                    4. X. coriaceum (D).


                 1. Xanthoxylum Fagara Sarg. Wild Lime.

                         _Fagara Fagara_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 577]

Leaves persistent, 3'--4' long, with a broad-winged jointed petiole, and
7--9 obovate leaflets rounded or emarginate at apex, minutely
crenulate-toothed above the middle, sessile, 1/2' long or less,
coriaceous, glandular-punctate, bright green and lustrous, with minute
hooked deciduous stipular prickles. Flowers on short pedicels from the
axils of minute ovate obtuse deciduous bracts, in short axillary
contracted cymes, appearing singly or in pairs from April until June, on
branches of the previous year, from minute dark brown globular buds, the
staminate and pistillate flowers on different trees; sepals 4,
membranaceous, much shorter than the 4 ovate yellow-green petals;
stamens 4, with slender exserted filaments, 0 in the pistillate flower;
pistils 2, with ovate sessile ovaries gradually contracted into long
slender subulate exserted styles united near apex and crowned with
obliquely spreading stigmas, rudimentary in the staminate flower. Fruit
ripening in September, obovoid, rusty brown and rugose, 1/8'--1/4' long;
seed dark and lustrous.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a slender often inclining
trunk, fastigiate branches, and more or less zigzag slender dark gray
branchlets armed with sharp hooked stipular spines; more frequently a
tall or low shrub. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, the smooth light
gray surface broken into small appressed persistent scales. Wood heavy,
hard, very close-grained, brown tinged with red, with thin yellow
sapwood of 10--12 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Coast and islands of southern Florida, and Texas from
Matagorda Bay to the Rio Grande and in San Saba, Bandera, and Brown
Counties; one of the commonest of the south Florida plants, and
arborescent on the rich hummock soil of Elliott's Key and the shores of
Bay Biscayne; in Texas generally shrubby; common in northern Mexico, and
widely distributed through the Antilles, southern Mexico, and Central
and South America to Brazil and Peru.


     2. Xanthoxylum clava-Herculis L. Prickly Ash. Toothache-tree.

                     _Fagara clava-Herculis_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 578]

Leaves 5'--8' long, with a stout pubescent or glabrous spiny petiole,
and 3--9 pairs of ovate or ovate-lanceolate sometimes slightly falcate
subcoriaceous leaflets usually oblique at base, crenulate-serrate,
sessile or short-stalked, 1'--2-1/2' long, green and lustrous above,
paler and often somewhat pubescent below, especially when they unfold;
persistent until late in the winter or until the appearance of the new
leaves in the early spring. Flowers on slender pedicels 1/3'--1/4' long,
from the axils of minute lanceolate deciduous bracts, in ample
wide-branched cymes 4'--5' long and 2'--3' wide, appearing in very early
spring, when the leaves are about half grown, the staminate and
pistillate flowers on different individuals; sepals minute,
membranaceous, persistent, barely one fourth the length of the oval
green petals 1/8'--1/4' long; stamens 5, with slender filiform
filaments, conspicuously exserted from the male flowers, rudimentary or
wanting in the female flowers; pistils 3, rarely 2, with sessile ovaries
and short styles crowned by a slightly 2-lobed stigma. Fruit ripening in
May and June, in dense often nearly globose clusters; mature carpels
obliquely ovoid, 1-seeded, chestnut-brown, 1/4' long, with a rugose or
pitted surface; seeds hanging at maturity outside the carpels.

A round-headed tree, 25 deg.--30 deg., or exceptionally 50 deg. high, with a short
trunk 12'--18' in diameter, numerous branches spreading nearly at right
angles, and stout branchlets covered when they first appear with brown
pubescence, becoming glabrous and light gray in their second year, and
marked by small glandular spots and by large elevated obcordate
leaf-scars displaying a row of large fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and
armed with stout straight or sometimes slightly curved sharp
chestnut-brown spines 1/2' or more long, with a flattened enlarged base;
or often a low shrub. Winter-buds short, obtuse, dark brown or nearly
black. Bark of the trunk barely 1/16' thick, light gray, and roughened
by corky tubercles, with ovoid dilated bases sometimes 1' or more across
and thick and rounded at apex. Wood light, soft, close-grained, and
light brown, with yellow sapwood. The bark, which is collected in large
quantities by negroes in the southern states, is used as a cure for
toothache and in the treatment of rheumatism.

Distribution. Southeastern Virginia southward near the coast to the
shores of Bay Biscayne and Bocagrande, Lee County, Florida, and westward
through the Gulf states to northern Louisiana, southern Arkansas (near
Arkadelphia, Clark County), and eastern Oklahoma, and through Texas to
the valley of the Colorado River ranging northward to Tarrant and Dallas
Counties; in the Atlantic states not abundant, and confined to the
immediate neighborhood of the coast, growing in light sandy soil and
often on the low bluffs of islands or on river banks; from the Gulf
coast ranging farther inland, especially west of the Mississippi River;
most abundant in eastern Texas, and of its largest size on the rich
intervale lands of the streams flowing into the Trinity River. In
western Texas a form occurs (var. _fruticosum_ Gray), with short
sometimes 3-foliolate more or less pubescent leaves, with small ovate or
oblong blunt and conspicuous crenulate rather coriaceous leaflets; this
is the common form of western Texas, growing usually as a low shrub.


                 3. Xanthoxylum flavum Vahl. Satinwood.

                       _Fagara flava_ Kr. & Urb.

[Illustration: Fig. 579]

Leaves unequally pinnate, persistent, usually 6'--9' long, with a stout
glandular petiole enlarged at base, and usually 5, sometimes 3, or
rarely 1 leaflet, unfolding in Florida during the month of June, and
then densely covered with tomentum, and at maturity sparingly hairy on
the petiole and on the midrib of the ovate-lanceolate or elliptic,
obtuse, often slightly falcate leaflets, sometimes oblique at base,
nearly sessile or long-stalked, 2'--3' long, 1-1/2'--2' broad, entire or
slightly crenulate, coriaceous, pale yellow-green and conspicuously
marked by large pellucid glands. Flowers appearing in Florida in June,
on a slender pubescent pedicel 1/4' or more long, in wide-spreading
pubescent sessile cymes, the male and female on different trees;
calyx-lobes 5, minute, acuminate, ciliate on the margins, barely one
eighth of the length of the ovate greenish white petals reflexed when
the flowers are fully expanded; stamens 5, with slender filaments much
longer than the petals, 0 in the pistillate flower; pistils 2 or
sometimes 1, with a stipitate obovate ovary and a short style with a
spreading entire stigma, minute and depressed in the staminate flower.
Fruit ripening in autumn and early winter and sometimes persistent until
the spring of the following year; mature carpels obliquely obovoid,
short-stalked, 1-seeded, pale chestnut-brown at maturity, about 1/3'
long, faintly marked by minute glands.

A round-headed tree, 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
and stout brittle branchlets coated at first with thick silky
pubescence, becoming light gray, rugose, conspicuously marked by large
triangular leaf-scars, and puberulous during their second and third
years. Winter-buds narrow-acuminate, 1/2' long, coated with short thick
pale tomentum. Bark of the trunk 1/4' thick, with a smooth light gray
surface divided by shallow furrows and broken into numerous short
appressed scales. Wood very heavy, exceedingly hard, brittle, not
strong, light orange-colored, with thin rather lighter colored sapwood;
occasionally used in southern Florida in the manufacture of furniture,
for the handles of tools, and other objects of domestic use.

Distribution. Florida, on the Marquesas Keys and on South Bahia Honda
and Boca Chica Keys; on Bermuda, the Bahama Islands, San Domingo, and
Porto Rico.


                  4. Xanthoxylum coriaceum A. Richard.

                      _Fagara coriacea_ Kr. & Urb.

[Illustration: Fig. 580]

Leaves equally pinnate, persistent, 2'--3' long, with a stout grooved
petiole, and 6--8 oblong-obovate stalked coriaceous dark yellow-green
lustrous leaflets rounded or rarely emarginate at apex, 1'--1-3/4' long
and 5/8'--3/4' wide, with much-thickened revolute entire margins, a
stout midrib, slender obscure spreading primary veins, and reticulate
veinlets. Flowers yellow, appearing in March on short stout pedicels, in
densely flowered terminal cymes; sepals 3, minute, united below, free
above, much shorter than the 3 oval or obovate petals rounded at apex;
stamens 3; filaments about as long as the petals; anthers ovoid or oval;
ovary 3-celled, globose-ovoid; styles thick, 3 (_teste Urban_). Fruit:
mature fruit not seen.

A glabrous tree, sometimes 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a slender stem, and stout
red-brown branches unarmed in Florida specimens, or in the West Indies
furnished with short recurved spines; more often shrubby.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Bay Biscayne and near Fort Lauderdale,
Dade County; rare; on the Bahama Islands and in Cuba.




                            2. HELIETTA Tul.


Trees or shrubs, with slender terete branchlets. Leaves opposite,
long-petiolate, trifoliolate, persistent; leaflets sessile,
obovate-oblong, obtuse, entire or crenate, subcoriaceous,
grandular-punctate, the terminal the largest. Flowers regular, perfect,
on slender bibracteolate pedicels, in terminal or axillary panicles;
calyx 3 or 4-parted, the divisions imbricated in the bud, slightly
united at base, persistent; petals 3 or 4, imbricated in the bud,
hypogynous, oblong, concave, glandular-punctate, reflexed at maturity;
stamens as many as the petals inserted under the disk; filaments shorter
than the petals, slightly flattened, glabrous; anthers ovoid, cordate at
base, attached on the back below the middle; disk free, cup-shaped,
erect, subcorrugated, with a sinuate margin, 4-lobed, the lobes entire
or crenate and opposite the petals; ovary minute, sessile, depressed, 3
or 4-lobed, glandular-verrucose or minutely pilose, the lateral lobes
slightly compressed, 4-celled; styles united into a single slender
column crowned by the globose 3--4-lobed stigma; ovules collateral,
anatropous. Fruit obconic, composed of 3 or 4 dry woody 1-seeded
indehiscent carpels with a cartilaginous endocarp and with a prominent
horizontal wing, separating at maturity. Seed linear-oblong, seed-coat
crustaceous, fragile, black; cotyledons straight, obtuse.

Helietta is distributed from the valley of the lower Rio Grande in Texas
to Brazil and Paraguay. Four species are recognized, one species
extending across the Rio Grande into western Texas.

The generic name is in honor of Lewis Theodore Helie (1804--1867), a
distinguished French physician.


                     1. Helietta parvifolia Benth.

[Illustration: Fig. 581]

Leaves 1-1/2'--2' long, with a stout slightly club-shaped petiole, at
first puberulent, soon becoming glabrous, and oblong or narrow-obovate
leaflets rounded or sometimes slightly emarginate at apex, gradually and
regularly contracted at base, entire or slightly and remotely
crenulate-serrate, yellow-green and lustrous above, paler below,
conspicuously marked by black glandular dots, the terminal leaflet
1/2'--1-1/2' long, sometimes 1/2' wide, and nearly twice as large as the
others; persistent on the branches until early spring. Flowers appearing
in April and May, on slender pedicels covered at first like the petioles
and calyx with short dense pubescence, with minute acuminate early
deciduous bracts, in dichotymously branched subsessile panicles on
branchlets of the year from the axils of the upper leaves; petals 4,
white, ovate, 1/8' long, with scattered hairs on the outer surface, and
thin scabrous margins, and four or five times longer than the 4
calyx-lobes; stamens 4; ovary 4-lobed, glandular-punctate like the
slender style. Fruit ripening in October, oblong, 1/4'--1/3' long, with
a rigid broad-ovate sometimes slightly falcate wing rounded at apex,
1/2' long, and conspicuously reticulate-veined.

A slender tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in diameter, rather
erect branches forming a small irregular head, and slender pale
branchlets covered with minute wart-like excrescences, slightly
puberulous when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous, and marked
during their second year by small inconspicuous leaf-scars; or a low
shrub. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, covered with dark brown
closely appressed scales separating in large irregular patches and
leaving when they fall a smooth pale yellow surface. Wood hard, very
heavy, close-grained, light orange-brown, with rather lighter colored
sapwood.

Distribution. Often forming thickets of considerable extent and abundant
near Rio Grande, Starr County, Texas; mesas south of the lower Rio
Grande; of its largest size and tree-like in habit on the limestone
ridges of the Sierra Madre of Nuevo Leon.




                              3. PTELEA L.


Small unarmed trees or shrubs, with smooth bitter bark, slender terete
branchlets, without terminal buds, small depressed lateral buds covered
with pale tomentum, and nearly inclosed by the narrow obcordate
leaf-scars marked by the ends of 2 or 3 small fibro-vascular bundles,
and thick fleshy acrid roots. Leaves alternate or rarely opposite,
without stipules, long-petiolate, usually trifoliolate, the leaflets
conduplicate in the bud, ovate or oblong, entire or crenulate-serrate,
punctate with pellucid dots. Flowers polygamous, on slender bracteolate
pedicels, in terminal or compound cymes, greenish white; calyx 4 or
5-parted; petals 4 or 5, hypogynous; stamens 3 or 4, alternate with and
as long as the petals, hypogynous, much shorter in the pistillate flower
with imperfect or rudimentary anthers; filaments subulate, more or less
pilose, especially toward the base; anthers ovoid or cordate; pistil
raised on a short gynophore, abortive and nearly sessile in the
staminate flower; ovary compressed, 2--3-celled; style short; stigma
2--3-lobed; ovules superposed, amphitropous, the upper ovule only
fertilized. Fruit a 2 or 3-celled broad-winged indehiscent samara
surrounded by a reticulate wing or rarely wingless. Seed oblong, acute
at apex, rounded at base, ascending; seed-coat smooth or slightly
wrinkled, coriaceous; cotyledons ovate-oblong.

Ptelea is confined to the United States and Mexico, where four or five
species are known; of these one is a small tree. The bark and foliage of
Ptelea is bitter and strong-scented and possesses tonic properties.

The generic name is from {ptelea}, a classical name of the Elm-tree.


              1. Ptelea trifoliata L. Hop-tree. Wafer Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 582]

Leaves rarely 5-foliolate on vigorous shoots; leaflets sessile, ovate or
oblong, pointed, the terminal leaflet generally larger and more
gradually contracted at base than the others, entire or finely serrate,
covered at first with short close pubescence, becoming glabrous and
rather coriaceous at maturity, dark green and lustrous above, pale
below, 4'--6' long, 2-1/2'--3' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary
veins; turning clear yellow in the autumn before falling; petioles
stout, thickened at base, 2-1/2'--3' in length. Flowers appearing in
early spring on slender pubescent pedicels 1'--1-1/2' long, the
pistillate and staminate flowers produced together, the staminate
usually less numerous and falling soon after the opening of the
anther-cells; calyx and petals pubescent; ovary puberulous. Fruit with a
thin almost orbicular sometimes slightly obovate wing, nearly 1' across,
on a long slender reflexed pedicel, in dense drooping clusters remaining
on the branches through the winter; seeds 1/3' long, dark red-brown.

A round-headed tree, rarely 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a straight slender trunk
6'--8' in diameter, small spreading or erect branches, and slender
branchlets covered at first with short fine pubescence, becoming
glabrous, dark brown and lustrous, and marked by wart-like excrescences
and by the conspicuous leaf-scars; more often a low spreading shrub.
Winter-buds depressed, nearly round, pale or almost white. Wood heavy,
hard, close-grained, yellow-brown, with thin hardly distinguishable
sapwood of 6--8 layers of annual growth. The bitter bark of the roots is
sometimes used in the form of tinctures and fluid extracts as a tonic,
and the fruit is occasionally employed domestically as a substitute for
hops in brewing beer.

Distribution. Generally on rocky slopes near the borders of the forest,
often in the shade of other trees; Long Island, New York, Pennsylvania,
and westward through southwestern Ontario (Point Pelee) and southern
Michigan to southern Iowa, southeastern Nebraska, and southward to
Georgia, Alabama, eastern Louisiana and through Missouri and Arkansas to
southeastern Kansas, eastern Oklahoma and eastern Texas. A form with
leaflets soft-pubescent on the lower surface (var. _mollis_ T. & G.)
occurs in the south Atlantic states from North Carolina to Florida.

Often planted as an ornament of parks and gardens.




                              4. AMYRIS L.


Glabrous glandular-punctate trees or shrubs, with balsamic resinous
juices. Leaves opposite or rarely opposite and alternate, 3-foliolate,
without stipules, persistent; leaflets opposite, petiolulate, entire or
crenate. Flowers white, minute, on slender bibracteolate pedicels,
usually in 3-flowered corymbs in terminal or axillary branched panicles;
calyx 4-toothed, persistent; petals 4, hypogynous, much larger than the
calyx-lobes, spreading at maturity; disk of the staminate flower
inconspicuous, that of the pistillate and perfect flowers thickened and
pulvinate; stamens 8, hypogynous, opposite and alternate with the
petals; filaments filiform, exserted; anthers ovoid, attached on the
back below the middle; ovary ellipsoid or ovoid, 1-celled, rudimentary
in the staminate flower; style short, terminal, or wanting; stigma
capitate; ovules collateral, suspended near the apex of the ovary,
anatropous. Fruit a globose or ovoid aromatic drupe; stone 1-seeded by
abortion, chartaceous. Seed pendulous, without albumen; seed-coat
membranaceous; cotyledons plano-convex, fleshy, glandular-punctate.

Amyris is confined to tropical America and northern Mexico. Of the
twelve or fourteen species which have been distinguished two extend into
the territory of the United States; one of these is a small West Indian
tree common on the shores of southern Florida, and the other, _Amyris
parvifolia_ A. Gray, a Mexican shrub, grows in Texas near Corpus
Christi, Neuces County, and near the mouth of the Rio Grande. Amyris is
fragrant and yields a balsamic aromatic and stimulant resin, and heavy
hard close-grained wood valuable as fuel and sometimes used in
cabinet-making.

The generic name, from {myrrha}, relates to the balsamic properties of
the plants of this genus.


                   1. Amyris elemifera L. Torch Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 583]

Leaves 3-foliolate, with slender petioles 1'--1-1/2' long, and
broad-ovate or rounded obtuse acute or acuminate leaflets cuneate at
base, or sometimes ovate-lanceolate or rhombic-lanceolate, entire or
remotely crenulate, coriaceous, lustrous, dark yellow-green,
conspicuously reticulate-veined, covered below with minute glandular
dots, 1'--2-1/2' long, with slender petiolules, that of the terminal
leaflet often 1' or more long and twice as long as those of the lateral
leaflets. Flowers in terminal pedunculate or nearly sessile panicles
appearing in Florida from August to December. Fruit ripening in the
spring, ovoid, often nearly 1/2' long, black covered with a glaucous
bloom, with thin flesh filled with an aromatic oil and of rather
agreeable flavor.

A slender tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes, although rarely,
a foot in diameter, and slender terete branchlets covered with wart-like
excrescences, at first light brown, becoming gray during their second
season. Bark of the trunk thin, gray-brown, slightly furrowed and broken
into short appressed scales. Winter-buds acute, flattened, 1/8' long,
with broad-ovate scales slightly keeled on the back. Wood heavy,
exceedingly hard, strong, close-grained, very resinous, extremely
durable, light orange color, with thin rather lighter colored sapwood of
12--15 layers of annual growth; often used as fuel.

Distribution. Florida, Mosquito Inlet, Volusia County, to the southern
keys; common in the immediate neighborhood of the coast to the rich
hummocks of the interior, and of its largest size on Umbrella Key; on
the Bahama Islands and on many of the Antilles.




                          XXVII. SIMAROUBACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with bitter juice. Leaves alternate, pinnate,
persistent, without stipules. Flowers regular, dioecious; calyx 5-lobed,
the lobes imbricated in the bud; petals 5, imbricated in the bud,
hypogynous; stamens 10, inserted under the disk; pistil of 5 united
carpels; ovary 5-celled; ovule solitary in each cell, anatropous; raphe
ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit a drupe.

Of the thirty genera of this family, confined chiefly to the tropics and
to the warmer parts of the northern hemisphere, three have arborescent
representatives in the flora of North America. _Ailanthus altissima_
Swing., the so-called Tree of Heaven, a native of northern China, has
been largely planted as an ornament and shade tree in the eastern United
States, and is now sparingly naturalized southward.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit a drupe or berry.
    Ovary deeply 5-lobed; fruit drupaceous.
                                                      1. Simarouba. (D).
    Ovary not lobed; fruit baccate.
                                                      2. Picramnia. (D).
  Fruit a 3-winged samara.
                                                      3. Alvaradoa. (D).




                           1. SIMAROUBA Aubl.


Trees, with resinous juice and tonic properties. Leaves long-petiolate,
abruptly pinnate; leaflets usually alternate, long-petiolulate,
conduplicate in the bud, entire, coriaceous, glabrous or slightly
puberulous below, feather-veined. Flowers in elongated widely branched
axillary and terminal panicles; disk cup-shaped, depressed in the
sterile flower, pubescent; stamens as long as the petals, in the
pistillate flower reduced to minute scales; filaments free, filiform,
thickened toward the base, inserted on the back of a minute ciliate
scale; anthers oblong, slightly emarginate, introrse, attached on the
back below the middle, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary
sessile on the disk, deeply lobed, the lobes opposite the petals,
rudimentary, lobulate, minute or wanting in the staminate flower; styles
united into a short column, with a 3--5-lobed spreading stigma. Fruit
composed of 1--5 sessile spreading drupes; flesh thin; stone
crustaceous. Seeds inverse, without albumen; seed-coat membranaceous;
cotyledons plano-convex, fleshy, the radicle very short, partly included
between the cotyledons, superior.

Simarouba with four species is confined to tropical America, and is
distributed from the coast of southern Florida to Brazil and Guatemala.
The plants of this genus contain a small amount of resin, a volatile
oil, and an exceedingly bitter principle, quasin, with tonic properties.

The generic name is formed from Simarouba, the Carib name of one of the
species.


                 1. Simarouba glauca DC. Paradise-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 584]

Leaves 6'--10' long, glabrous, with a stout petiole 2'--3' in length,
and usually 6 pairs of opposite or alternate oblong-obovate or oval
leaflets, rounded or slightly mucronate at apex, usually oblique at
base, membranaceous and dark red when they first unfold, soon becoming
coriaceous, dark green and very lustrous above, pale and glaucous below,
2'--3' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with revolute margins, a prominent
midrib, remote conspicuous primary veins, and stout petiolules
1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers appearing in early spring, 1/8'--1/4'
long, on short stout club-shaped pedicels, in panicles 12'--18' long,
and 18'--24' broad, with a stout pale glaucous stem and spreading
branches from the axils of small acute scarious deciduous bracts; petals
fleshy, oval, often acute, pale yellow, and four or five times as long
as the glaucous calyx. Fruit nearly fully grown by the end of April and
then bright scarlet, about 1' long, ovoid, sometimes falcate, and
slightly angled on the ventral suture, becoming dark purple when fully
ripe; seeds papillose, orange-brown, about 3/4' long.

A round-headed tree, growing occasionally in Florida to the height of
50 deg., with a straight trunk 18'--20' in diameter, slender spreading
branches, and stout glabrous branchlets pale green when they first
appear, becoming light brown before the end of the summer, rugose and
conspicuously marked during their second season by the large oval
leaf-scars. Bark of the trunk 1/2'--3/4' thick, light red-brown and
broken on the surface into broad thick appressed scales. Wood light,
soft, close-grained, light brown, with thick rather darker colored
sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, from Cape Canaveral and the shores of Bay
Biscayne to the southern keys; in Cuba, Jamaica, Nicaragua, and Brazil.




                            2. PICRAMNIA Sw.


Trees or shrubs, with bitter principles and slender terete branchlets.
Leaves alternate, unequally pinnate, persistent, the leaflets
subopposite to alternate, entire. Flowers dioecious, occasionally
perfect, small, glomerate on long pendulous spikes or racemes opposite
the leaves; calyx 3--5-parted, the lobes imbricated in the bud; petals
3--5, imbricated in the bud, rarely wanting; stamens 3--5, opposite the
petals, inserted under the lobed depressed disk, in the pistillate
flower reduced to linear scales or wanting; filaments naked; anthers
2-celled, introrse, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary inserted on
the disk, 2 or 3-celled, rudimentary in the staminate flower; style 2 or
3-lobed, the lobes recurved and stigmatic on the inner surface, or
crowned by a 2 or 3-lobed sessile stigma; ovules 2 in each cell,
collateral, attached at the inner angle of the cell near its apex,
anatropous; raphe narrow; micropyle superior. Fruit baccate, oblong to
oblong-obovoid, 2 or by abortion 1-celled, the cells 1-seeded. Seeds
filling the cavity of the cell, plano-convex, pendulous from the apex of
the cell; hilum minute, apical, the raphe conspicuous; testa
membranaceous, adherent to the exalbuminous undivided embryo; radicle
superior, inconspicuous.

Picramnia, with about twenty species, is confined to the tropical and
subtropical regions of the New World, one species extending into
southern Florida. The bitter principle in the plants of this genus makes
the bark of several of them useful in domestic remedies.

The generic name, from {pikros} and {thamnos}, is in reference to this
bitter principle.


                       1. Picramnia pentandra Sw.

[Illustration: Fig. 585]

Leaves 8'--12' long, 5--9-foliolate, with a slender rachis and petiole;
leaflets ovate-oblong, abruptly acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed
and cuneate at base, coriaceous, glabrous, dark green and lustrous
above, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and 3/4'--1' wide, with thickened slightly
revolute margins, a prominent midrib, slender primary veins and thin
reticulate veinlets; petiolules stout, 1/12'--1/6' long, that of the
terminal leaflet often 3/4' in length. Flowers green on short slender
pedicels, in slender pubescent racemes 6'--8' in length; calyx 5-lobed,
the lobes oblong-ovate, acuminate, coated on the outer surface with pale
hairs; petals 5, acuminate, hirsute, narrower and longer than the
calyx-lobes; stamens 5 in the pistillate flower; filaments slender,
glabrous, exserted; anthers short-oblong, obtuse; stigma sessile, 2 or
3-lobed. Fruit red becoming nearly black when fully ripe, 1/3'--1/2' in
length, about 1/4' in diameter; seeds light brown and lustrous.

A slender tree in Florida, occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a straight
trunk 4' or 5' in diameter, and slender light yellow-green or pale brown
branchlets slightly pubescent during their first season; more often a
shrub. Bark thin, close, yellowish brown.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Bay Biscayne to the Everglade Keys,
Dade County, and on the southern keys; on the Bahama Islands and several
of the Antilles, and in Colombia.




                          3. ALVARADOA Liebm.


Trees or shrubs, with bitter juices and slender terete pubescent
branchlets. Leaves alternate, crowded at the end of the branches,
unequally pinnate, long-petiolate, many-foliolulate, persistent;
leaflets alternate, entire; stipules and stipels none. Flowers in
many-flowered axillary or terminal racemes. Fruit a 2 or 3-winged
samara, 3-celled below the middle, 2-celled above, crowned with remnants
of the styles. Seed erect, compressed; testa membranaceous; albumen
none; embryo oblong-compressed; cotyledons flat; radicle inferior, very
short.

An anomalous genus, by several authors doubtfully referred to
Sapindaceae, but chiefly on account of its bitter properties now placed
in Simaroubaceae. It consists of three species; of these the widely
distributed _Alvaradoa amorphoides_ Liebmann, the type of the genus,
occurs in southern Florida. The other species appear to be confined to
the islands of Jamaica and Cuba.


                    1. Alvaradoa amorphoides Liebm.

[Illustration: Fig. 586]

Leaves 4'--12' long, with 21--41 leaflets and slender petioles; leaflets
oblong-obovate, obtuse or occasionally minutely mucronate at apex,
gradually narrowed below into a short slender pubescent petiolule,
slightly thickened and revolute on the margins, dark green above, pale
pubescent below, 1/2'--3/4' long, about 1/4' wide, with a slender midrib
and obscure primary veins. Flowers regular, minute, dioecious, on
slender accrescent pubescent pedicels from the axils of ovate minute
deciduous bracts, in many-flowered hoary-tomentose racemes 3'--4-1/2'
long, the pistillate accrescent, becoming 4'--8' in length; calyx
campanulate, 5-parted, the lobes ovate, acute, hoary-tomentose on the
outer surface; disk 5-lobed; staminate flowers appearing sessile in the
bud; their pedicels only slightly accrescent; petals filiform; filaments
slender, elongated, slightly villose toward the base, inserted between
the lobes of the disk and alternate with the calyx-lobes; anthers
introrse, 2-celled, united except at apex, opening longitudinally by
marginal slits, their connective orbicular, conspicuous; pistillate
flowers on short accrescent pedicels; petals 0 or very rarely present;
stamens 0; ovary compressed, unequally 3-angled, villose-hirsute on the
margins, 3-celled at base, with two small compressed empty cells, the
third larger with two anatropous ovules; styles 2, subulate or recurved,
often of unequal length, stigmatic above the middle. Fruit lanceolate,
acuminate, narrowly 2-winged, ciliate on the margins with long spreading
hairs, slightly tinged with red, 3/4' in length and about two-thirds as
long as its slender hairy pedicel; seeds acute at ends, pale yellow,
1/4' long.

A slender tree, in Florida occasionally 30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, and slender branchlets hoary-pubescent during their first year
becoming dull red-brown, glabrous and marked by numerous small pale
lenticels and by the large obovate obcordate scars of fallen leaves
showing the ends of three conspicuous equidistant fibro-vascular
bundles; in Florida more often a shrub.

Distribution. Florida, Everglade Keys (Timbo Hummock near Gozman's
Homestead, Caldwell's Hummock and Long Key), Dade County; in the Bahama
Islands, and in Cuba, southern Mexico, Central America and Argentina.




                          XXVIII. BURSERACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with resinous bark and wood. Leaves alternate, pinnate,
without stipules. Flowers perfect or polygamous, in clustered racemes or
panicles; calyx 4--5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud, persistent;
petals 4--5, imbricated in the bud, distinct or slightly united,
deciduous; stamens twice as many as the petals, inserted under the
annular or cup-shaped disk; filaments distinct, subulate; anthers
introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; pistil of 2--5
united carpels; ovary 2--5-celled; styles united; stigma 2--5-lobed;
ovules 2 in each cell, pendulous, collateral, anatropous; micropyle
superior; raphe ventral. Fruit drupaceous. Seeds without albumen;
seed-coat membranaceous; embryo straight; cotyledons foliaceous; radicle
short, superior.

Of the sixteen genera of this family, which is widely distributed
through the tropics of the two hemispheres, one only, Bursera, occurs in
the United States, reaching the shores of southern Florida with an
arborescent species, and southern California and Arizona with another
species.




                            1. BURSERA Jacq.


Trees, with balsamic resinous juices. Leaves unequally pinnate; leaflets
opposite, petiolulate, entire or subserrate, thin, or coriaceous.
Flowers polygamous, small, on fascicled or rarely solitary pedicels, in
short or elongated lateral simple or branched panicles; calyx minute,
membranaceous; petals inserted on the base of an annular crenate disk,
reflexed at maturity above the middle; stamens inserted on the base of
the disk; anthers oblong, attached on the back above the base, usually
effete in the pistillate flower; ovary sessile, ovoid, 3-celled,
rudimentary in the staminate flower; style short; stigma capitate,
obtuse, 3-lobed; ovules suspended below the apex from the central angle.
Fruit with a valvate epicarp, globose or oblong-oblique, indistinctly
3-angled; flesh coriaceo-carnose, 2--3-valved; nutlets 1--3, usually
solitary, adnate to a persistent fleshy axis, 1-celled, 1-seeded,
covered with a thin membranaceous coat. Seed ovoid, without albumen;
seed-coat membranaceous; hilum ventral, below the apex; embryo straight;
cotyledons contortuplicate.

Bursera with about forty species is confined to southern Florida, the
Antilles, the southwestern United States and to Mexico, and Central and
South America.

The generic name is in honor of Joachim Burser (1593--1649), a German
botanist and physician.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves 5--7 rarely 3-foliolate, their rachis and petiole without
        wings; staminate flowers in elongated many-flowered racemes.
                                                     1. B. Simaruba (D).
  Leaves usually 10--22-foliolate, their rachis and petiole
        wing-margined; staminate flowers in short, usually 3-flowered
        clusters.
                                               2. B. microphylla (G, H).


       1. Bursera Simaruba Sarg. Gumbo Limbo. West Indian Birch.

[Illustration: Fig. 587]

Leaves confined to the end of the branchlets, 6'--8' long, 4'--8' wide,
with a long slender petiole, and usually 5, rarely 3 or 7 leaflets
coriaceous at maturity, oblong-ovate, oblique at base, contracted at
apex into a long or short point, 2-1/2'--3' long, 1-1/2'--2' broad, with
stout petiolules often 1/2' long; deciduous in early winter or
occasionally persistent until the following spring. Flowers about 3/16'
in diameter, appearing before the leaves or as they unfold, on slender
pedicels 1/3'--1/2' long, in slender raceme-like panicles, those of the
staminate plant 4'--5' long or nearly twice as long as those of the
pistillate plant; calyx-lobes and petals 5; petals ovate-lanceolate,
acute, revolute on the margins, and nearly four times as long as the
slender acute calyx-lobes; stamens of the staminate flower as long as
the petals and in the pistillate flower not more than half as long, with
smaller often effete anthers. Fruit in short raceme-like clusters,
1/4'--1/3' long, 3-angled, with a thick dark red outer coat, separating
readily into 3 broad-ovate valves, and containing 1 or rarely 2 bony
triangular nutlets rounded at base, pointed at apex, and covered with a
thin membranaceous light pink coat; seeds 1 or 2, triangular, rose
color.

A glabrous tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
massive primary branches spreading nearly at right angles, and stout
terete branchlets light gray during their first season, becoming during
their second year reddish brown, covered with lenticular spots and
conspicuously marked by large elevated obcordate yellow leaf-scars.
Winter-buds short, rounded, obtuse, with broad-ovate dark red scales
slightly scarious on the margins. Bark of the trunk and large branches
1' thick, glandular dotted, separating freely into thin papery bright
red-brown scales exposing in falling the dark red-brown or gray inner
bark. Wood spongy, very light, exceedingly soft and weak, light brown,
with thick sapwood, soon becoming discolored by decay. Pieces of the
trunk and large branches set in the ground soon produce roots and grow
rapidly into large trees. The aromatic resin obtained by incisions cut
in the trunk was formerly used in the treatment of gout, and in the West
Indies is manufactured into varnish. An infusion of the leaves is
sometimes used in Florida as a substitute for tea.

Distribution. Florida, from Cape Canaveral to the southern keys, and on
the west coast from Terra Ceia Island, Manatee County, Plagida, De Sota
County, and Gasparilla Island southward; one of the largest and most
common of the south Florida trees, and the only one which sheds its
foliage during the autumn and winter; on most of the West Indian
islands, in tropical Mexico, Guatemala, New Granada, and Venezuela.


                    2. Bursera microphylla A. Gray.

[Illustration: Fig. 588]

Leaves glabrous, deciduous, 1'--1-1/4' long, with a slender narrowly
winged rachis and petiole and usually 10--20 oblong or oblong-obovate
leaflets rounded at apex, obliquely cuneate at base, sessile, about 1/4'
long and 1/12' wide. Flowers appearing in June before the leaves, 1/6'
long on slender pedicels from the axils of minute acuminate caducous
bracts, in mostly 3-flowered clusters 1/4' in length; staminate,
calyx-lobes ovate, acute; petals 5, lanceolate, acuminate, revolute on
the margins, 3 or 4 times longer than the calyx-lobes, white; stamens
shorter than the petals; pistillate flower not seen. Fruit ripening in
October, ellipsoid or slightly obovoid, solitary, drooping on the
thickened pedicel 1/5' in length, 3-angled, 1/4' long, red, glabrous,
splitting into three valves; nutlets usually ovoid, acute, narrow at
base, thin walled, 3-angled, gray with a deep depression at base.

A tree, rarely 10 deg.--12 deg. high, with a short trunk 2-1/2'--3' in diameter,
stout erect and spreading branches, forming a wide round-topped head,
and slender glabrous red branchlets, roughened during their first year
by the crowded scars of fallen leaves; more often a low shrub. Bark of
the trunk pale yellow, separating into membranaceous scales, the outer
layer thin and firm, the inner layer corky, reddish brown, 1/2' thick.
Wood hard, close-grained, pale yellow.

Distribution. Colorado Desert, between Fish Creek and Carriso Creek
about twenty-five miles from the Mexican Boundary, on "banks of dry
washes, in hard sterile soil covered with boulders" (_E. H. Davis_),
Imperial County, California; near Maricopa, Pinal County, Arizona, and
in Lower California and Sonora; reported as a tree only from California.




                            XXIX. MELIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with hard wood and alternate pinnate leaves, without
stipules. Flowers in panicles, perfect, regular; calyx 5-lobed, the
lobes contorted (in _Swietenia_) in the bud, persistent; petals 5,
convolute in the bud; stamens inserted at the base of the disk;
filaments united into a tube; anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells
opening longitudinally; ovary 3--5-celled, free, surrounded at base by
an annular or cup-shaped disk; styles united, dilated into a 5-lobed
stigma; ovules numerous in each cell, suspended, semianatropous; raphe
ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit a capsule (in _Swietenia_) or drupe.
Seeds often winged; embryo with leafy cotyledons.

A family with about forty genera chiefly confined to the tropics, with a
single representative, Swietenia, in southern Florida. _Melia Azedarach_
L., of this family, the China-tree or Pride of India, with drupaceous
fruits, has long been cultivated in the southern states, where it now
often grows spontaneously.




                           1. SWIETENIA Jacq.


Trees, with heavy dark red wood. Leaves abruptly pinnate, glabrous,
long-petiolate, persistent; leaflets opposite, petiolulate, usually
oblique at base. Flowers small, in axillary or subterminal panicles
produced near the end of the branches; calyx minute; petals spreading;
staminal tube urn-shaped, connate with the petals, 10-lobed, the lobes
convolute in the bud; anthers 10, fixed by the back below the sinuses of
the staminal tube, included; ovary ovoid, 5-celled, the cells opposite
the petals; style erect, longer than the tube of the stamens; stigma
discoid, 5-rayed. Fruit a 5-celled 5-valved capsule septicidally
dehiscent from the base, the valves separating from a persistent
5-angled axis thickened toward the apex and 5-winged toward the base.
Seeds suspended from near the summit of the axis, imbricated in 2 ranks,
compressed, emarginate, produced above into a long membranaceous wing
with the hilum at its apex and transversed by the raphe; embryo
transverse; cotyledons conferruminate with each other and with the thin
fleshy albumen; radicle short, papillaeform.

Swietenia with five species is confined to tropical America from
southern Florida where one species occurs, to Venezuela, western and
southwestern Mexico, and the east coast of Central America.

The generic name is in honor of Baron von Swieten (1700--1772), the
distinguished Dutch physician, founder of the Botanic Garden and of the
Medical School at Vienna.


                 1. Swietenia mahagoni Jacq. Mahogany.

[Illustration: Fig. 589]

Leaves 4'--6' long, with a slender glabrous petiole thickened at base
and 3 or 4 pairs of ovate-lanceolate leaflets rounded at base on the
upper side, narrow-cuneate or nearly straight on the lower side, entire,
coriaceous, pale yellow-green or slightly rufous on the under surface,
3'--4' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent reddish brown midrib,
conspicuous reticulate veins, and a stout grooved petiolule 1/4' long.
Flowers appearing in July and August on slender puberulous pedicels,
bibracteolate near the middle, 1 or 2 together at the end of the
branches of slender panicles in the axils of leaves of the year; calyx
glabrous, cup-shaped, much shorter than the ovate elliptic petals 1/8'
long and slightly emarginate at apex. Fruit ripening in the autumn or
early winter, long-stalked, ovoid, rounded at apex narrowed at base,
4'--5' long and 2-1/2' broad, with thick dark brown valves rugose and
pitted on the surface, its axis obovoid 3' or 4' long, 1'--1-1/2' thick,
dark red-brown, marked near the apex by the dark scars left by the
falling seeds; seeds 3/4' long, almost square, thickened at base and
nearly one fourth as long as their ovate rugose red-brown wings rounded
or truncate at apex and gradually contracted below.

A tree, in Florida rarely more than 40 deg.--50 deg. high or with a trunk
exceeding 2 deg. in diameter, and slender glabrous angled branchlets covered
during their first season with pale red-brown bark, becoming lighter or
gray faintly tinged with red and thickly covered with lenticels during
their second year; much larger in the West Indies. Winter-buds about
1/8' long, with broad-ovate minutely apiculate loosely imbricated light
red scales. Bark of the trunk in Florida 1/2'--2/3' thick, with a dark
red-brown surface broken into short broad rather thick scales. Wood
heavy, exceedingly hard and strong, close-grained, very durable, rich
red-brown, becoming darker with age and exposure, with thin yellow
sapwood of about 20 layers of annual growth; the most esteemed of all
woods for cabinet-making, and also largely used in the interior finish
of houses and railroad cars, and formerly in ship and boat-building. The
bark is bitter and astringent and has been used as a substitute for
quinine in the treatment of intermittent fevers.

Distribution. Florida, hummocks, shores of Bay Biscayne on the Everglade
Keys and near Flamingo on White Water Bay, Dade County, on Elliotts Key,
Key Largo and Upper Matacombe Key; rare and now nearly exterminated
except in the region of Cape Sable; on the Bahama and many of the West
Indian islands.




                           XXX. EUPHORBIACEAE.


Trees, shrubs, or herbs, with acrid juice, and alternate stipular
leaves. Flowers monoecious or dioecious; calyx 3--6-lobed or parted, the
divisions imbricated in the bud, or wanting; corolla 0; stamens 2 or 3,
or as many or twice as many as the calyx-lobes; anthers 2-celled,
opening longitudinally; ovules 1 or 2 in each cell, suspended,
anatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit a drupe or capsule.
Seeds albuminous; cotyledons flat, much longer than the superior
radicle.

The Euphorbia family, widely distributed over tropical and temperate
regions, with some one hundred and thirty genera and over three thousand
species, is represented in the United States by three arborescent
genera, with only five species, and by many shrubby herbaceous and
annual plants.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit drupaceous.
    Nutlets usually 1-celled and 1-seeded; stamens as many or twice as
          many as the calyx-lobes, free.
                                                            1. Drypetes.
    Nutlets 6--8-celled and 6--8-seeded; stamens 2 or 3, united into a
          column.
                                                           2. Hippomane.
  Fruit a 3-lobed capsule splitting into three 2-valved 1-seeded
        carpels.




                           1. DRYPETES Vahl.


Trees or shrubs, with thick juice, and terete branchlets. Leaves
involute in the bud, petiolate, penniveined, coriaceous, persistent;
stipules minute, caducous. Flowers axillary, sessile or pedicellate,
their pedicels from the axils of minute deciduous bracts, ebracteolate,
the males in many-flowered clusters, the females solitary or in
few-flowered clusters; calyx divided nearly to the base into 4 or 5
lobes rounded or acute at apex, deciduous or persistent under the fruit;
stamens inserted under the margin of a flat or concave slightly lobed
disk, 0 in the pistillate flower; filaments filiform; anthers ovoid,
emarginate, attached on the back near the base, extrorse or introrse,
2-celled, the cells affixed to a broad oblong connective; ovary sessile,
ovoid, 1 or rarely 2-celled, with 1 or 2 sessile or subsessile peltate
or reniform stigmas, rudimentary or wanting in the staminate flower;
ovules collateral, descending, attached to the central angle of the
cell, operculate, with a hood-like body developed from the placenta.
Fruit drupaceous, ovoid or subglobose, tipped with the withered remnants
of the stigmas; flesh thick and corky or thin and crustaceous; stone
thick or thin, bony or crustaceous, 1-celled and 1-seeded, or rarely
2-celled and 2-seeded. Seed filling the cavity of the nut; seed-coat
crustaceous or membranaceous; embryo erect in thin fleshy albumen.

Drypetes is confined to the tropical regions of the New World, and is
distributed from southern Florida through the West Indies to eastern
Brazil. Of the eleven species now distinguished, two inhabit the
coast-region of southern Florida.

The generic name, from {dryppa}, relates to the character of the fruit.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Calyx 5-lobed; stamens 8; ovary 1-celled; fruit oblong, ivory-white;
        outer coat thick and mealy; stone thick-walled.
                                                 1. D. diversifolia (D).
  Calyx 4-lobed; stamens 4; ovary 2-celled; fruit subglobose, bright
        red; outer coat thin, crustaceous; stone thin-walled.
                                                  2. D. lateriflora (D).


            1. Drypetes diversifolia Krug & Urb. White Wood.

                    _Drypetes keyensis_ Krug & Urb.

[Illustration: Fig. 590]

Leaves appearing in early spring and falling during their second year,
entire, oval or oblong, often more or less falcate, acute, acuminate,
rounded or rarely emarginate at apex, rounded or cuneate at base, on
young plants often spinose-dentate, when they unfold thin and
membranaceous, light green or green tinged with red and pilose with
scattered pale hairs, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green and
lustrous, rather paler on the lower surface than on the upper surface,
3'--5' long and 1'--2' wide, with a broad thick pale midrib raised and
rounded on the upper side and obscure primary veins arcuate and united
near the thick revolute cartilaginous margins and connected by
conspicuous coarsely reticulated veinlets; petioles stout, yellow,
grooved above, 1/2' long; stipules nearly triangular, rather less than
1/16' long, caducous. Flowers on pedicels rather shorter than the
petioles, opening in early spring from the axils of leaves of the
previous year, the staminate in many-flowered clusters, the pistillate
usually solitary or occasionally in 2--3-flowered clusters; calyx
yellow-green, hirsute on the outer surface, 1/16' long, and divided
nearly to the base into 5 ovate acute boat-shaped lobes deciduous from
the fruit; stamens about 8, inserted on the borders of the slightly
lobed pulvinate concave disk; filaments unequal in length, rather longer
than the calyx-lobes and a little longer than the broad-ovoid emarginate
pilose extrorse anthers, with broad ovate acute connectives; ovary
sessile, hirsute, 1-celled, crowned with a broad sessile slightly
stalked oblique pulvinate stigma, wanting in the staminate flower. Fruit
ripening in the autumn, deciduous at maturity from its stout erect stalk
much enlarged at apex and 1/3' long, ovoid, 1' long, ivory-white, with
thick dry mealy flesh closely investing the light brown stone narrowed
at base into a long point, with bony walls 1/8' thick and penetrated
longitudinally by large fibro-vascular bundle-channels; seed oblong,
rounded at the ends, nearly 1/2' long, covered with a thin membranaceous
light brown coat marked by conspicuous veins radiating from the small
hilum.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in
diameter, stout usually erect branches forming an oblong round-topped
head, and stout branchlets light green tinged with red and covered with
pale scattered caducous hairs when they first appear, becoming ashy gray
and roughened by numerous elevated circular pale lenticels and later by
the large prominent orbicular leaf-scars displaying the ends of 3
conspicuous fibro-vascular bundles. Winter-buds minute, obtuse, partly
immersed in the bark and coated with brown resin. Bark of the trunk
about 1/2' thick, smooth, milky white and often marked by large
irregular gray or pale brown patches. Wood heavy, hard, not strong,
brittle, close-grained, and brown streaked with bright yellow, with
thick yellow-brown sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Flamingo near Cape Sable (_C. T. Simpson_),
Cocoanut Grove (_Miss O. Rodham_), Dade County, on Key West, Key Largo,
Elliotts, Lower Metacombe and Umbrella Keys. One of the rarest of the
tropical trees of Florida; on the Bahamas.


               2. Drypetes lateriflora Urb. Guiana Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 591]

Leaves appearing in Florida in early spring and falling during their
second year, oblong, acute or acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed at
base, and entire, when they unfold thin and covered with scattered pale
hairs, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous, 3'--4'
long and 1/2'--1-1/2' wide, with a conspicuous light-colored midrib,
rounded above, and pale obscure primary veins arcuate and united near
the slightly thickened revolute margins and connected by slender
reticulate veinlets; petioles slender, grooved, 1/4' in length. Flowers
on pedicels shorter than the petioles, opening late in the autumn or in
early winter on branches one or two years old, in the axils of leaves or
from leafless nodes, in many or few-flowered clusters; calyx greenish
white, hirsute on the outer surface, divided to the base into 4 ovate
rounded lobes, persistent under the fruit; stamens 4, inserted under the
margin and between the lobes of the flat tomentose disk; filaments
slender, exserted; anthers introrse, emarginate, pilose, wanting in the
pistillate flower; ovary ovoid, tomentose, 2-celled, with 2 nearly
sessile oblique spreading cushion-like stigmas. Fruit ripening during
the spring and early summer, subglobose, 1/3' in diameter, tipped with
the conspicuous blackened remnants of the stigmas, bright red, covered
with soft pubescence, solitary or in clusters of 2 or 3, deciduous at
maturity from its stout stalk enlarged at apex and 1/4' long; flesh thin
and crustaceous, closely investing the thin-walled crustaceous stone;
seed usually solitary by abortion, obovoid, gibbous, 1/8' long, narrowed
below, narrowed and marked at apex by the elevated pale hilum and on the
inner surface of the seed-coat by the broad conspicuous raphe.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 5'--6' in diameter, small
erect branches, and slender branchlets, light green tinged with red when
they first appear, becoming in their first winter ashy gray and marked
by scattered pale lenticels, and at the end of their second year by the
small elevated oval leaf-scars displaying the ends of 3 fibro-vascular
bundles. Winter-buds minute, acute or obtuse, chestnut-brown, and
covered with pale hairs. Bark of the trunk about 1/16' thick, light
brown tinged with red, the generally smooth surface separating into
small irregular scales. Wood heavy, hard, brittle, close-grained, rich
dark brown, with thick yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Palm Beach, Palm Beach County, shores of Bay
Biscayne, Dade County, and on many of the southern keys; common on the
Bahama Islands and on several of the Antilles.




                            2. HIPPOMANE L.


A glabrous tree, with thick acrid juice, scaly bark, and stout pithy
branchlets marked by circular raised lenticels, and oblong or
semiorbicular horizontal elevated leaf-scars displaying a row of obscure
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and nearly encircled at the nodes by
ring-like scars left by the falling of the stipules. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, covered by many loosely imbricated long-pointed chestnut-brown
scales. Leaves alternate, involute in the bud, tardily deciduous,
broad-ovate, rounded and abruptly narrowed at apex into a broad point
terminating in a slender mucro, rounded or subcordate at base, remotely
crenulate-serrate with minute gland-tipped teeth, penniveined,
long-petiolate, at first pilose with occasional long pale hairs, soon
becoming glabrous, and at maturity thick and coriaceous, dark
yellow-green and lustrous above, paler and dull below, with a stout
light yellow midrib raised and rounded on the upper side, and slender
primary veins remote, arcuate, and united at some distance from the
margins and connected by conspicuous coarsely reticulate veinlets more
prominent on the upper than on the lower side; their petioles elongated,
slender, rigid, light yellow, rounded below, obscurely grooved above,
marked at the apex by large orbicular dark red glands; stipules
ovate-lanceolate, abruptly narrowed from a broad base, slightly
laciniate near the apex, membranaceous, light chestnut-brown, caducous.
Inflorescence terminal, spicate, appearing in early spring usually
before the unfolding leaves, the stout fleshy rachis often bearing at
the base acute sterile deciduous bracts, or 1 or 2 small leaves, the
minute pistillate flowers solitary in their axils or in the axils of
ovate acute lanceolate bracts furnished with 2 lateral glandular
bractlets; staminate flowers minute, articulate on slender pedicels
clustered in 8--15-flowered fascicles in the axils of simple bracts
higher on the rachis and extending to its apex; calyx usually 3-lobed,
the lobes imbricated in the bud, that of the staminate flower
yellow-green, membranaceous, divided below into 3 or sometimes into 2
acute lobes; calyx of the pistillate flower, ovoid, yellow-green,
divided nearly to the base into 3 ovate acute concave divisions rounded
on the back; stamens 2 or often 3, exserted, more or less connate by
their filaments into a stout column, free and spreading at apex; anthers
ovoid, light yellow, surmounted by the short prolonged connective,
attached on the back below the middle, erect, extrorse; ovary
6--8-celled, narrowed at base, gradually contracted above into a short
simple cylindric style separating into 6--8 long radiating flattened
abruptly reflexed lobes stigmatic on the inner face; ovule solitary in
each cell. Fruit drupaceous, pome-shaped, obscurely 6--8-lobed, raised
on a thickened woody stem; skin thin, light yellow-green or yellow and
red; flesh thick, lactescent, adherent to the thick-walled rugose deeply
winged 6--8-celled, 6--8-seeded subglobose stone flattened at the ends,
the cells divided throughout by thin dark radial plates, ultimately
separable, penetrated near the summit by oblique canals filled by the
funicles of the seeds. Seeds oblong-ovoid, marked by a minute slightly
elevated hilum and on the ventral face by an obscure raphe; seed-coat
membranaceous, separable into 2 layers, the outer dark, the inner
thinner, light brown; embryo surrounded by thick fleshy albumen.

The genus is represented by a single species abounding in exceedingly
poisonous caustic sap which produces cutaneous eruptions and when taken
internally destroys the mucous membrane; formerly employed by the Caribs
to poison arrows.

The generic name is from {hippos} and {mania}, and was first used by the
Greeks to distinguish some plant with properties excitant to horses.


                 1. Hippomane Mancinella L. Manchineel.

[Illustration: Fig. 592]

Leaves 3'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, unfolding in early spring and
persistent in Florida until the spring of the following year; petioles
2-1/2'--4' in length. Flowers opening in March before the leaves of the
year; rachis of the inflorescence 4'--6' long, dark purple, more or less
covered with a glaucous bloom. Fruit ripening in the autumn or early
winter and often persistent on the branches until after the appearance
of the flowers of the following year, 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, light
yellow-green, with a bright red cheek; seeds about 1/4' long.

A tree, in Florida rarely more than 12 deg.--15 deg. high, with a short trunk
5'--6' in diameter, long spreading pendulous branches forming a handsome
round-topped head; in the West Indies often 50 deg.--60 deg. tall, with a trunk
occasionally 3 deg. in diameter. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/2' thick, dark
brown and broken on the surface into small thick appressed irregularly
shaped scales; in the West Indies sometimes smooth, light gray or nearly
white. Wood light and soft, close-grained, dark brown, with thick light
brown or yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, sandy beaches and dry knolls in the immediate
neighborhood of the ocean, shores of White Water Bay and on many of the
southern keys; on the Bahama Islands, through the Antilles to the
northern countries of South America, and to southern Mexico and the
eastern and western coasts of Central America.




                           3. GYMNANTHES Sw.


Glabrous trees or shrubs, with milky juice and slender terete
branchlets. Leaves conduplicate in the bud, petiolate, entire or
crenulate-serrate, coriaceous, penniveined, persistent; stipules
membranaceous, minute, caducous. Flowers monoecious or rarely dioecious;
inflorescence buds covered with closely imbricated chestnut-brown
scales, lengthening in anthesis, bearing in the upper axils numerous
3-branched clusters of staminate flowers, their branches furnished with
minute ovate bracts, and in the lower axils 2 or 3 long-stalked
pistillate flowers; calyx of the staminate flower minute or 0; stamens 2
or rarely 3; filaments filiform, inserted on the slightly enlarged
torus, free or slightly connate at base; anthers attached on the back
below the middle, erect, ovoid, 2-celled, the cells parallel; calyx of
the pistillate flower reduced to 3 bract-like scales; ovary ovoid,
3-celled, narrowed into 3 recurved styles free or slightly united at
base, stigmatic on their inner face; ovule solitary in each cell. Fruit
a 3-lobed capsule separating from the persistent axis into three
2-valved 1-seeded carpels dehiscent on the dorsal suture and partly
dehiscent on the ventral suture. Seed ovoid or subglobose, strophiolate;
seed-coat crustaceous; embryo erect in fleshy albumen.

Gymnanthes with about ten species is confined to the tropics of the New
World and is distributed from southern Florida, where one species
occurs, through the West Indies to Mexico and Brazil.

The generic name, from {gymnos} and {anthos}, relates to the structure
of the naked flowers.


                  1. Gymnanthes lucida Sw. Crab Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 593]

Leaves oblong-ovate or ovate-lanceolate, obscurely and remotely
crenulate-serrate or often entire, when they unfold thin and
membranaceous, deeply tinged with red, and glandular on the teeth with
minute caducous dark glands, and at maturity coriaceous, dark green and
lustrous on the upper surface and pale and dull on the lower surface,
2'--3' long, 2/3'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad pale midrib raised and
rounded on the upper side, obscure primary veins arcuate and united near
the margins and connected by prominent coarsely reticulate veinlets;
appearing in Florida in early spring and remaining on the branches
through their second summer; petioles broad, slightly grooved, about
1/4' in length; stipules ovate, acute, light brown, clothed on the
margins with long pale hairs, about 1/16' long. Flowers: inflorescence
buds appearing in Florida late in the autumn in the axils of leaves of
the year and beginning to lengthen in spring, the inflorescence becoming
1-1/2'--2' long, with a slender glabrous angled rachis, the scales
broad-ovate, pointed, concave, rounded and thickened at apex, puberulous
and ciliate on the margins, those inclosing the male flowers connate
with the flowers and persistent under the calyx, those subtending the
female flowers at the base of the inflorescence and not raised on their
peduncle. Fruit produced in Florida sparingly, ripening in the autumn,
slightly obovoid, dark reddish brown or nearly black, 1/3' in diameter,
covered with thin dry flesh, and pendent on a slender stem 1' or more in
length; seeds ovoid.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter and
often irregularly ridged, the rounded ridges spreading near the surface
of the ground into broad buttresses, slender erect branches forming a
narrow open oblong head, and slender upright branchlets light green more
or less deeply shaded with red when they first appear, becoming in their
first winter light gray-brown faintly tinged with red and roughened by
numerous oblong pale lenticels, ultimately ashy gray and marked at the
end of their second year by the semiorbicular elevated leaf-scars
displaying the ends of 4 fibro-vascular bundle-scars superposed in
pairs. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, covered with chestnut-brown scales,
about 1/16' long. Bark of the trunk dark red-brown, about 1/16' thick,
separating into large thin scales, in falling displaying the light brown
inner bark. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, rich dark brown
streaked with yellow, with thick bright yellow sapwood; in Florida
occasionally manufactured into canes, and used as fuel.

Distribution. Florida, common in low woods from the shores of Bay
Biscayne to the Everglade Keys, Dade County, and on many of the southern
keys to those of the Marquesas group; on the Bahama Islands, and on many
of the Antilles.




                          XXXI. ANACARDIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with terete pithy branchlets, resinous juice, and
alternate simple or pinnate leaves, without stipules, and scaly or naked
buds. Flowers regular, minute, dioecious, polygamo-dioecious, or
polygamo-monoecious; calyx-lobes and petals 5, imbricated in the bud or
0; stamens as many as the petals and alternate and inserted with them on
the margin or under an hypogynous annular fleshy slightly 5-lobed disk;
filaments filiform; anthers oblong, introrse, 2-celled, the cells
opening longitudinally; ovary 1-celled; styles 1--3; ovule solitary,
suspended from the apex of a slender funicle rising from the base of the
cell, anatropous; micropyle superior; styles 3, united or spreading;
stigmas terminal. Fruit drupaceous. Seed without albumen; seed-coat thin
and membranaceous; embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons
flat, accumbent on the short radicle.

The Sumach family with some sixty genera is mostly confined to the
warmer parts of the earth's surface and contains the Mango, Pistacia,
and other important trees. In the flora of the United States four genera
have arborescent representatives.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers without petals, and in the species of the United States,
        without a calyx.
                                                            1. Pistacia.
  Flowers with a calyx and petals.
    Flowers usually dioecious by abortion; styles lateral, spreading;
          pedicels of the abortive flowers becoming long and plumose at
          maturity; fruit compressed, very oblique; leaves simple,
          deciduous.
                                                             2. Cotinus.
    Flowers mostly dioecious; styles terminal, short, united; stigma
          3-lobed; fruit ovoid, glabrous; leaves unequally pinnate,
          persistent.
                                                            3. Metopium.
    Flowers polygamo-dioecious or polygamo-monoecious; styles terminal,
          spreading; fruit usually globose, naked or clothed with acrid
          hairs; leaves unequally pinnate, trifoliolate or rarely
          simple, deciduous or rarely persistent.
                                                                4. Rhus.




                             1. PISTACIA L.


Balsamic trees or shrubs. Leaves 3-foliolate or equally or unequally
pinnate, petiolate, deciduous or persistent. Flowers small, dioecious,
subtended by a bract and 2 branchlets, short pedicellate in panicles or
racemes; calyx 1 or 2-lobed or in the pistillate flower 3--5-lobed, or
0; petals 0, stamens 3--5, 0 in the pistillate flower; filaments short,
their base connate with the disk; anthers large; ovary subglobose or
short-ovoid, rudimentary or 0 in the staminate flower; style 3-lobed,
shorter than the 3 obovate-oblong or oblong stigmas. Drupe ovoid,
oblique, compressed; exocarpa thin; the stone bony, 1-seeded; seed
compressed; cotyledons thick plano-convex.

Pistacia with eight or nine species is confined to the valley of the
lower Rio Grande, southern Mexico; the Canary Islands, the countries
adjacent to the Mediterranean, and northern and central China, with one
species growing on the northern banks of the Rio Grande in Texas.

The Pistacio-nuts of commerce, the green or yellow seeds of P. _vera_ L.
are largely used in confectionery, and some of the species are valued
for the decoration of parks and gardens.

Pistacia from {pist} and {akeomai}, in reference to the healing
properties of its resinous exudations.


                       1. Pistacia texana Swing.

[Illustration: Fig. 594]

Leaves persistent or tardily deciduous, 9--19-foliolate, with a slightly
winged rachis pubescent above and a flattened narrow-winged petiole
1/2'--3/4' in length; leaflets spatulate, rounded and often mucronate at
apex, gradually narrowed below into a deltoid or subcuneiform base,
entire, more or less curved and unequilateral, wine-red when they
unfold, and at maturity thin, dark green and sparingly pubescent along
the midrib above, pale and glabrous below, nearly sessile or the
terminal leaflet raised on a short petiolule, 5/12'--3/4' long and about
1/4' wide, with a slender midrib often near one side of the leaflet and
reticulate veinlets. Flowers small, without a calyx, appearing just
before or with the new leaves, in simple nearly glabrous panicles, their
bracts and bractlets ciliate on the margins and wine-red at apex;
staminate flowers more crowded than the pistillate, in compact panicles
3/4'--1-1/2' long; anthers reddish yellow or wine color; pistillate
flowers in loose panicles 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length; ovary ovoid or
subglobose, two of the three styles with 2-lobed stigmas, the third with
a 3-lobed stigma. Fruit oval, dark reddish brown and slightly
glaucescent, about 1/4' long and 1/6' broad, usually striate.

A small tree, occasionally 30 deg. high with a short trunk 15'--18' in
diameter, with stout erect and spreading branches forming a head
sometimes 30 deg.--35 deg. across, and slender slightly pubescent reddish
branchlets becoming grayish brown by the end of their first year; more
often a large shrub with numerous stout stems.

Distribution. Texas, limestone cliffs and the rocky bottoms of canyons
periodically swept by floods, and in deep narrow ravines, along the
lower Pecos River and in the neighborhood of its mouth, Valverde County;
and in northeastern Mexico.




                             2. COTINUS L.


Small trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, small acute winter-buds, with
numerous imbricated scales, fleshy roots, and strong-smelling juice.
Leaves simple, petiolate, oval, obovate-oblong or nearly orbicular,
glabrous or more or less pilose-pubescent, deciduous. Flowers regular,
dioecious by abortion or rarely polygamo-dioecious, greenish yellow, on
slender pedicels accrescent after the flowering period, mostly abortive
and then becoming conspicuously tomentose-villose at maturity, in ample
loose terminal or lateral pyramidal or thyrsoidal panicles, the branches
from the axils of linear acute or spatulate deciduous bracts;
calyx-lobes ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, persistent; disk coherent with the
base of the calyx and surrounding the base of the ovary; petals oblong,
acute, twice as long as the calyx, inserted under the free margin of the
disk opposite its lobes, deciduous; stamens shorter than the petals,
usually rudimentary or wanting in the pistillate flower; ovary sessile,
obovoid, compressed, rudimentary in the staminate flower; styles 3,
short and spreading from the lateral apex of the ovary; stigmas large,
obtuse. Fruit oblong-oblique, compressed, glabrous, conspicuously
reticulate-veined, light red-brown, bearing on the side near the middle
the remnants of the persistent styles, the outer coat thin and dry;
stone thick and bony.

Cotinus is widely distributed through southern Europe and the Himalayas
to central China with a single species, and is represented in the
southern United States by one species.

The Old World _Cotinus coggygria_ Scop., the Smoke-tree of gardens, is
often cultivated in the United States.

The generic name is from {Kotinos}, the classical name of a tree with
red wood.


               1. Cotinus americanus Nutt. Chittam Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 595]

Leaves oval or obovate, rounded or sometimes slightly emarginate at
apex, gradually contracted at base, and entire, with slightly wavy
revolute margins, when they unfold light purple and covered below with
fine silky white hairs, and at maturity dark green on the upper surface,
pale on the lower surface, and puberulous along the under side of the
broad midrib and primary veins, 4'--6' long and 2'--3' wide; turning in
the autumn brilliant shades of orange and scarlet; petioles stout,
1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers appearing late in April or early in May on
pedicels 1/2'--3/4' long, and usually collected 3 or 4 together in loose
umbels near the end of the principal branches of puberulous terminal
slender long-branched few-flowered panicles 5'--6' long and 2-1/2'--3'
broad, the staminate and pistillate flowers on different individuals.
Fruit produced very sparingly, about 1/8' long, on stems 2'--3' in
length; the sterile pedicels becoming 1-1/2'--2' long at maturity and
covered with short not very abundant rather inconspicuous pale purple or
brown hairs; seed kidney-shaped, pale brown, about 1/16' long.

A tree, 25 deg.--35 deg. high, with a straight trunk occasionally 12'--14' in
diameter, usually dividing 12 deg.--14 deg. from the ground into several erect
stems separating into wide-spreading often slightly pendulous branches,
and slender branchlets purple when they first appear, soon becoming
green, bright red-brown and covered with small white lenticels and
marked by large prominent leaf-scars during their first winter, and dark
orange-colored in their second year. Winter-buds 1/8' long, and covered
with thin dark red-brown scales. Bark of the trunk 1/8' thick, light
gray, furrowed, and broken on the surface into thin oblong scales. Wood
light, soft, rather coarse-grained, bright clear rich orange color, with
thin nearly white sapwood; largely used locally for fence-posts and very
durable in contact with the soil; yielding a clear orange-colored dye.

Distribution. Banks of the Ohio River, Owensboro, Daviess County,
Kentucky (_E. J. Palmer_); on the Cheat Mountains, eastern Tennessee;
near Huntsville, Madison County, Alabama; valley of White River in Stone
and Taney Counties, southern Missouri; near Cotter, Baxter County, and
Van Buren, Crawford County, Arkansas, and eastern Oklahoma; valleys of
the upper Guadalupe and Medina Rivers, western Texas; usually only in
small isolated groves or thickets scattered along the sides of rocky
ravines or dry slopes; very abundant as a small shrub and spreading over
many thousand acres of the mountain canyons, and high hillsides in the
neighborhood of Spanish Pass, Kendall County, Texas.

Occasionally cultivated in the eastern United States and rarely in
Europe; hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts.




                           3. METOPIUM P. Br.


Trees or shrubs, with naked buds, fleshy roots, and milky exceedingly
caustic juice. Leaves unequally pinnate, persistent; leaflets
coriaceous, lustrous, long-petiolulate. Flowers dioecious, yellow-green,
on short stout pedicels, in narrow erect axillary clusters at the ends
of the branches, with minute acute deciduous bracts and bractlets, the
males and females on different trees; calyx-lobes semiorbicular, about
half as long as the ovate obtuse petals; stamens 5, inserted under the
margin of the disk; filaments shorter than the anthers, minute and
rudimentary in the pistillate flower; ovary ovoid, sessile, minute in
the staminate flower; style terminal, short, undivided; stigma 3-lobed.
Fruit ovoid, compressed, smooth and glabrous, crowned with the remnants
of the style; outer coat thick and resinous; stone crustaceous. Seed
nearly quadrangular, compressed; seed-coat smooth, dark brown and
opaque, the broad funicle covering its margin.

Metopium with two species is confined to southern Florida and the West
Indies.

The generic name, from {opos}, was the classical name of an African tree
now unknown.


         1. Metopium toxiferum Kr. & Urb. Poison Wood. Hog Gum.

                       _Metopium Metopium_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 596]

Leaves clustered near the end of the branches, 9'--10' long, with stout
petioles swollen and enlarged at base, and 5--7 leaflets, or often
3-foliolate; unfolding in March and persistent until the following
spring; leaflets ovate, rounded or usually contracted toward the acute
or sometimes slightly emarginate apex, rounded or sometimes cordate or
cuneate at base, 3'--4' long, 2'--3' broad, with thickened slightly
revolute margins, a prominent midrib, primary veins spreading at right
angles, and numerous reticulate veinlets; petiolules stout, 1/2'--1'
long, that of the terminal leaflet often twice as long as the others.
Flowers about 1/8' in diameter, in clusters as long or rather longer
than the leaves; petals yellow-green, marked on the inner surface by
dark longitudinal lines; stamens rather shorter than the petals. Fruit
ripening in November and December, pendent in long graceful clusters,
orange-colored, rather lustrous, 3/4' in length; seed about 1/4' long.

A tree, frequently 35 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk sometimes 2 deg. in
diameter, stout spreading often pendulous branches forming a low broad
head, and reddish brown branchlets marked by prominent leaf-scars and
numerous orange-colored lenticels. Winter-buds 1/3'--1/2' in length,
with acuminate scales ciliate on the margin with rufous hairs. Bark of
the trunk about 1/8' thick, light reddish brown tinged with orange,
often marked by dark spots caused by the exuding of the resinous gum,
and separating into large thin plate-like scales displaying the bright
orange color of the inner bark. Wood heavy, hard, not strong, rich dark
brown streaked with red, with thick light brown or yellow sapwood of
25--30 layers of annual growth. The resinous gum obtained from incisions
made in the bark is emetic, purgative, and diuretic.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Bay Biscayne, on the Everglade Keys,
and on Coot Bay in the rear of Cape Sable, Dade County, and on the
southern keys; very abundant; in the Bahamas, Cuba, Jamaica, and
Honduras.




                               4. RHUS L.


Trees or shrubs, with pithy branchlets, fleshy roots, and milky
sometimes caustic or watery juice. Leaves unequally pinnate, or rarely
simple. Flowers mostly dioecious, rarely polygamous, white or greenish
white, in more or less compound axillary or terminal panicles, the
staminate and pistillate usually produced on separate plants;
calyx-lobes united at base only, generally persistent; disk surrounding
the base of the free ovary, coherent with the base of the calyx; petals
longer than the calyx-lobes, inserted under the margin of the disk,
opposite its lobes, deciduous; stamens 5, inserted on the margin of the
disk alternate with the petals; filaments longer than the anthers; ovary
ovoid or subglobose, sessile; styles 3, terminal, free or slightly
connate at base, rising from the centre of the ovary. Fruit usually
globose, smooth or covered with hairs; outer coat thin and dry, more or
less resinous; stone crustaceous or bony. Seed ovoid or reniform,
commonly transverse; cotyledons foliaceous, generally transverse;
radicle long, uncinate, laterally accumbent.

Rhus is widely distributed, with more than one hundred species, in the
extra-tropical regions of the northern and southern hemispheres. In
North America the genus is widely and generally distributed from Canada
to southern Mexico and from the shores of the Atlantic to those of the
Pacific Ocean, with sixteen or seventeen species within the territory of
the United States. Of these, four obtain the habit of small trees. The
acrid poisonous juice of _Rhus vernicifera_ DC., of China, furnishes the
black varnish used in China and Japan in the manufacture of lacquer, and
other species are valued for the tannin contained in their leaves or for
the wax obtained from their fruit.

The name of the genus is from {Rhous}, the classical name of the
European Sumach.


           CONSPECTUS OF NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers in terminal thyrsoid panicles; fruit globular, clothed with
        acrid hairs; leaves unequally pinnate, deciduous; Sumachs.
    Branches and leaf-stalks densely velvety hairy; leaflets 11--31,
          pale on the lower surface; fruit covered with long hairs; buds
          inclosed in the enlarged base of the petioles; juice milky.
                                                   1. R. typhina (A, C).
    Branches and leaf-stalks pubescent; rachis winged; leaflets 9--21,
          green on the lower surface; fruit pilose; buds not inclosed by
          the petioles; juice watery.
                                                 2. R. copallina (A, C).
  Flowers in axillary slender panicles; fruit glabrous, white; leaves
        unequally pinnate, deciduous; leaflets 7--13.
                                                    3. R. vernix (A, C).
  Flowers in short compact terminal panicled racemes; fruit pubescent;
        leaves ovate, entire or serrate, simple or rarely trifoliolate,
        persistent.
                                                 4. R. integrifolia (G).


                  1. Rhus typhina L. Staghorn Sumach.

                           _Rhus hirta_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 597]

Leaves 16'--24' long, with a stout petiole usually red on the upper side
and covered with soft pale hairs, enlarged at base and surrounding and
inclosing the bud developed in its axil, and 11--31 oblong often falcate
rather remotely and sharply serrate or rarely laciniate long-pointed
nearly sessile or short-stalked leaflets rounded or slightly
heart-shaped at base, covered above like the petiole and young shoots
when they first appear with red caducous hairs, bright yellow-green
until half grown, and at maturity dark green and rather opaque on the
upper surface, pale or often nearly white on the lower surface, glabrous
with the exception of the short fine hairs on the under side of the
stout midrib, and primary veins forked near the margins, opposite, or
the lower leaflets slightly alternate, those of the 3 or 4 middle pairs
considerably longer than those at the ends of the leaf, 2'--5' long, and
1'--1-1/2' wide; turning in the autumn before falling bright scarlet
with shades of crimson, purple, and orange. Flowers opening gradually
and in succession in early summer, the pistillate a week or ten days
later than the staminate, on slender pedicels from the axils of small
acute pubescent bracts, in dense panicles, with a pubescent stem and
branchlets, and acuminate bracts 1/2' to nearly 2' long and deciduous
with the opening of the flowers; panicle of the staminate flowers
8'--12' long and 5'--6' broad, with wide-spreading branches and nearly
one third larger than the more compact panicle of the pistillate plant;
calyx-lobes acute, covered on the outer surface with long slender hairs,
much shorter than the petals in the staminate flower, and almost as long
in the pistillate flower; petals of the staminate flower yellow-green
sometimes tinged with red, strap-shaped, rounded at apex, becoming
reflexed above the middle at maturity; petals of the pistillate flower
green, narrow and acuminate, with a thickened and slightly hooded apex,
remaining erect; disk bright red and conspicuous; stamens slightly
exserted, with slender filaments and large bright orange-colored
anthers; ovary ovoid, pubescent, the 3 short styles slightly connate at
base, with large capitate stigmas, in the staminate flower glabrous,
much smaller, unusually rudimentary. Fruit fully grown and colored in
August and ripening late in the autumn in dense panicles 6'--8' long and
2'--3' wide, depressed-globose, with a thin outer covering clothed with
long acrid crimson hairs and a small pale brown bony stone; seed
slightly reniform, orange-brown.

A tree, occasionally 35 deg.--40 deg. high, with copious white viscid juice
turning black on exposure, a slender often slightly inclining trunk
occasionally 12'--14' in diameter, stout upright often contorted
branches forming a low flat open head, and thick branchlets covered with
long soft brown hairs gathered also in tufts in the axils of the
leaflets, becoming glabrous after their third or fourth year, and in
their second season marked by large narrow leaf-scars and by small
orange-colored lenticels enlarging vertically and persistent for several
years; more frequently a tall shrub, spreading by underground shoots
into broad thickets. Winter-buds conic, thickly coated with long silky
pale brown hairs, about 1/4' long. Bark of the trunk thin, dark brown,
generally smooth, and occasionally separating into small square scales.
Wood light, brittle, soft, coarse-grained, orange-colored, streaked with
green, with thick nearly white sapwood. From the young shoots pipes are
made for drawing the sap of the Sugar Maple. The bark, especially that
of the roots, and the leaves are rich in tannin. A form with narrow
deeply divided leaflets (f. _dissecta_ Rehdr.) occasionally occurs.

Distribution. Usually on uplands in good soil, or less commonly on
sterile gravelly banks and on the borders of streams and swamps, New
Brunswick and through the valley of the St. Lawrence River to southern
Ontario and westward to eastern North Dakota and eastern and
northeastern Iowa, and southward through the northern states and along
the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia and Mississippi; more
abundant on the Atlantic seaboard than in the region west of the
Appalachian Mountains.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the United States, and
very commonly in central and northern Europe.

x _Rhus hybrida_ Rehdr. a hybrid of _R. typhina_ and _R. glabra_ L. has
been found in Massachusetts.


                      2. Rhus copallina L. Sumach.

[Illustration: Fig. 598]

Leaves 6'--8' long, with a slender pubescent petiole and rachis more or
less broadly wing-margined between the leaflets, the wings increasing in
width toward the apex of the leaf, and 9--21 oblong or ovate-lanceolate
leaflets entire or remotely serrate above the middle, sharp-pointed or
rarely emarginate at apex, acute or obtuse and often unequal at base,
those of the lower pairs short-petiolulate and smaller than those above
the middle of the leaf, the others sessile with the exception of the
terminal leaflet sometimes contracted into a long winged stalk, when
they unfold dark green and slightly puberulous above, especially along
the midrib, and covered below with fine silvery white pubescence, at
maturity subcoriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, pale and
pubescent below, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and about 3/4' wide, with slightly
thickened revolute margins, a prominent midrib and primary veins;
turning in the autumn before falling dark rich maroon color on the upper
surface. Flowers appearing from June in the south to August in the
north, those of the staminate plant opening in succession during nearly
a month and continuing to unfold long after the petals of the pistillate
plant have fallen, on stout pubescent pedicels 1/8'--1/4' long, in short
compact pubescent panicles, the lower branches from the axils of the
upper leaves, 4'--6' long, 3'--4' broad, and usually smaller on the
female than on the male plant, their bracts and bractlets ovate or
oblong, densely cinereo-pilose, deciduous before the expansion of the
flowers; calyx puberulous on the outer surface, with ovate acute lobes
one third as long as the ovate greenish yellow petals rounded at apex,
becoming reflexed above the middle; disk red and conspicuous; stamens
somewhat longer than the petals, with slender filaments and large
orange-colored anthers, in the pistillate flower much shorter than the
petals, with minute rudimentary anthers; ovary ovoid, pubescent,
glabrous, much smaller in the staminate flower. Fruit ripening in five
or six weeks and borne in stout compact often nodding pubescent clusters
sometimes persistent on the branches until the beginning of the
following summer, 1/8' across, slightly obovoid, more or less flattened,
with a thin bright red coat covered with short fine glandular hairs, and
a smooth bony orange-brown stone; seed reniform, smooth, orange-colored,
with a broad funicle.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with colorless watery juice, a short stout trunk
8'--10' in diameter, erect spreading branches, and branchlets at first
dark green tinged with red and more or less densely clothed with short
fine or sometimes ferrugineous pubescence, appearing slightly zigzag at
the end of their first season from the swellings formed by the prominent
leaf-scars, and then pale reddish brown, slightly puberulous and marked
by conspicuous dark-colored lenticels; or at the north usually a low
shrub rarely more than 4 deg.--5 deg. tall. Winter-buds minute, nearly globose,
and covered with dark rusty brown tomentum. Bark of the trunk 1/3'--1/2'
thick, light brown tinged with red, and marked by large elevated dark
red-brown circular excrescences, and separating into large thin papery
scales. Wood light, soft, coarse-grained, light brown streaked with
green and often tinged with red, with thin lighter colored sapwood of 4
or 5 layers of annual growth. The leaves are rich in tannin and are
gathered in large quantities and ground for curing leather and for
dyeing.

Distribution. Dry hillsides and ridges; widely and generally distributed
from northern New England to southern Florida, and to southeastern Iowa,
southeastern Nebraska, eastern Kansas and the valley of the San Antonio
River, Texas; in Cuba; in the United States arborescent only southward;
at the north rarely more than a few feet high and spreading by
underground stems on gravelly sterile soil into broad thickets; varying
considerably in the size and form of the leaflets. The most distinct and
probably the most constant of these varieties is var. _lanceolata_ A.
Gray, a small tree growing on the prairies of eastern Texas to the
valley of the Rio Grande and to southeastern New Mexico, often forming
thickets on river bluffs or on the banks of small streams, and
distinguished by its narrow acute often falcate leaflets and by its
larger inflorescence and fruit. A tree sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a
trunk occasionally 8' in diameter, covered by dark gray bark marked by
lenticular excrescences. The flowers appear in July and August and the
dull red or sometimes green fruit ripens in early autumn and falls
before the beginning of winter.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern United
States, and in western and northern Europe.


            3. Rhus vernix L. Poison Dogwood. Poison Sumach.

[Illustration: Fig. 599]

Leaves 7'--14' long, with a slender usually light red or red and green
petiole, and 7--13 obovate-oblong entire leaflets slightly unequal at
base and narrowed at the acute or rounded apex, bright orange color and
coated, especially on the margins and under surface, with fine
pubescence when they unfold, soon becoming glabrous, and at maturity
3'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, dark green and lustrous above, pale below,
with a prominent midrib scarlet above, primary veins forked near the
margins, conspicuous reticulate veinlets, and revolute margins; turning
early in the autumn before falling to brilliant shades of scarlet or
orange and scarlet. Flowers about 1/8' long, appearing in early summer
on slender pubescent pedicels bibracteolate near the middle, in long
narrow axillary pubescent panicles crowded near the end of the branches,
with acute pubescent early deciduous bracts and bractlets; calyx-lobes
acute, one third the length of the yellow-green acute petals erect and
slightly reflexed toward the apex; stamens nearly twice as long as the
petals, with slender filaments and large orange-colored anthers, in the
fertile flower not more than half the length of the petals, with small
rudimentary anthers; ovary ovoid-globose, with short thick spreading
styles terminating in large capitate stigmas. Fruit ripening in
September and often persistent on the branches until the following
spring, in long graceful racemes, ovoid, acute, often flattened and
slightly gibbous, tipped with the dark remnants of the styles, glabrous,
striate, ivory-white or white tinged with yellow, very lustrous, and
about 1/2' long; stone conspicuously grooved, the wall thin,
membranaceous; seed pale yellow.

A tree, with acrid poisonous juice turning black on exposure,
occasionally 25 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in diameter, slender rather
pendulous branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and slender
glabrous branchlets reddish brown and covered with minute orange-colored
lenticels when they first appear, orange-brown at the end of their first
season, becoming light gray and marked by large elevated conspicuous
leaf-scars; more often a shrub, with several slender clustered stems.
Winter-buds acute and covered with dark purple scales puberulous on the
back, and ciliate on the margins with short pale hairs, the terminal
1/8'--3/4' long and two or three times larger than the axillary buds.
Bark of the trunk thin, light gray, smooth or sometimes slightly
striate. Wood light, soft, coarse-grained, light yellow streaked with
brown, with lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Wet swamps often inundated during a portion of the year;
northern New England to northern Florida and southern Alabama, and
westward to Ontario and southeastern Minnesota, western Louisiana and
the valley of the Neches River (San Augustine County) eastern Texas;
common and one of the most dangerous plants of the North American flora.
An infusion of the young branches and leaves is employed in homoeopathic
practice, and the juice can be used as a black lustrous durable varnish.


                 4. Rhus integrifolia B. & H. Mahogany.

[Illustration: Fig. 600]

Leaves simple or very rarely 3-foliolate, persistent, acute or rounded
at apex, with thickened revolute, or spinosely toothed margins (var.
_serrata_ Engler), puberulous when young, and at maturity 1-1/2'--3'
long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, thick and coriaceous, dark yellow-green above,
paler below, and glabrous with the exception of the stout petiole, broad
thick midrib, and prominent reticulate veins. Flowers appearing from
February to April, 1/4' in diameter when expanded, on short stout
pedicels, with 2--4 broad-ovate pointed persistent scarious ciliate
pubescent bractlets, in short dense racemes forming hoary-pubescent
terminal panicles 1'--3' in length; sepals rose-colored, orbicular,
concave, ciliate on the margins, rather less than half the length of the
rounded ciliate reflexed rose-colored petals; stamens as long as the
petals, with slender filaments and pale anthers, minute and rudimentary
in the pistillate flower; ovary broad-ovoid, pubescent, with 3 short
thick connate styles and very large 3-lobed capitate stigmas,
rudimentary in the staminate flower. Fruit 1/2' long, ovoid, flattened,
more or less gibbous, thick, dark red, densely pubescent; stone
kidney-shaped, smooth, light chestnut-brown, with thick walls; seed
flattened, pale, with a broad dark-colored funicle covering its side.

A tree, rarely 30 deg. high, with a short stout trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
numerous spreading branches, and stout branchlets covered when they
first appear with thick pale pubescence disappearing in their second and
third years, and bright reddish brown and marked by numerous small
elevated lenticels; or usually a small often almost prostrate shrub.
Winter-buds small, obtuse, covered with a thick coat of pale tomentum.
Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/2' thick, bright reddish brown, exfoliating in
large plate-like scales. Wood hard, heavy, bright clear red, with thin
pale sapwood of 8--10 layers of annual growth; valued and largely used
as fuel. The fruit is occasionally employed in the preparation of a
cooling beverage.

Distribution. Sandy sterile soil along sea beaches, and bluffs in the
immediate vicinity of the ocean; neighborhood of Santa Barbara, Santa
Barbara County, California, to the shores of Magdalena Bay, Lower
California, and on the Santa Barbara and Cedros islands; on the mainland
usually shrubby, forming close impenetrable thickets; in more sheltered
situations and on the islands becoming arborescent; probably of its
largest size on the shores of Todos Santos Bay, Lower California.




                           XXXII. CYRILLACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with small scaly buds and watery juice. Leaves
alternate, entire, subcoriaceous, without stipules, persistent or
tardily deciduous. Flowers small, regular, perfect, on slender
bibracteolate pedicels, in terminal or axillary racemes; calyx
5--8-lobed, persistent, the lobes imbricated in the bud; petals 5--8,
hypogynous; stamens 5--10, hypogynous, those opposite the petals shorter
than the others; anthers oblong, introrse, 2-celled, the cells laterally
dehiscent, opening longitudinally; ovary 2--4-celled; ovules suspended,
anatropous; raphe dorsal; micropyle superior. Fruit an indehiscent
capsule. Seed suspended; seed-coat membranaceous; albumen fleshy,
radicle superior.

A family confined to the warmer parts of America, with three genera, of
which two are represented by small trees in the southern states.


             CONSPECTUS OF THE GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers in axillary racemes; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5 contorted in the
        bud; fruit without wings, 2-celled, with 2 seeds in each cell.
                                                             1. Cyrilla.
  Flowers in terminal racemes; calyx 5--8-lobed; petals 5--8 imbricated
        in the bud; fruit with 2--4 wings, 3 or rarely 4-celled, with 1
        seed in each cell.
                                                           2. Cliftonia.




                             1. CYRILLA L.


A glabrous tree or shrub, with spongy bark, slender terete branchlets
conspicuously marked by large leaf-scars, and narrow acute winter-buds
covered with chestnut-brown scales. Leaves usually clustered near the
end of the branches, oblong or oblong-obovate, pointed, rounded, or
slightly emarginate at apex, conspicuously reticulate-veined,
short-petiolate. Flowers on pedicels from the axils of narrow alternate
persistent bracts, in slender racemes from the axils of fallen leaves or
of small deciduous bracts near the end of the branches of the previous
year; calyx minute, divided nearly to the base into 5 ovate-lanceolate
acute coriaceous lobes; petals 5, contorted in the bud, white or rose
color, inserted on an annular disk, three or four times longer than the
calyx-lobes, oblong-lanceolate, acute, concave, subcoriaceous, furnished
below the middle on the inner surface with a broad glandular nectary;
stamens 5, opposite the divisions of the calyx, inserted with and
shorter than the petals; filaments subulate, fleshy; anther-cells united
above the point of attachment, free below; ovary ovoid, free, sessile,
pointed, 2-celled; styles short, thick; stigma 2-lobed, with spreading
lobes; ovules 3 in each cell, suspended from an elongated placental
process developed from the apex of the cell. Fruit 2-celled,
broad-ovoid, crowned with the remnants of the persistent style; pericarp
spongy. Seeds 2 in each cell, elongated, acuminate; embryo minute,
cylindric, 2-lobed.

Cyrilla is represented by a single species of the coast region of the
south Atlantic and Gulf states and of the Antilles and eastern tropical
South America.

The name commemorates the scientific labors of Dominico Cirillo
(1734--1799), the distinguished Italian naturalist and patriot.


           1. Cyrilla racemiflora L. Ironwood. Leather Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 601]

Leaves 2'--3' long and 1/4'--1' wide, with a stout petiole 1/8'--1' in
length; turning late in the autumn and early winter to brilliant shades
of orange and scarlet and then deciduous, or southward persistent with
little change of color until the beginning of the following summer.
Flowers appearing late in June or early in July, in racemes usually
6--10 together and 4'--6' long, at first erect, becoming pendulous
before the fruit ripens. Fruit ripening in August and September, rarely
more than 1/16' long; seeds light brown.

A slender tree, occasionally 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with a stout often eccentric
trunk 10'--14' in diameter, dividing several feet above the ground into
numerous wide-spreading branches, and slender branchlets bright brown
during their first season and ultimately ashy gray; often a broad bush
sending up many slender stems 15 deg.--20 deg. high. Winter-buds about 1/8'
long. Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/2' thick except near the base
of old trees, and covered by large thin bright red-brown scales. Wood
heavy, hard, close-grained, not strong, brown tinged with red, with
rather lighter colored sapwood. The spongy bark at the base of the trunk
is pliable, absorbent, and astringent, and has been recommended as a
styptic.

Distribution. Rich shaded river-bottoms, the borders of sandy swamps and
shallow ponds of the coast Pine-belt, or on high sandy exposed ridges
rising above streams near the Gulf coast; southeastern Virginia
southward near the coast to northern Florida and westward along the Gulf
coast to the valley of the Neches River, Texas; in Lake County, Florida,
and ranging northward in Mississippi to Forrest County (near
Hattiesburg, _T. G. Harbison_), and in Alabama to Dallas County; in
swamps near the coast of western Florida often a low shrub with smaller
leaves and shorter racemes (var. _parviflora_ Sarg.); in Cuba, Jamaica,
Porto Rico, Demarara, and Brazil (var. _racemifera_ Sarg.).




                         2. CLIFTONIA Gaertn. f.


A glabrous tree or shrub, with thick dark brown scaly bark, slender
terete branchlets marked by conspicuous leaf-scars, and small acuminate
buds covered by chestnut-brown scales. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, rounded
or slightly emarginate at apex, glandular-punctate, short-petiolate,
persistent. Flowers on pedicels from the axils of large acuminate
membranaceous alternate bracts deciduous before the opening of the
flowers, in short terminal erect racemes; calyx 5--8-lobed, equal or
unequal, broad-ovoid, rounded or acuminate at apex, much shorter than
the 5--8 obovate unguiculate concave white or rose-colored sepals;
stamens 10, opposite and alternate with the sepals, inserted with and
shorter than the petals, 2-ranked, those of the outer rank longer than
the others; filaments laterally enlarged near the middle, flattened
below, subulate above; disk cup-shaped, surrounding the base of the
oblong 2--4-winged 2--4-celled ovary; stigma subsessile, obscurely
2--4-lobed; ovules 2 in each cell, suspended from its apex. Fruit
oblong, 2--4-winged, crowned with the remnants of the persistent style,
3 or rarely 4-celled; pericarp spongy, the wings thin and membranaceous.
Seed 1 in each cell, terete, tapering to the ends, suspended; cotyledons
very short.

Cliftonia is represented by a single species of the south Atlantic and
Gulf states.

The generic name is in honor of Dr. Francis Clifton (d. 1736), an
English physician.


             1. Cliftonia monophylla Britt. Titi. Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 602]

Leaves 1-1/2'--2' long, 1/2'--1' wide, bright green and lustrous on the
upper surface, paler on the lower surface; persistent until the autumn
of their second year. Flowers fragrant, appearing in February and March,
in racemes at first nodding, and conspicuous from the long exserted dark
red-brown caducous bracts, becoming erect as the flowers open. Fruit
about 1/4' long, ripening in August and September; seeds 1/16'--1/8'
long, light brown.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a stout often crooked or
inclining trunk, occasionally 15'--18' in diameter, and usually divided
12 deg.--15 deg. from the ground into a number of stout ascending branches, and
slender rigid bright red-brown branchlets, becoming paler during their
second and third seasons; or sometimes a shrub, with numerous straggling
stout or slender stems frequently only a few feet high or occasionally
30 deg.--40 deg. high. Winter-buds about 1/4' long. Bark of young stems and of
large branches thin, the surface separating into small persistent scales
1'--2' long, becoming near the base of old trees deeply furrowed, dark
red-brown, 1/4' thick, and broken on the surface into short broad
scales. Wood heavy, close-grained, moderately hard, brittle, not strong,
brown tinged with red, with thick lighter colored sapwood of 40--50
layers of annual growth; burning with a clear bright flame, and valued
as fuel.

Distribution. Damp sandy peat soil in swamps almost submerged for
several months of the year, or often in shallow rarely overflowed
swamps; coast region of the south Atlantic states from the valley of the
Savannah River to the coast of western Florida, and through the maritime
Pine-belt of the Gulf coast to eastern Louisiana.




                         XXXIII. AQUIFOLIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, scaly buds, and alternate
simple entire crenate or pungently toothed petiolate persistent or
deciduous leaves, with minute stipules. Flowers axillary, solitary or
cymose, small, greenish white, dioecious; calyx 4--6-lobed, the lobes
imbricated in the bud, hypogynous; petals 4--6, oval or oblong, obtuse,
free or united at base, imbricated in the bud; disk 0; stamens as many
as and alternate with the petals and adnate to the base of the corolla;
anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally, small and
sterile in the pistillate flower; pistil compound; ovary 4--8-celled,
minute and rudimentary in the staminate flower; style short or 0;
stigmas as many as the cells of the ovary, nearly confluent; ovule
generally solitary in each cell, suspended, anatropous; raphe usually
dorsal, the micropyle superior. Fruit a drupe, with as many indehiscent
bony or crustaceous 1-seeded nutlets as carpels; sarcocarp thin and
fleshy. Seed narrowed at the ends, suspended; seed-coat membranaceous,
pale brown; embryo minute in the apex of the copious fleshy albumen;
cotyledons plain; the radicle superior.

The Holly family with five genera is distributed in temperate and
tropical regions of the two hemispheres. Of the five genera now
recognized, only Ilex is important in the number of species or is widely
distributed.




                               1. ILEX L.


Characters of the family.

Ilex with about one hundred and seventy-five species is found in all
tropical and temperate regions of the world with the exception of
western North America, Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, and New Guinea,
the largest number of species occurring in Brazil and Guiana. Of the
thirteen species which inhabit eastern North America, six are trees.
Ilex contains a bitter principle, ilicin, and possesses tonic
properties. _Ilex paraguariensis_ St. Hilaire, of South America,
furnishes the mate or Paraguay tea, and is the most useful of the
species. The European _Ilex Aquifolium_ L. is a favorite garden plant,
and is sometimes planted in the middle, southern, and Pacific United
States.

_Ilex_ is the classical name of the Evergreen Oak of southern Europe.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Parts of the flower in 4's; pedicels with bractlets at the base;
        nutlets prominently ribbed on the back and sides; leaves
        persistent.
    Leaves armed with spiny teeth; young branchlets glabrous or
          sparingly pubescent.
                                                     1. I. opaca (A, C).
    Leaves serrate or entire; fruit bright red.
      Leaves oblanceolate or oblong-obovate, mostly entire; young
            branchlets pubescent; calyx-lobes acuminate.
                                                      2. I. Cassine (C).
      Leaves elliptic or oblong-elliptic, coarsely crenulate-serrate;
            young branchlets puberulous; calyx-lobes obtuse.
                                                    3. I. vomitoria (C).
    Leaves entire, ovate, ovate-elliptic or ovate-lanceolate; fruit
          brownish purple.
                                                     4. I. Krugiana (D).
  Parts of the flower in 4's or 5's, rarely in 6's; pedicels without
        bractlets; nutlets striate, many-ribbed on the back; leaves
        deciduous.
    Leaves oblong-spatulate or obovate-lanceolate, remotely
          crenulate-serrate; calyx-lobes broad-triangular.
                                                   5. I. decidua (A, C).
    Leaves ovate or oblong-lanceolate, sharply serrate; calyx-lobes
          acute.
                                                    6. I. monticola (A).


                       1. Ilex opaca Ait. Holly.

[Illustration: Fig. 603]

Leaves elliptic to obovate-oblong, pungently acute, with thickened
undulate margins and few stout spinose teeth, or occasionally entire,
especially on upper branches, thick, coriaceous, dull yellow-green,
paler and often yellow on the lower surface, 2'--4' long, with a
prominent midrib and conspicuous veins; persistent on the branches for
three years, finally deciduous in the spring; petioles short, stout,
thickened at base, grooved above, slightly puberulent; stipules minute,
broad-acute or nearly deltoid, persistent. Flowers appearing in spring
on slender puberulous pedicels, with minute acute bractlets, in short
pedunculate cymes from the axils of young leaves or scattered along the
base of the young shoots, 3--9-flowered on the staminate and 1 or rarely
2 or 3-flowered on the pistillate plant; calyx-lobes acute, ciliate on
the margins; stigmas broad and sessile. Fruit ripening late in the
autumn, persistent on the branches during the winter, spherical or
ovoid, dull red or rarely yellow, 1/4' in diameter; nutlets prominently
few-ribbed on the back and sides, rather narrower at apex than at base.

A tree, often 40 deg.--50 deg. and occasionally 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.,
3 deg., or exceptionally 4 deg. in diameter, short slender branches forming a
narrow pyramidal head, and stout branchlets covered when they first
appear with fine rufous pubescence disappearing during their first
season, and becoming glabrous and pale brown. Winter-buds obtuse or
acuminate, 1/8'--1/4' long, with narrow acuminate ciliate scales. Bark
about 1/2' thick, light gray and roughened by wart-like excrescences.
Wood light, tough, not strong, close-grained, nearly white when first
cut, turning brown with age and exposure, with thick rather lighter
colored sapwood; valued and much used in cabinet-making, in the interior
finish of houses, and in turnery. The branches are used in large
quantities for Christmas decoration.

Distribution. Coast of Massachusetts, in the city of Quincy, Norfolk
County, southward generally near the coast to the shores of Mosquito
Inlet and Charlotte Harbor, Florida; valley of the Mississippi River
from southern Indiana and Illinois, to the shores of the Gulf of Mexico,
and through Missouri, Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma, and Louisiana to the
valley of Cibolo Creek (Southerland Springs, Wilson County), Texas; rare
and of small size east of the Hudson River and rare in the Appalachian
Mountain region and the country immediately west of it; most abundant
and of its largest size on the bottom-lands of the streams of northern
Louisiana, southern Arkansas and eastern Texas; at the north in dry
rather gravelly soil often on the margins of Oak-woods, southward on the
borders of swampy river-bottoms, in rich humid soil.

Occasionally cultivated in the eastern states as an ornamental plant.


                       2. Ilex Cassine L. Dahoon.

[Illustration: Fig. 604]

Leaves oblanceolate to oblong-obovate, acute, mucronate or rarely
rounded and occasionally emarginate at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, revolute and entire, or sometimes serrate above the
middle with sharp mucronate teeth, puberulous above and densely
pubescent below when they first unfold, becoming glabrous at maturity
with the exception of scattered hairs on the lower surface of the broad
midrib, dark green and lustrous above, pale below, 1-1/2'--3' long and
1/2'--1' wide; petioles short, stout, thickened at the base, sparingly
villose. Flowers on hairy pedicels, with acute scarious bractlets, in
pedunculate clusters, 3--9-flowered on the staminate plant, usually
3-flowered on the pistillate plant sometimes nearly 1' long, from the
axils of leaves of the year or occasionally of the previous year;
calyx-lobes acute, ciliate. Fruit ripening late in the autumn,
persistent until the following spring, globose, sometimes 1/4' in
diameter, bright or occasionally dull red or nearly yellow, solitary or
often in clusters of 3's; nutlets prominently few-ribbed on the back and
sides; rounded at base, acute at apex.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, and branches
coated at first with dense silky pubescence persistent until the end of
the second or third year, ultimately dark brown and marked by occasional
lenticels; or often a low shrub. Winter-buds minute, acute, with
lanceolate scales thickly coated with pale silky pubescence. Bark of the
trunk about 1/16' thick, dark gray, thickly covered and roughened by
lenticels. Wood light, soft, close-grained, not strong, pale brown, with
thick nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Cold swamps and on their borders, in rich moist soil, or
occasionally on the high sandy banks of Pine-barren streams;
southeastern Virginia southward in the immediate neighborhood of the
coast to the shores of Bay Biscayne and the Everglade Keys, Dade County,
and in the interior of the peninsular in Polk and De Soto Counties,
Florida, and along the Gulf coast to western Louisiana; on the Bahama
Islands and in Cuba (var. _latifolia_ Ait.); nowhere abundant on the
Atlantic coast; most common in western Florida and southern Alabama;
passing through forms with elongated narrow leaves (var. _angustifolia_
Ait., the common form of southern Alabama) into the variety _myrtifolia_
Sarg. This is a low shrub or occasionally a slender wide-branched tree,
with pale nearly white bark, puberulous branchlets, and crowded
generally entire mucronate leaves 1/2'--1' long, 1/8' wide, with
strongly reflexed margins, a very short petiole, and a broad prominent
midrib; an inhabitant of Cypress-swamps and Pine-barren ponds or their
margins, in the neighborhood of the coast, North Carolina to Louisiana.

_Ilex Cassine_ is occasionally cultivated in Europe.


                3. Ilex vomitoria Ait. Cassena. Yaupon.

[Illustration: Fig. 605]

Leaves elliptic to elliptic-oblong, obtuse, coarsely and remotely
crenulate-serrate, coriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, pale and
opaque below, 1'--2' long and 1/4'--1' wide, persistent for two or three
years, generally falling just before the appearance of the new growth of
their third season; petioles short, broad, and grooved. Flowers on
slender club-shaped glabrous pedicels, with minute bractlets at the
base, in short glabrous cymes on branchlets of the previous year, those
of the staminate plant short-stemmed and many-flowered, those of the
pistillate plant sessile and 1 or 2-flowered; calyx-lobes rounded,
obtuse, often slightly ciliate; ovary contracted below the broad flat
stigma. Fruit produced in great abundance, on stems not more than 1/4'
long, ripening late in the autumn or in early winter, soon deciduous, or
persistent until spring, scarlet, nearly globose, about 1/4' in
diameter; nutlets obtuse at the ends, and prominently few-ribbed on the
back and sides.

A small much-branched tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a slender often
inclining trunk rarely more than 6' in diameter, and stout branchlets
standing at right angles with the stem, slightly angled and puberulous
during their first season, becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous, terete
and pale gray in their second year; generally a tall shrub, with
numerous stems forming dense thickets. Winter-buds minute, obtuse, with
narrow dark brown or often nearly black scales. Bark of the trunk
1/16'--1/8' thick, the light red-brown surface broken into thin minute
scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, nearly white, turning yellow
with exposure, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Southeastern Virginia to the St. John's River and Cedar
Keys, Florida, and westward to the shores of Matagorda Bay and the
valleys of the upper Rio Blanco and the Guadalupe River, Texas, and to
southern Arkansas; in the Atlantic and east Gulf states rarely far from
salt water and usually not more than 10 deg.--15 deg. high; of its largest size
and of tree-like habit only on the rich bottom-lands of eastern Texas.
The branches covered with the fruit are sold during the winter months
for decorative purposes. An infusion of the leaves, which are emetic and
purgative, was used by the Indians, who formerly visited the coast in
large numbers every spring to drink it.

Occasionally used in the southern states for hedges.


                        4. Ilex Krugiana Loesen.

[Illustration: Fig. 606]

Leaves ovate, ovate-elliptic or ovate-lanceolate, acuminate and abruptly
long-pointed or acute at apex, rounded or obtusely cuneate at base,
entire, with slightly thickened margins subcoriaceous or coriaceous,
glabrous, dark yellow-green and lustrous above, dull beneath,
persistent, 2-1/2'--4' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent midrib
deeply impressed on the upper side and pale on the lower side, and 6--9
pairs of slender primary veins connected by thin reticulate veinlets;
petioles slender, 1/3'--3/4' in length; stipules minute, whitish,
persistent. Flowers on slender pedicels, 1/12'--1/6' long, in the axils
of minute acute scarious deciduous bractlets, in crowded clusters, the
staminate 1--3-flowered on short peduncles, the pistillate 1-flowered;
calyx about 1/12' in diameter, 4-lobed, the lobes triangular, suberect,
about as long as the tube, imbricated in the bud; corolla rotate,
greenish white, petals 4, ovate or slightly obovate in the pistillate
flower, imbricated in the bud; stamens 4 in the staminate flower, nearly
as long as the petals; filaments slender, about as long as the oval
anthers; in the pistillate flower much smaller and abortive; ovary
4-celled, ellipsoid; stigma small, discoid, obscurely 4-lobed; ovary of
the staminate flower subconic, minute and abortive. Fruit on a stout
pedicel up to 1/5' in length, globose, brownish purple, lustrous, 1/6'
in diameter; sarcocarp thin; nutlets 4, irregularly 3-seeded, obtusely
angled, dark brown.

In Florida a tree, sometimes 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a tall often crooked
trunk occasionally 4' in diameter and covered with thin smooth nearly
white bark, becoming on old individuals darker-colored and broken into
narrow scales, and small ascending branchlets green when they first
appear, becoming light gray and finally white, and marked by numerous
round elliptic lenticels; often a shrub.

Distribution. Florida, Homestead and Paradise Keys in the Everglades,
Dade County; in the Bahama Islands, Hayti and San Domingo.


                         5. Ilex decidua Walt.

[Illustration: Fig. 607]

Leaves deciduous, except on vigorous shoots, fascicled at the end of
short spur-like lateral branchlets, oblong-spatulate or
spatulate-lanceolate, acuminate, obtuse or emarginate at apex, gradually
narrowed below, remotely crenulate-serrate, 2'--3' long, 1/3'--1' wide,
thin early in the season, becoming thick and firm at maturity, light
green above and pale and sparingly hairy along the narrow midrib below;
petioles slender, grooved, pubescent, about 1/4' in length; stipules
filiform, membranaceous. Flowers on slender pedicels, those of the
staminate plant often 1/2' long and longer than those of the pistillate
plant, in 1 or 2-flowered glabrous cymes crowded at the end of the
lateral branches of the previous season, or rarely solitary on
branchlets of the year; calyx-lobes triangular, with smooth or sometimes
ciliate margins. Fruit on short stout stems, ripening in the early
autumn, often remaining on the branches until the appearance of the
leaves the following spring, globose or depressed-globose, orange or
orange-scarlet, 1/4' in diameter; nutlets narrowed and rounded at base,
acute or acuminate at apex, many-ribbed on the back.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a slender trunk 6'--10' in diameter, stout
spreading branches, and slender glabrous pale silver gray branchlets;
more often a tall straggling shrub. Winter-buds minute, obtuse, with
ovate light gray scales. Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/16' thick,
light brown, and roughened by wart-like excrescences. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, creamy white, with rather lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps in low moist soil;
Gloucester County, Virginia, to western Florida in the region between
the eastern and southern base of the Appalachian Mountains and the
neighborhood of the coast, and through the Gulf states to the valley of
the Colorado River, Texas, and through Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma, and
southern Missouri to southern Illinois; usually shrubby east of the
Mississippi River and only arborescent in Missouri, southern Arkansas,
and eastern Texas. In Florida a form (var. _Curtissii_ Fern.) occurs
with leaves only 1/3'--2/3' long and fruit about 1/4' in diameter.


                        6. Ilex monticola Gray.

[Illustration: Fig. 608]

Leaves deciduous, ovate to oblong-lanceolate, abruptly narrowed and
acuminate or rarely acute at apex, cuneate or rarely rounded at base,
sharply and rather remotely serrate with minute glandular incurved
teeth, thin, glabrous, or sparingly hairy along the prominent midrib and
veins, 2'--5' long, 1/2'--2-1/2' wide, light green above and pale below;
petioles slender, 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers appearing in June when
the leaves are more than half grown, on slender pedicels 1/2' long on
the staminate plant and much longer on the pistillate plant, in
1--2-flowered cymes crowded at the end of lateral spur-like branchlets
of the previous year, or solitary on branchlets of the year; calyx-lobes
acute, ciliate; ovary contracted below the broad flat stigma. Fruit
globose, bright scarlet, nearly 1/2' in diameter; nutlets narrowed at
the ends, prominently ribbed on the back and sides.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk sometimes 10'--12' in
diameter, slender branches forming a narrow pyramidal head, and more or
less zigzag glabrous branchlets pale red-brown at first, becoming dark
gray at the end of their first season; more often a low shrub, with
spreading stems. Winter-buds broad-ovoid to subglobose, about 1/8' long,
with ovate keeled apiculate light brown scales. Bark of the trunk
usually less than 1/16' thick, with a light brown surface roughened by
numerous lenticels. Wood hard, heavy, close-grained, and creamy white.

Distribution. Central and western New York, southward along the
Appalachian Mountains to eastern Tennessee; northern and central
Georgia; coast of South Carolina near Charleston; western Florida
(Mariana, Jackson County, and Wakulla Springs, Wakulla County); Dallas
County, Alabama; northeastern Mississippi (Tishomingo County), and in
West Feliciana and Wynn Parishes, Louisiana; a shrubby form with leaves
soft pubescent beneath (var. _mollis_ Britt.) occurs in western
Massachusetts and Connecticut, and southward to North Carolina.




                          XXXIV. CELASTRACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, and opposite or alternate simple
persistent or deciduous leaves, with or without stipules. Flowers
regular, perfect, polygamous or dioecious, pedicellate in axillary
clusters; calyx 4--5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud; petals 4 or
5, imbricated in the bud; stamens 4 or 5; anthers introrse, 2-celled,
the cells opening longitudinally; ovary 2--5-celled; ovules 2 or
solitary in each cell (_6 in Canotia_), anatropous, or subhorizontal
(_in Canotia_). Fruit a capsule or drupe. Seed with copious albumen;
embryo axile.

A family of about thirty-eight genera widely distributed over the
tropical and warm temperate parts of the world, with five arborescent
representatives in the United States.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves opposite, deciduous; parts of the flower in 4's; fruit a fleshy
        capsule enclosed in a colored aril.
                                                            1. Evonymus.
  Leaves alternate, persistent (_0 in 3_).
    Fruit capsular; parts of the flower in 5's.
      Capsule 3--4-valved, loculicidal, its outer coat woody, the valves
            apiculate at apex; base of the seed enclosed in a colored
            aril.
                                                            2. Maytenus.
      Capsule 5-valved, septicidal, its outer coat thin and fleshy, the
            valves 2-lobed at apex; seed without an aril.
                                                             3. Canotia.
    Fruit drupaceous; parts of the flower in 4's; seed without an aril.
      Leaves often crenately serrate above the middle; stipules minute,
            caducous; fruit usually 1-seeded; branchlets quadrangular.
                                                             4. Gyminda.
      Leaves entire; stipules 0; fruit 2-seeded; branchlets terete.
                                                          5. Schaefferia.




                             1. EVONYMUS L.


Small generally glabrous trees or shrubs, with usually square sometimes
wing-margined branchlets, bitter drastic bark, slender obtuse or
acuminate winter-buds, and fibrous roots. Leaves opposite, petiolate,
entire, crenate or dentate, deciduous or rarely persistent; stipules
minute, caducous. Flowers perfect or polygamo-dioecious, in dichotomous
axillary usually few-flowered cymes; calyx 4-lobed (in the North
American arborescent species); disk thick and fleshy, cohering with and
filling the short tube of the calyx, flat, 4-angled or lobed, closely
surrounding and adhering to the ovary; petals inserted in the sinuses of
the calyx under the free border of the disk, as many as and much longer
than the calyx-lobes, spreading, deciduous; stamens as many as the
petals and alternate with them, inserted on the summit of the disk;
filaments very short, subulate, erect or recurved; anthers 2-celled, the
cells nearly parallel or spreading below; ovary 4-celled; styles short,
terminating in a depressed stigma; ovules usually 2 in each cell,
ascending from the central angle; raphe ventral, micropyle inferior, or
pendulous, the raphe then dorsal and the micropyle superior. Fruit
capsular, 4-lobed and celled, fleshy, angled or winged, smooth (in the
North American arborescent species), loculicidally 4-valved, the valves
septicidal. Seeds 2 in each cell, or commonly solitary by abortion,
ascending, surrounded by a colored aril; seed-coat chartaceous; albumen
fleshy; embryo axile; cotyledons broad, coriaceous, parallel with the
raphe; the radicle short, inferior.

Evonymus is widely distributed through the northern hemisphere,
extending south of the equator to the islands of the Indian Archipelago
and to Australia. About forty species are distinguished, the largest
number occurring in the tropical regions of southern Asia, and in China
and Japan. Of the four species found within the territory of the United
States one only is a small tree. Many of the species are rich in bitter
and astringent principles, and are drastic and slightly stimulant. Many
are valued as ornaments of gardens and parks.

The generic name is from the classical name of one of the European
species.


          1. Evonymus atropurpureus Jacq. Bunting Bush. Wahoo.

[Illustration: Fig. 609]

Leaves ovate-elliptic, acuminate, minutely serrate or biserrate, thin,
puberulous below, 2'--5' long and 1'--2' wide, with a stout midrib and
primary veins; turning pale yellow in the autumn and falling in October;
petioles stout, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers appearing from May to the
middle of June, nearly 1/2' across, in twice or thrice dichotomous
usually 7--15-flowered cymes borne on slender peduncles 1'--2' long and
conspicuously marked by the scars of minute bracts; calyx-lobes 4,
rounded or rarely acute at apex, mostly entire; petals broad-obovate,
undulate, often erose on the margins; anthers spreading. Fruit ripening
in October, usually persistent on the branches until midwinter, deeply
lobed, 1/2' across, with light purple valves; seeds sometimes gibbous on
the dorsal side, broad and rounded above, narrowed below, 1/4' long,
with a thin light chestnut-brown wrinkled coat and a thin scarlet aril.

A tree, rarely 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--6' in diameter, spreading
branches, and slender terete branchlets dark purple-brown at first,
becoming lighter colored in their second season, often covered with
small crowded lenticels, and marked by prominent leaf-scars,
occasionally slightly or on vigorous shoots rarely broadly
wing-margined; more often a shrub, 6 deg.--10 deg. tall. Winter-buds 1/8' long,
acute, with narrow purple apiculate scales scarious on the margins and
covered by a glaucous bloom. Bark thin, ashy gray, and covered by thin
minute scales. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained, white tinged with
orange.

Distribution. Borders of woods in rich soil; western New York to
southern Minnesota, central Iowa, southeastern South Dakota,
northwestern Nebraska, central Kansas, Oklahoma to the valley of the
Canadian River (near Minton, Caddo County), southern Arkansas and
eastern Texas (Dallas County), and southward to eastern Tennessee,
Jackson County, Alabama, and western Florida; in the valley of the upper
Missouri River, Montana; arborescent only in southern Arkansas and
Texas.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornament of gardens in the eastern United
States and in Europe.




                          2. MAYTENUS Molina.


Small unarmed trees or shrubs with slender branchlets and minute buds.
Leaves alternate often in two ranks, coriaceous, petiolate, persistent;
stipules minute, deciduous. Flowers polygamous, small, white, yellow or
red, axillary, solitary or in cymose or fascicled clusters; calyx
5-lobed; petals 5, spreading; stamens 5, inserted under the orbicular
disk, with undulate margins; filaments filiform; anthers ovoid-cordate;
ovary immersed and confluent with the disk, 2--4-celled; style 0 or
columnar; stigma 2--4-lobed, usually sessile; ovules erect, solitary or
in pairs in each cell. Fruit capsular, coriaceous, 2--4-valved; seed
erect, surrounded at base or entirely in a pulpy aril; testa
crustaceous; albumen fleshy or wanting; cotyledons foliaceous.

Maytenus with some seventy species is widely distributed in the tropical
and subtropical regions of America from southern Florida, where one
species occurs, to Brazil and Chile.

The Chilean _Maytenus boaria_ Molina, a handsome tree of graceful habit,
is occasionally cultivated in California.

The generic name is from Mayten, the Chilean name of one of the species.


                   1. Maytenus phyllanthoides Benth.

[Illustration: Fig. 610]

Leaves oblong-obovate to elliptic, rounded and rarely emarginate or
acute at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base and entire, deeply
tinged with red when they unfold and at maturity, 1'--1-1/2' long and
1/2'--3/4' wide, with thickened often slightly undulate margins, a
slender midrib, obscure primary veins, and conspicuous reticulate
veinlets; petioles stout, 1/6'--1/4' in length. Flowers usually solitary
or in compact fascicles, short-stalked, about 1/12' in diameter;
calyx-lobes rounded at apex, often persistent under the fruit, reddish,
shorter than the white petals; ovary 3--4-celled. Fruit solitary,
short-stalked, broad-obovoid, 4-angled, rounded and minutely mucronate
at apex, abruptly narrowed below, bright red, 1/4'--1/3' long and broad,
1-celled, 3--4-valved, the valves opening to the base, ridged down the
inner surface with a low ridge developed from the dissepiment,
2--4-seeded; seed ellipsoid, acute at the ends, 1/12' long, surrounded
at base by an open bright red aril.

A round-topped tree, rarely 20 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in diameter
(_teste J. K. Small_), and slender alternate glabrous pale gray
branchlets; usually a low shrub.

Distribution. Florida, west coast, Captiva Island, Lee County, to the
neighborhood of Cape Sable; Cocoanut Grove, Dade County, and on many of
the southern keys; on bluffs of Matagorda Bay near Corpus Christi,
Nueces County, Texas; in northern Mexico and Lower California; probably
of its largest size in Florida on Sands Key and on Captiva Island.




                            3. CANOTIA Torr.


A glabrous leafless tree, with light brown deeply furrowed bark, stout
terete alternate branches terminating in rigid, pale green and striate
spines, their base and those of the peduncles surrounded by black
triangular persistent cushion-like processes minutely papillose on the
surface. Flowers perfect, on slender spreading pedicels jointed below
the middle, 3--7 together, in short-stemmed fascicles or corymbs near
the end of the branches, from the axils of minute ovate subulate bracts;
calyx 5-lobed, minute, persistent, much shorter than the oblong obtuse
white hypogynous petals imbricated in the bud, reflexed at maturity
above the middle, deciduous; stamens 5, hypogynous, opposite the lobes
of the calyx; filaments awl-shaped, rather shorter than the petals,
persistent on the fruit; anthers oblong, cordate, minutely apiculate,
attached below the middle, grooved on the back; ovary raised upon and
confluent with a fleshy slightly 10-angled gynophore,
papillose-glandular on the surface, 5-celled, the cells opposite the
petals, terminating in a fleshy elongated style; stigma slightly
5-lobed; ovules 6 in each cell, inserted in 2 ranks on its inner angle,
subhorizontal; micropyle inferior. Fruit a woody ovoid, acuminate
capsule rounded at base, crowned with the subulate persistent style,
septicidally 5-valved, the valves 2-lobed at apex; outer coat thin,
fleshy; inner coat woody. Seed solitary or in pairs, ascending,
subovoid, flattened; seed-coat subcoriaceous, papillate, produced below
into a subfalcate membranaceous wing; embryo surrounded by thin fleshy
albumen, erect; cotyledons oval, compressed; radicle very short,
inferior.

The genus is represented by a single species.

The generic name is that by which this plant was known to the Mexicans
of Arizona at the time of its discovery.


                      1. Canotia holacantha Torr.

[Illustration: Fig. 611]

Leaves 0. Flowers 1/8'--1/4' in diameter, appearing from June until
October. Capsule 1' long; seed about 3/4' in length.

A small shrub-like tree, sometimes 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short stout
trunk rarely a foot in diameter; or often a low spreading shrub.

Distribution. Dry gravelly mesas on the Arizona foothills, from the
White Mountain region to the valley of Bill Williams's Fork in the
northwestern part of the state, and on Providence Mountain in southern
California.




                            4. GYMINDA Sarg.


Trees or shrubs, with pale quadrangular branchlets and minute acuminate
buds. Leaves opposite, short-petiolate, oblong-obovate, rounded and
sometimes emarginate at apex, entire or remotely crenulate-serrate above
the middle with revolute thickened margins, feather-veined, coriaceous,
persistent; stipules minute, acuminate, membranaceous, caducous. Flowers
unisexual, pedicellate, in axillary pedunculate few-flowered
dichotomously branched cymes bibracteolate at apex; calyx minute,
4-lobed, persistent, with a short urceolate tube and rounded lobes; disk
fleshy, filling the tube of the calyx, cup-shaped, slightly 4-lobed;
petals entire, obovate, white, rounded at apex, reflexed, much longer
than the lobes of the calyx; stamens 4, opposite the sepals, inserted in
the lobes of the disk, exserted, 0 in the pistillate flower; filaments
slender, subulate, incurved; anthers oblong; ovary 2-celled, oblong,
sessile, confluent with the disk, crowned with a large 2-lobed sessile
stigma, rudimentary and deeply cleft in the staminate flower; ovule
solitary, suspended from the apex of the cell; raphe dorsal; micropyle
superior. Fruit drupaceous, 2-celled, 1 or 2-seeded, black or dark blue,
oval or obovoid, crowned with the remnants of the persistent stigma,
often 1-celled by abortion; flesh thin; stone thick, crustaceous. Seed
oblong, suspended; seed-coat membranaceous; albumen thin, fleshy; embryo
axile; cotyledons ovate, foliaceous; radicle superior, next the hilum.

Gyminda with a single species is distributed from southern Florida to
Trinidad and southern Mexico, and is represented in Central America by
what is perhaps a second species.

The generic name is formed by transposing the first three letters of
_Myginda_, to which this plant had been referred.


                       1. Gyminda latifolia Urb.

                      _Gyminda Grisebachii_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 612]

Leaves 1-1/2'--2' long, 3/4'--1' broad, pale yellow-green. Flowers
produced on shoots of the year from April to June. Fruit ripening in
November, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk rarely more than 6' in
diameter, and branchlets becoming terete during their third season and
covered with thin slightly grooved roughened bright red-brown bark. Bark
of the trunk thin, brown tinged with red, separating into thin minute
scales. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, dark brown or nearly
black, with thick light brown sapwood of 75--80 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, common and generally distributed over the
southern keys from the Marquesas group to Upper Matecombe Key; in Cuba,
Porto Rico, Trinidad, and southern Mexico. A form (var. _glaucescens_,
Small.) with smaller less coriaceous very glaucous leaves occurs in
Cuba.




                          5. SCHAEFFERIA Jacq.


Glabrous trees or shrubs, with slender rigid terete branches and small
obtuse buds. Leaves alternate, or fascicled on short spur-like
branchlets, entire, obovate or spatulate, acute and minutely apiculate
or gradually narrowed to the rounded or emarginate apex, cuneate below,
persistent, without stipules. Flowers dioecious, pedicellate in axillary
clusters from buds covered by scale-like persistent bracts; calyx
4-lobed, the lobes orbicular, persistent, much shorter than the 4
hypogynous, oblong, obtuse, white or greenish white petals; stamens 4,
hypogynous, inserted under the margin of the small inconspicuous disk
opposite the lobes of the calyx, wanting in the pistillate flower;
filaments subulate, incurved; anthers oblong-ovoid; ovary 2-celled,
ovoid, sessile, free, rudimentary in the staminate flower; style very
short, gradually enlarged into the large 2-lobed stigma, with spreading
lobes; ovule solitary, ascending; raphe thin, ventral; micropyle
inferior. Fruit a small 2-seeded fleshy drupe, ovoid or obovoid, crowned
with the remnants of the persistent style, indistinctly 2-lobed by
longitudinal grooves, slightly flattened; flesh thin and tuberculate;
nutlets 2, obovoid, rounded at the ends, with a thick bony shell. Seed
solitary, ascending; seed-coat membranaceous; albumen fleshy; cotyledons
broad, foliaceous; radicle very short, inferior, next the hilum.

Schaefferia with four or five species is confined to the New World, with
one species in southern Florida, and another, a small shrub, _Schaefferia
cuneifolia_ A. Gray in the arid region of western Texas and northern
Mexico.

The generic name is in honor of Jakob Christian Schaeffer (1718--1790),
the distinguished German naturalist.


         1. Schaefferia frutescens Jacq. Yellow Wood. Box Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 613]

Leaves bright yellow-green, 2'--2-1/2' long, 1/2'-1' wide, with thick
revolute margins, appearing in Florida in April and persistent on the
branches until the spring of the following year; petioles short and
broad. Flowers opening in spring on branchlets of the year, 1/8' across,
the staminate generally 3 or 5 together on pedicels rarely more than
1/6' long, the pistillato solitary or 2 or 3 together on pedicels rather
longer than the petioles. Fruit ripening in Florida in November,
slightly grooved, compressed, bright scarlet, with an acrid disagreeable
flavor.

A glabrous tree, 35 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 8'--10' in
diameter, erect branches, and slender many-angled branchlets pale
greenish yellow during their first season, becoming light gray during
their second year and then conspicuously marked by the remains of the
persistent wart-like clusters of bud-scales; or often a tall or low
shrub. Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/12' thick, pale brown
faintly tinged with red, the surface divided by long shallow fissures,
and ultimately separating into long narrow scales. Wood heavy,
close-grained, bright clear yellow, with thick rather lighter colored
sapwood; sometimes used as a substitute for boxwood in wood engraving.

Distribution. Florida, upper Matecombe and Old Rhodes Keys, and eastward
on the southern keys, and on the Everglade Keys, Dade County; on the
Bahama Islands, and widely distributed through the West Indies to
Venezuela.




                            XXXV. ACERACEAE.


Trees or rarely shrubs, with limpid juice, terete branches, scaly buds,
their inner scales accrescent and marking the base of the branchlets
with ring-like scars, and fibrous roots. Leaves opposite, or on vigorous
shoots rarely in whorls of 3, long-petiolate, simple, palmately
3--7-lobed and nerved or pinnately 3--7-foliolulate, usually without
stipules, deciduous, in falling leaving small U-shaped narrow scars
showing the ends of 3 equidistant fibro-vascular bundles. Flowers
regular, dioeciously or monoeciously polygamous, rarely perfect or
dioecious, in fascicles produced from separate lateral buds appearing in
early spring before the leaves or in terminal and lateral racemes or
panicles appearing with or later than the leaves; bracts minute,
caducous; calyx colored, generally 5-parted, the lobes imbricated in the
bud; petals usually 5, imbricated in the bud, or 0; disk annular,
fleshy, more or less lobed, with a free margin; stamens 4--10, usually 7
or 8, inserted on the summit or inside of the disk, hypogynous;
filaments distinct, filiform, commonly exserted in the staminate,
shorter and generally abortive in the pistillate flower; anthers oblong
or linear, attached at the base, introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; ovary 2-lobed, 2-celled, compressed contrary to the
dissepiment, wing-margined on the back; styles 2, inserted between the
lobes of the ovary, connate below and divided into 2 linear branches
stigmatose on their inner surface; ovules 2 in each cell, collateral,
rarely superposed, ascending, attached by their broad base to the inner
angle of the cell, anatropous or amphitropous; micropyle inferior. Fruit
composed of 2 samaras separable from a small persistent axis, the
nut-like carpels compressed laterally, produced on the back into a large
chartaceous or coriaceous reticulated obovate wing thickened on the
lower margin. Seed solitary by abortion, or rarely 2 in each cell,
ovoid, compressed, irregularly 3-angled, ascending obliquely, without
albumen; seed-coat membranaceous, the inner coat often fleshy; embryo
conduplicate; cotyledons thin, foliaceous or coriaceous, irregularly
plicate, incumbent or accumbent on the elongated descending radicle
turned toward the hilum.

A family of two genera, one widely distributed, the other, Dipteronia,
distinguished by the broad wings encircling the mature carpels, and
represented by a single Chinese species.




                           1. ACER L. Maple.


Characters of the family.

Acer with sixty or seventy species is widely distributed over the
northern hemisphere, with a single species extending south of the
equator to the mountains of Java. Acer produces light close-grained
moderately hard wood valued for the interior finish of houses and in
turnery. The bark is astringent, and the limpid sweet sap of some of the
American species is manufactured into sugar.

_Acer_ is the classical name of the Maple-tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves simple, usually palmately lobed (_sometimes 3-foliolate in 1,
        3-lobed at apex in 4_).
    Flowers appearing with or after the leaves.
      Flowers with petals; sepals distinct.
        Inflorescence corymbose.
          Flowers in terminal drooping corymbs.
            Leaves 3-lobed or parted.
                                                1. A. glabrum (B, F, G).
            Leaves palmately 3--5-lobed.
                                                2. A. circinatum (B, G).
        Inflorescence racemose.
          Flowers in dense erect racemes.
                                                     3. A. spicatum (A).
          Flowers in drooping racemes.
            Ovary and young fruit glabrous; leaves 3-lobed at apex.
                                               4. A. pennsylvanicum (A).
            Ovary and young fruit hairy; leaves deeply 5-lobed.
                                                 5. A. macrophyllum (G).
      Flowers without petals; sepals united; inflorescence corymbose;
            pedicels long, pendulous, mostly hairy.
        Leaves pale or glaucescent, or green and glabrous beneath.
          Leaves green or pale beneath, glabrous or in one form
                villose-pubescent on the under side of the veins and on
                the petioles.
                                                 6. A. saccharum (A, C).
          Leaves pale and pubescent, rarely glabrous beneath, their
                lobes usually short and obtuse or acuminate.
            Lobes of the leaves only slightly lobed or entire; bark of
                  young trees smooth and pale.
                                                   7. A. floridanum (C).
            Lobes of the leaves distinctly lobulate; bark of young trees
                  dark brown and scaly.
                                            8. A. grandidentatum (F, H).
        Leaves green and pubescent, rarely glabrous beneath.
          Leaves hirsute-pubescent beneath and on the petioles, the
                lobes entire or lobulate, the basal sinus often closed
                by the lower lobes; bark dark and furrowed.
                                                       9. A. nigrum (A).
          Leaves pilose-pubescent, rarely glabrous beneath, the lobes
                slightly lobulate, the basal sinus open; petioles
                glabrous; bark pale and smooth.
                                                  10. A. leucoderme (C).
    Flowers appearing before the leaves in dense lateral clusters from
          separate buds; leaves 5-lobed (_3-lobed in varieties of 12_);
          fruit ripening in May or June.
      Flowers sessile or short-stalked, without petals; ovary and young
            fruit tomentose.
                                                      11. A. saccharinum
      Flowers on long pedicels, with petals; ovary and young fruit
            glabrous.
                                                           12. A. rubrum
  Leaves 3--7-foliolate; flowers dioecious, without petals.
                                      13. A. Negundo (A, B, C, F, G, H).


                   1. Acer glabrum Torr. Dwarf Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 614]

Leaves glabrous, thin, rounded in outline, cordate-truncate or cuneate
at base, 3--5-lobed, the middle lobe usually narrowed and entire below
the middle, or often 3-parted or 3-foliolate (f. _trisecta_ Sarg.), with
acute or obtuse doubly serrate lobes, 3'--5' in diameter, dark green and
lustrous on the upper, paler on the lower surface, with conspicuous
veinlets; petioles stout, grooved, 1'--6' in length, and often bright
red. Flowers about 1/8' long on short slender pedicels, in loose
few-flowered glabrous racemose corymbs on slender drooping peduncles
from the end of 2-leaved branchlets, the staminate and pistillate
usually produced separately on different plants; sepals oblong, obtuse,
petaloid, as long as the greenish yellow petals; stamens 7 or 8, with
glabrous unequal filaments shorter than the petals, much shorter or
rudimentary in the pistillate flower; ovary glabrous, with short obtuse
lobes, rudimentary or 0 in the staminate flower; style divided to the
base into 2 spreading stigmatic lobes as long as the petals. Fruit
glabrous, with broad nearly erect or slightly spreading wings 3/4'--7/8'
long, often rose-colored during the summer; seeds ovoid, bright
chestnut-brown, about 1/4' long.

A small tree, occasionally 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--12' in
diameter, small upright branches, and slender glabrous branchlets often
slightly many-angled, pale greenish brown when they first appear,
becoming bright red-brown during their first winter; often a shrub.
Winter-buds acute, 1/8' long, with bright red or occasionally yellow
scales, those of the inner ranks pale brown tinged with pink, tomentose
on the inner surface, becoming 1-1/2' long and narrow-spatulate. Bark of
the trunk thin, smooth, and dark reddish brown. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, light brown or often nearly white, with thick lighter
colored sapwood.

Distribution. Borders of mountain streams usually at elevations of
5000 deg.--6000 deg.; Rocky Mountains from Montana to Wyoming, the Black Hills
of South Dakota, Sioux County, Nebraska, Colorado, Utah, Nevada,
northern Arizona, and to the Sacramento Mountains, New Mexico; in
California from the Siskiyou Mountains along the Sierra Nevada to the
East Fork of the Kaweah River, Kern County, at altitudes of 5000 deg.--6000 deg.
at the north and of 8000 deg.--9000 deg. at the south. Passing into


                  Acer glabrum var. Douglasii Dippel.

                         _Acer Douglasii_ Hook.

[Illustration: Fig. 615]

Leaves ovate or oblong-ovate, slightly cordate by a wide shallow sinus,
truncate or rarely rounded at base, 3-lobed with acuminate lobes often
slightly divided into acuminate lobules, the terminal leaflet usually
ovate from a broad base, or occasionally gradually narrowed below and
rhombic in outline and sharply serrate to the base or nearly to the base
of the lobe with long-acuminate teeth pointing forward, dark green
above, paler and often glaucescent below, 3-1/2'--4' long and 3'--4'
wide, with 3 prominent nerves extending to the points of the lobes, and
slender veins; petioles glabrous, 1'--3-1/2' in length. Flowers as in
the species. Fruit with erect or nearly erect wings, 3/4'--1' long and
1/3'--1/2' wide.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg. high, with a short trunk 12'--18' in diameter,
small upright branches and slender bright red-brown branchlets.

Distribution. Coast of southern Alaska (head of Lynn Canal), southward
near the coast to Vancouver Island and western Washington, and eastward
on the high mountains of Washington to the Blue Mountains of eastern
Oregon, western Idaho and northern Montana; on Loomis Creek, Natrona
County, Wyoming.


                 2. Acer circinatum Pursh. Vine Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 616]

Leaves almost circular in outline, cordate at base by a broad shallow
sinus, or sometimes almost truncate, palmately 7--9-lobed occasionally
nearly to the middle, with acute lobes sharply and irregularly doubly
serrate, and conspicuously palmately nerved, with prominent veinlets,
when they unfold tinged with rose color, and puberulous, especially on
the lower surface and on the petioles, and at maturity glabrous with the
exception of tufts of pale hairs in the axils of the large veins, thin
and membranaceous, dark green above, pale below, and 2'--7' in diameter;
in the autumn turning orange and scarlet; petioles stout, grooved,
1'--2' in length, clasping the stem by their large base. Flowers
appearing when the leaves are about half grown, in loose 10--20-flowered
umbel-like corymbs pendent on long stems from the end of slender
2-leaved branchlets, the staminate and pistillate flowers produced
together; sepals oblong to obovate, acute, villose, purple or red, much
longer than the greenish white broad, cordate petals folded together at
apex; stamens 6-8, with slender filaments villose at base, exserted in
the staminate flower, much shorter than the petals in the pistillate
flower; ovary glabrous, with spreading lobes, in the staminate flower
reduced to a small point surrounded by a tuft of pale hairs; style
divided nearly to the base into long exserted stigmas. Fruit with thin
wings, 1-1/2' long, spreading almost at right angles, red or rose color
like the nutlets in early summer, ripening late in the autumn; seeds
smooth, pale chestnut-brown, 1/8'-1/4' long.

A tree, rarely 30 deg.--40 deg. high, often vine-like or prostrate, with a trunk
10'--12' in diameter, and glabrous pale green or reddish brown
branchlets frequently covered during their first winter with a glaucous
bloom, and occasionally marked by small lenticels; often a low
wide-spreading shrub. Winter-buds 1/8' long, rather obtuse, with thin
bright red outer scales rounded on the back, and obovate-spatulate inner
scales rounded at apex, contracted into a long narrow claw, bright
rose-colored and more or less pubescent, especially on the outer
surface, and when fully grown often 2' long and 1/4' broad. Bark of the
trunk thin, smooth, bright red-brown, marked by numerous shallow
fissures. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, not strong, light brown,
sometimes nearly white, with thick lighter colored sapwood; used for
fuel, the handles of axes and other tools, and by the Indians of the
northwest coast for the bows of their fishing-nets.

Distribution. Banks of streams; coast of British Columbia through
western Washington and Oregon to Mendocino County, and the canyon of the
upper Sacramento River, California; one of the most abundant of the
deciduous-leaved trees of western Washington and Oregon up to altitudes
of 4000 deg. above the sea, and of its largest size on the rich alluvial
soil of bottom-lands, its vine-like stems in such situations springing 4
or 5 together from the ground, spreading in wide curves and sending out
long slender branches rooting when they touch the ground and forming
impenetrable thickets of contorted and interlaced trunks, often many
acres in extent; in California smaller and less abundant, growing along
streams in the coniferous forest or rarely on dry ridges up to an
altitude of 4000 deg. in the northeastern part of the state.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in Europe, and in the
eastern states, and hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts.


                 3. Acer spicatum Lam. Mountain Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 617]

Leaves subcordate or sometimes truncate at base, conspicuously 3-nerved,
3 or slightly 5-lobed, with gradually narrowed pointed lobes, and
sharply and coarsely glandular-serrate, when they unfold puberulous on
the upper surface and densely tomentose on the lower surface, and at
maturity thin, 4'--5' long and broad; turning in the autumn to various
shades of orange and scarlet; petioles slender, enlarged at base, 2'--3'
in length, often becoming scarlet in summer. Flowers opening in June
after the leaves are fully grown, 1/4' diameter, on slender pedicels
1/2'--3/4' long, the pistillate toward the base and the staminate at the
apex of a narrow many-flowered long-stemmed upright slightly compound
pubescent raceme; calyx-lobes narrow-obovate, yellow, pubescent on the
outer surface, much shorter than the linear-spatulate pointed yellow
petals; stamens 7 or 8, inserted immediately under the ovary, with
slender glabrous filaments as long as the petals in the sterile flower,
about as long as the sepals in the pistillate flower, and glandular
anthers; ovary hoary-tomentose, reduced to a minute point surrounded by
a tuft of pale hairs in the staminate flower; style columnar, almost as
long as the petals, with short stigmatic lobes. Fruit fully grown and
bright red or yellow in July, turning brown late in the autumn, almost
glabrous, with more or less divergent wings about 1/2' long; seeds
smooth, dark red-brown, 1/8' long.

A bushy tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, small upright branches, and slender branchlets light gray and
pubescent when they first appear, becoming glabrous during the summer,
bright red during their first winter, gray or pale brown the following
season, and blotched or streaked with green toward the base; more often
a tall or low shrub. Winter-buds acute; the terminal 1/8' long, with
bright red outer scales more or less coated with hoary tomentum, those
of the inner ranks becoming at maturity 1' or more in length and then
lanceolate, pale and papery; axillary buds much smaller and glabrous or
puberulous. Bark of the trunk very thin, reddish brown, smooth or
slightly furrowed. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light brown tinged
with red, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Moist rocky hillsides usually in the shade of other trees,
and really arborescent only on the western slopes of the high mountains
of Tennessee and North Carolina; Newfoundland and Labrador to Hudson
Bay, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, and southward through the northern
states, and westward to Minnesota and northeastern Iowa, and along the
Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornament of parks and gardens in the
northern states.


          4. Acer pennsylvanicum L. Striped Maple. Moose Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 618]

Leaves rounded or cordate at base, palmately 3-nerved, 3-lobed at apex,
with short lobes contracted into a tapering serrate point, and finely
and sharply doubly serrate, when they unfold thin, pale rose color and
coated with ferrugineous pubescence, especially on the lower surface and
on the petioles, and at maturity glabrous with the exception of tufts of
ferrugineous hairs in the axils of the principal nerves on the two
surfaces, thin, pale green above, rather paler below, 5'--6' long and
4'--5' wide; turning in the autumn clear light yellow; petioles stout,
grooved, 1-1/2'--2' in length, with an enlarged base nearly encircling
the branch. Flowers bright canary-yellow, opening toward the end of May
or early in June when the leaves are nearly fully grown, on slender
pedicels 1/4'--1/2' long, in slender drooping long-stemmed racemes
4'--6' in length, the staminate and pistillate usually in different
racemes on the same plant; sepals linear-lanceolate to obovate, 1/4'
long and a little shorter and narrower than the obovate petals; stamens
7--8, shorter than the petals in the staminate flower, rudimentary in
the pistillate flower; ovary purplish brown, glabrous, in the staminate
flower reduced to a minute point; styles united nearly to the top, with
spreading recurved stigmas. Fruit in long drooping racemes, glabrous,
with thin spreading wings 3/4' long, and marked on one side of each
nutlet by a small cavity; seeds 1/4' long, dark red-brown, and slightly
rugose.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in diameter, small
upright branches, and slender smooth branchlets pale greenish yellow at
first, bright reddish brown during their first winter, and at the end of
two or three years striped like the trunk with broad pale lines; or
often much smaller and shrubby in habit. Winter-buds: the terminal
conspicuously stipitate, sometimes almost 1/2' long, much longer than
the axillary buds, covered by two thick bright red spatulate boat-shaped
scales prominently keeled on the back, the inner scales green and
foliaceous, becoming 1-1/2'--2' long, 1/2' wide, pubescent, and bright
yellow or rose color. Bark of the trunk 1/8'--1/4' thick, reddish brown,
marked longitudinally by broad pale stripes, and roughened by many
oblong horizontal excrescences. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light
brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood of 30-40 layers of annual
growth.

Distribution. Usually in the shade of other trees, often forming in
northern New England a large part of their shrubby undergrowth; shores
of Ha-Ha Bay, Quebec, westward along the shores of Lake Ontario and the
islands of Lake Huron to northern Wisconsin, and southward through the
Atlantic states and along the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia;
ascending to altitudes of 5000 deg.; common in the north Atlantic states,
especially in the interior and elevated regions; of its largest size on
the slopes of the Big Smoky Mountains, Tennessee, and of the Blue Ridge
in North and South Carolina.

Sometimes cultivated as an ornamental tree in the northern states, and
occasionally in Europe.


            5. Acer macrophyllum Pursh. Broad-leaved Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 619]

Leaves more or less cordate at the broad base, deeply 5-lobed by narrow
sinuses acute in the bottom, the lobes acute or acuminate, the terminal
lobe often 3-lobed, the others usually furnished with small lateral
lobules, the lower lobes much smaller than the others, prominently
3--5-nerved, puberulous when they unfold, especially on the upper
surface along the principal veins, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark
green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface,
8'--12' in diameter; turning in the autumn bright orange color before
falling; petioles stout, 10'--12' in length, with enlarged bases united
and encircling the stem and often furnished on the inside with small
tufts of white hairs. Flowers bright yellow, fragrant, 1/4' long, on
slender pubescent often branched pedicels 1/2'--3/4' in length, the
staminate and pistillate together in graceful pendulous slightly
puberulous racemes 4'--6' long, appearing in April and May after the
leaves are fully grown; sepals petaloid, obovate, obtuse and a little
longer and broader than the spatulate petals; stamens 9--10, with long
slender filaments hairy at base, exserted in the staminate flower and
included in the pistillate flower, and orange-colored anthers; ovary
hoary-tomentose, reduced in the staminate flower to a minute point;
styles united at base only; stigmas long and exserted. Fruit fully grown
by the 1st of July and ripening late in the autumn; nutlets covered with
long pale hairs, their wings 1-1/2' long, 1/2' wide, slightly divergent
and glabrous with the exception of a few hairs on the thickened edge;
seeds dark-colored, rugose and pitted, 1/4' long.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter,
stout often pendulous branches forming a compact handsome head, and
stout branchlets smooth and pale green at first, becoming bright green
or dark red in their first winter, covered more or less thickly with
small longitudinal white lenticels, and in their second summer gray or
grayish brown. Winter-buds obtuse; terminal 1/4' long, with short broad
slightly spreading dark red ciliate outer scales rounded on the back,
those of the inner ranks green and foliaceous, and at maturity 1-1/2'
long, colored and puberulous; axillary buds minute. Bark of the trunk
1/2'--3/4' thick, brown faintly tinged with red or bright reddish brown,
deeply furrowed and broken on the surface into small square plate-like
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained, rich brown tinged
with red, with thick lighter colored often nearly white sapwood of
60--80 layers of annual growth; more valuable than the wood produced by
other deciduous-leaved trees of western North America, and in Washington
and Oregon used in the interior finish of buildings, for furniture, and
for axe and broom-handles.

Distribution. Banks of streams or on rich bottom-lands or the rocky
slopes of mountain valleys; coast of Alaska south of latitude 55 deg. north,
southward along the islands and coast of British Columbia, through
Washington and Oregon west of the Cascade Mountains, and southward along
the coast ranges and the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada to the San
Bernardino Mountains, and to Hot Spring Valley, San Diego County,
California; on the Sierra Nevada usually between altitudes of 2000 deg. and
5000 deg. and on the southern mountains rarely above 3000 deg.; most abundant
and of its largest size in the humid climate and rich soil of the
bottom-lands of southwestern Oregon, forming extensive forests; in
California usually much smaller, especially on the coast ranges.

Generally planted in the Pacific States for shade and as a street tree,
and occasionally in the Eastern States as far north as Long Island, New
York, and in western Europe; not hardy in Massachusetts.


           6. Acer saccharum Marsh. Sugar Maple. Rock Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 620]

Leaves rarely in whorls of 3, heart-shaped by a broad sinus, truncate or
sometimes cuneate at base, 3--5-lobed, the lobes usually acute sparingly
sinuate-toothed usually 3-lobulate at apex, with 3--5 conspicuous
nerves, and reticulate veinlets, when they unfold coated below with pale
pubescence, glabrous or more or less pubescent on the nerves below (var.
_Schneckii_ Rehd.) and at maturity, 4'--5' in diameter, often rather
coriaceous, dark green and opaque on the upper surface, green or pale
(var. _glabrum_ Sarg.) on the lower surface; turning in the autumn
brilliant shades of deep red, scarlet and orange or clear yellow;
petioles slender, glabrous, 1-1/2--3' in length. Flowers appearing with
the leaves on slender more or less hairy pedicels 3/4'--3' long, in
nearly sessile umbel-like corymbs from terminal leaf-buds and lateral
leafless buds, the staminate and pistillate in the same or in separate
clusters on the same or on different trees; calyx broad-campanulate,
5-lobed by the partial union of the obtuse sepals, greenish yellow,
hairy on the outer surface; corolla 0; stamens 7--8, with slender
glabrous filaments twice as long as the calyx in the staminate flower
and much shorter in the pistillate flower; ovary obtusely lobed, pale
green, covered with long scattered hairs, in the staminate flower
reduced to a minute point; styles united at base only, with 2 long
exserted stigmatic lobes. Fruit ripening in the autumn, glabrous, with
broad thin and usually divergent wings 1/2'--1' long; seeds smooth,
bright red-brown, 1/4' long.

A tree, 100 deg.--120 deg. high, with a trunk often 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, rising
sometimes in the forest to the height of 60 deg.--70 deg. without branches, or
in open situations developing 8 deg.--10 deg. from the ground stout upright
branches forming while the tree is young a narrow egg-shaped head,
ultimately spreading into a broad round-topped dome often 70 deg.--80 deg.
across, and slender glabrous branchlets green at first, becoming reddish
brown by the end of their first season, lustrous, marked by numerous
large pale oblong lenticels, and in their second winter pale brown
tinged with red. Winter-buds acute, 1/4' long, with purple slightly
puberulous outer scales, and inner scales becoming 1-1/2' long,
narrow-obovate, short-pointed at apex, thin, pubescent, and bright
canary yellow. Bark of young stems and of large branches pale, smooth or
slightly fissured, becoming on large trunks 1/2'--3/4' thick and broken
into deep longitudinal furrows, the light gray-brown surface separating
into small plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, close-grained,
tough, light brown tinged with red, with thin sapwood of 30-40 layers of
annual growth; largely used for the interior finish of buildings,
especially for floors, in the manufacture of furniture, in turnery,
shipbuilding, for shoe-lasts and pegs, and largely as fuel. Accidental
forms with the grain curled and contorted, known as curly maple and
bird's-eye maple, are common and are highly prized in cabinet-making.
The ashes of the wood are rich in alkali and yield large quantities of
potash. Maple sugar is principally made from the sap of this tree.

Distribution. Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, westward to the Lake of the
Woods, Ontario, and southward through eastern Canada and the northern
states, and along the Appalachian Mountains to northern Georgia; in
central Alabama and Mississippi, and westward in the United States to
Minnesota, northeastern South Dakota (coulees of Little Minnesota River,
Roberts County), central and northwestern Iowa, eastern Kansas, central
Oklahoma, and eastern Louisiana; most abundant northward; ascending in
North Carolina the Alleghany Mountains to altitudes of 3000 deg.; the var.
_glabrum_ rare and local in the north from Prince Edwards Island and
Lake St. John, Quebec, to Iowa and southward to Pennsylvania, Ohio and
central Tennessee; more abundant southward; apparently the only form but
not common in South Carolina, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and
southern Arkansas; the var. _Schneckii_ with leaves glaucous or
glaucescent below and more or less densely pubescent with spreading
hairs, on the under side of the midrib and veins and on the petioles,
southern Indiana and Illinois to western Kentucky and western and middle
Tennessee, northwestern Georgia (near Rome, Floyd County), and to
eastern Missouri southward to Williamsville, Wayne County.

Commonly planted as a shade and ornamental tree in the northern states.

More distinct are the following varieties:


                   Acer saccharum var. Rugelii Rehd.

[Illustration: Fig. 621]

Leaves thick, 3'--5' long and 4'--6' wide, pale and glabrous below,
3-lobed by broad rounded sinuses, rounded or slightly cordate at base,
the lobes long-acuminate, usually entire, the middle lobe occasionally
slightly undulate, the lateral lobes spreading, sometimes furnished near
the base with a short acute lobule.

Distribution. Southeastern Ohio to western Pennsylvania (Kittaning,
Armstrong County) and eastern and middle Tennessee, and to southern
Ontario, the southern peninsula of Michigan, eastern and central
Indiana, southern Illinois, eastern Missouri and northwestern Arkansas
(Eureka Springs, Carroll County); rare and local in its extreme form;
its 3-lobed leaves sometimes appearing on upper branches of trees
bearing on lower branches leaves of the typical Sugar Maple.


                   Acer saccharum var. sinuosum Sarg.

                         _Acer sinuosum_ Rehd.

[Illustration: Fig. 622]

Leaves suborbicular, broader than long, 3--5-lobed with short
triangular-ovate to triangular-oblong obtuse lobes, entire or on
vigorous shoots occasionally dentate, usually broad-cordate at base,
often with the nerves of the two lateral lobes projecting into the broad
sinus and forming its base, when they unfold glabrous and purplish
above, loosely hairy below, soon glabrous, and at maturity dark
yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale,
reticulate-venulose and glabrous except in the axils of the principal
veins on the lower surface, 3--5-nerved, usually not more than 1-1/2'
long, occasionally up to 2-3/4' long and 3' wide; petioles slender,
glabrous, 1/2'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers appearing with the leaves, on
slender glabrous pedicels, 1/2'--1-1/4 long, in 3--8-flowered nearly
sessile corymbs; calyx broad-campanulate or cupulate, with short
semiorbicular lobes ciliate on the margins; petals 0; stamens usually 6,
with slender filaments longer than the calyx of the staminate flower;
style divided to below the middle, with two spreading stigmas. Fruit
glabrous, with long and broad almost horizontally spreading nutlets,
convex, smooth, pale yellow-brown, the wing curved upward.

A tree, rarely more than 20 deg. high with a short trunk 8'--10' in
diameter, small branches forming an open irregular head, and slender
glabrous branchlets light green above when they first appear, becoming
pale red-brown and marked by pale lenticels during their first season
and ultimately dull gray-brown. Bark of the trunk smooth, pale gray.
Winter-buds small, obtuse, covered with dark brown scales, those of the
inner ranks accrescent, linear-oblong, scarlet or pink, up to 1-1/8' in
length when fully grown.

Distribution. Edwards Plateau of western Texas, banks and bluffs of
Cibolo Creek, near Boerne, Kendall County, on the rocky banks of upper
Saco Creek, Bandera County, and at the base of a high limestone bluff
near Utopia, Uvalde County; rare and local.


                  7. Acer floridanum Pax. Sugar Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 623]

Leaves rounded, truncate or slightly cordate at the broad base,
3--5-lobed, with short obtuse or acute entire or lobulate lobes, when
they unfold sparingly hairy on the upper surface and hoary-tomentose on
the lower surface, and at maturity thin, dark green and lustrous above,
pale or glaucescent and pubescent below, 1-1/2'--3' in diameter, and
prominently 3--5-nerved, with stout spreading lateral veins and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning yellow and scarlet in the
autumn before falling; petioles slender, glabrous, or pubescent
generally becoming glabrous, 1-1/2'--3' in length, with an enlarged base
nearly encircling the branchlet. Flowers appearing with the leaves on
slender elongated sparingly hairy ultimately glabrous or
villose-tomentose (var. _villipes_ Rehd.) pedicels, in many-flowered
drooping nearly sessile corymbs; calyx campanulate, yellow, about 1/8'
long, persistent under the fruit, the short lobes ciliate on the margins
with long pale hairs; corolla 0. Fruit green, sparingly villose until
fully grown, usually becoming glabrous, with spreading occasionally
erect wings 3/8'--3/4' long; seeds smooth, bright red-brown, about 1/4'
long.

A tree, occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 3 deg. in diameter,
small erect and spreading branches, and slender glabrous or more or less
densely villose-tomentose (var. _villipes_ Rehdr.) branchlets, light
green when they first appear, becoming rather light red-brown during
their first season, and covered with minute pale lenticels; usually
smaller. Winter-buds obtuse, about 1/8' long, with dark chestnut-brown
obtuse scales and bright rose-colored linear-spatulate inner scales
often 1' long when fully grown. Bark of the trunk thin, smooth, pale,
becoming near the base of old trees thick, dark, and deeply furrowed.

Distribution. River banks and low wet woods, southeastern Virginia (near
McKinney, Dinwiddie County, _W. W. Ashe_), valley of the Roanoke River
near Weldon, Halifax County, North Carolina, and southward to southern
Georgia and western Florida to Lafayette County; near Selma, Dallas
County, Alabama; West Feliciana Parish and through western Louisiana to
eastern Texas (Harrison and St. Augustine Counties), and southern
Arkansas (Fulton, Hempstead County); the var. _fillipes_ near Raleigh,
Walker County, North Carolina, Calhoun Falls, Abbeville County, South
Carolina, Shell Bluff on the Savannah River, Burke County, Cuthbert,
Randolph County, and Columbus, Muscogee County, Georgia; River Junction,
Gadsden County, Florida, and on the San Luis Mountains, southern New
Mexico (_A. brachypterum_ Woot. & Stanl.).

Sometimes planted as a shade-tree; the prevailing tree in the streets
and squares of Raleigh, North Carolina.


               8. Acer grandidentatum Nutt. Sugar Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 624]

Leaves cordate or truncate at base, 3-lobed by broad shallow sinuses,
the lobes acute or obtuse, entire or slightly lobulate, sparingly hairy
on the upper surface and thickly coated with dense pale tomentum on the
lower surface when they unfold, and at maturity thick and firm, dark
green and lustrous above, pale and pubescent below, especially on the
stout nerves and veins, or rarely glabrous, 2'--5' in diameter; turning
in the autumn before falling yellow and scarlet; petioles stout, 1'--2'
in length, glabrous, often red after midsummer, encircling the branchlet
with their large base villose on the inner surface. Flowers appearing
with the leaves on long slender drooping villose pedicels, in
short-stalked corymbs; calyx campanulate, yellow, sparingly hairy with
long pale hairs, about 1/4' long, with broad rounded lobes, often
persistent under the fruit; corolla 0; stamens 7 or 8, much longer than
the calyx, in the pistillate flower shorter than the calyx; ovary
usually glabrous, with long spreading stigmatic lobes, rudimentary in
the staminate flower. Fruit often rose-colored at midsummer, green at
maturity, glabrous or rarely sparingly hairy, with spreading or erect
wings 1/2'--1' long; seeds smooth, light red-brown, about 1/4' long.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
stout usually erect branches, and slender glabrous bright red branchlets
marked by numerous small pale lenticels and nearly encircled by the
narrow leaf-scars, with conspicuous bands of long pale hairs in their
axils. Winter-buds acute or acuminate, about 1/16' long, bright
red-brown, with puberulous-ciliate outer scales and obovate apiculate
inner scales sometimes 1/2' long when fully grown. Bark of the trunk
thin, dark brown, separating on the surface into plate-like scales. Wood
heavy, hard, close-grained, bright brown or nearly white, with thick
sapwood.

Distribution. Banks of mountain streams usually at altitudes of
5000 deg.--6000 deg. above the sea; on the Salt River Mountains, western
Wyoming; valley of the Columbia River in northern Montana, southeastern
Idaho (Pocatello, Oneida County), Wasatch Mountains, Utah, mountains of
Arizona and of southern New Mexico; on the Guadalupe Mountains, western
Texas, and on the Wichita Mountains, southwestern Oklahoma (_G. W.
Stevens_); in Coahuila; rare and local.

Occasionally cultivated; hardy in the Arnold Arboretum.


                   9. Acer nigrum Michx. Black Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 625]

Leaves generally 3 or occasionally 5-lobed, with abruptly short-pointed
acute or acuminate lobes, undulate and narrowed from broad shallow
sinuses and rarely furnished with short lateral spreading lobules,
cordate at base with a broad sinus usually more or less closed by the
approximation or imbrication of the basal lobes, occasionally 3-lobed
with a broad long-acuminate nearly entire terminal lobe, and rounded or
slightly cordate at base (var. _Palmeri_ Sarg.), covered below when they
unfold with hoary tomentum and above with caducous pale hairs, and at
maturity thick and firm in texture, dull green on the upper surface,
yellow-green and soft-pubescent, especially along the yellow veins on
the lower surface, and 5'--6' long and wide, with drooping sides;
turning bright clear yellow in the autumn; petioles stout, tomentose or
pubescent, sometimes becoming glabrous at maturity, usually pendent,
3'--5' in length, much enlarged at base, frequently nearly inclosing the
buds, in falling leaving narrow scars almost encircling the branchlet
and furnished in their axils with tufts of long pale hairs; stipules
triangular and dentate or foliaceous, sessile or stipitate, oblong,
acute, tomentose or pubescent, sometimes slightly lobed, frequently
1-1/2' long. Flowers yellow, about 1/4' long, on slender hairy pedicels
2-1/2'--3' long, in many-flowered nearly sessile umbel-like corymbs, the
staminate and pistillate in separate or in the same cluster on the same
or on different trees; calyx broad-campanulate, 5-lobed by the partial
union of the sepals, pilose on the outer surface near the base; corolla
0; stamens 7 or 8, with slender glabrous filaments, in the staminate
flower nearly twice as long as the calyx and in the pistillate flower
shorter than the calyx; ovary obtusely lobed, pale green, covered with
long scattered hairs, minute in the sterile flower. Fruit glabrous, with
convergent or wide-spreading wings 1/2'--1' long; seeds smooth, bright
red-brown, 1/4' long.

A tree, sometimes 80 deg. high, with a trunk frequently 3 deg. in diameter,
stout spreading or often erect branches, and stout branchlets marked by
oblong pale lenticels, orange-green and pilose with scattered pale
caducous hairs when they appear, orange or orange-brown and lustrous
during their first year, becoming dull pale gray-brown the following
season. Winter-buds sessile, ovoid, acute, 1/8' long, with dark
red-brown acute scales hoary-pubescent on the outer surface and often
slightly ciliate on the margins, and yellow puberulous inner scales,
1/2'--1' long at maturity. Bark of young stems and of the branches thin,
smooth, pale gray, becoming on old trunks thick, deeply furrowed, and
sometimes almost black.

Distribution. Valley of the St. Lawrence River in the neighborhood of
Montreal, Quebec, southward to the valley of Cold River, New Hampshire,
through western Vermont and Massachusetts and northwestern Connecticut
(near Salisbury, Litchfield County), and westward through northern and
western New York, southern Ontario, Ohio, the southern peninsula of
Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, and Iowa to southeastern Minnesota,
northeastern South Dakota, western and southern Missouri, eastern
Kansas, and southward through western Pennsylvania, West Virginia and
eastern Kentucky; comparatively rare near Montreal and in New England,
more abundant farther west; almost entirely replacing _Acer saccharum_
in Iowa, and the only Sugar Maple of South Dakota; easily distinguished
in summer by its heavy drooping leaves, and at all seasons of the year
by the orange color of the branchlets; the var. _Palmeri_ in a single
grove at Tunnel Hill, Johnson County, Illinois; southern Indiana
(Shelby, Putnam and Lawrence Counties), and in Clark, Jackson and
Dunklin Counties, Missouri; rare and local.

Occasionally planted in the region where it grows naturally as a
shade-tree.


                10. Acer leucoderme Small. Sugar Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 626]

Leaves usually truncate or slightly cordate at base, more or less deeply
divided into 3--5 acute caudate-acuminate lobes coarsely and sinuately
dentate or undulate, when they unfold coated below with long matted pale
caducous hairs, and at maturity thin, dark yellow-green above, bright
yellow-green and pilose-pubescent below, 2'--3-1/2' in diameter; often
turning in the autumn bright scarlet on the upper surface before
falling; petioles slender, glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers
yellow, about 1/8' long, on slender, glabrous pedicels, in nearly
sessile clusters; calyx campanulate, glabrous or slightly villose, with
rounded ciliate lobes; corolla 0; stamens 7 or 8; filaments villose,
longer than the calyx, much shorter than the calyx in the pistillate
flower; ovary villose; style elongated, with short spreading lobes.
Fruit villose, with long scattered pale hairs until nearly grown,
becoming glabrous at maturity, the wings wide-spreading or divergent,
1/2'--3/4' long; seeds smooth, light red-brown, about 1/4' long.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk a foot in diameter,
occasionally 40 deg. high, with a trunk 18'--20' in diameter, short slender
branches forming a rather compact round-topped head, and slender
glabrous branchlets dark green when they first appear, becoming bright
red-brown and lustrous during their first summer, and marked by numerous
small oblong pale lenticels, gradually growing darker in their second
year and finally light gray-green. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, dark brown,
glabrous, rather more than 1/16' long, the inner scales becoming bright
crimson and very conspicuous when the tree is in flower. Bark of young
stems and large branches close, light gray or grayish brown, becoming
near the base of old trees dark brown or often nearly black and broken
by deep furrows into narrow ridges covered by closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Banks of streams, rocky gorges, and woods in moist soil;
valley of the Yadkin River, Stanley County, North Carolina; southeastern
Tennessee (Polk County); valley of the Savannah River (Abbeville County,
South Carolina, and Richmond County, Georgia) to central and
northwestern Georgia (near Rome, Floyd County, and Walker County) and to
the valley of the Chattahoochee River to Muscogee County; northern and
central Alabama; western Louisiana (Natchitoches and Sabine Parishes);
southern Arkansas (Baker Springs, Howard County); rare and local; most
abundant in northwestern and central Georgia and northern Alabama.

Occasionally planted as a street tree in the towns of northern Georgia
and Alabama; hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts.


           11. Acer saccharinum L. Silver Maple. Soft Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 627]

Leaves truncate or somewhat cordate at base, deeply 5-lobed by narrow
sinuses, with acute irregularly and remotely dentate lobes, the middle
lobe often 3-lobed, 6'--7' long and nearly as broad, thin, bright pale
green above, silvery white and at first slightly hairy below, especially
in the axils of the primary veins; turning pale yellow in the autumn
before falling; petioles slender, drooping, bright red, 4'--5' in
length. Flowers greenish yellow, opening during the first warm days of
the late winter or early spring long before the appearance of the
leaves, on short pedicels, in sessile axillary fascicles on shoots of
the previous year, or on short spur-like branchlets developed the year
before from wood of the preceding season, the staminate and pistillate
in separate clusters, on the same or on different trees, and produced
from clustered obtuse buds covered with thick ovate pubescent red and
green scales ciliate on the margins with a thick fringe of long rufous
hairs; calyx slightly 5-lobed, more or less pubescent on the outer
surface, long and narrow in the staminate and short and broad in the
pistillate flower; corolla 0; stamens 3--7, with slender filaments,
three times as long as the calyx of the staminate flower and about as
long as the calyx of the pistillate flower; ovary covered, like the
young fruit, with a thick coat of pubescence, rudimentary in the sterile
flower; styles united at base only, with long exserted stigmatic lobes.
Fruit ripening in April and May when the leaves are nearly grown, on
slender drooping pedicels, 1-1/2'--2' long, glabrous, 1-1/2' to nearly
3' long, with thin almost straight conspicuously falcate divergent wings
sometimes 3/4' broad, prominently reticulate-veined and pale
chestnut-brown or rarely bright red; seeds 1/2' long, with a pale
reddish brown wrinkled coat, germinating as soon as they fall to the
ground, and producing plants with several pairs of leaves before the end
of the summer.

A tree, 90 deg.--120 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, generally
dividing 10 deg.--15 deg. from the ground into 3 or 4 stout upright secondary
stems destitute of branches for a considerable length, brittle pendulous
branchlets light green and covered with lenticels when they first
appear, soon becoming darker, bright chestnut-brown, smooth and lustrous
in the autumn and winter of their first year, and in their second season
pale rose color or gray faintly tinged with red. Winter-buds 1/8' long,
with thick ovate bright red outer scales rounded on the back, minutely
apiculate, and ciliate on the margins, and acute inner scales pubescent
on the inner surface, becoming pale green or yellow and about 1' long.
Bark of young stems and large branches smooth and gray faintly tinged
with red, becoming on old trunks 1/2'--3/4' thick, reddish brown and
more or less furrowed, the surface separating into large thin scales.
Wood hard, strong, close-grained, easily worked, rather brittle, pale
brown, with thick sapwood of 40--50 layers of annual growth; now
sometimes used for flooring and in the manufacture of furniture. Sugar
is occasionally made from the sap.

Distribution. Sandy banks of streams, rarely in deep often submerged
swamps; valley of the St. John's River (near Fredericton), New
Brunswick, to that of the St. Lawrence in Quebec, and southward through
western Vermont and central Massachusetts to western Florida, Alabama,
and south central Mississippi, and westward through Ontario, New York,
Ohio, the southern peninsula of Michigan and southern Indiana to
Minnesota, southeastern South Dakota, and eastern Nebraska, and through
Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, eastern Kansas, northwestern Arkansas,
and eastern Oklahoma; in western Louisiana (swamp near Alexandria,
Rapides Parish); rare in the immediate neighborhood of the Atlantic
coast and on the high Appalachian Mountains; probably of its largest
size in the valley of the lower Ohio River.

Often cultivated with several forms differing in habit and in the lobing
of the leaves; fast-growing, and largely planted in the eastern states
as a park and street tree.


              12. Acer rubrum L. Red Maple. Scarlet Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 628]

Leaves truncate, more or less cordate by a broad shallow sinus, rounded
or cuneate at base, 3--5-lobed by acute sinuses, with irregularly doubly
serrate or toothed lobes, the middle lobe often longer than the others,
when they unfold pubescent especially beneath, and at maturity light
green and glabrous on the upper surface and white or glaucescent and
more or less pubescent or densely tomentose (var. _tomentosum_ Kirch.
[var. _rubrocarpum_ Detmars]) on the lower surface, particularly along
the principal veins, chartaceous or sometimes almost coriaceous,
1-1/2'--6' long and rather longer than broad; turning in the early
autumn to brilliant shades of scarlet and orange, or clear bright
yellow; petioles slender, glabrous or puberulous, red or green, 2'--4'
in length. Flowers opening in March and April before the appearance of
the leaves, bright scarlet, dull yellowish red or sometimes yellow (var.
_pallidiflorum_ Pax.), on long slender pedicels, in few-flowered
fascicles on branches of the previous year, from clustered obtuse buds,
the staminate and pistillate flowers in separate clusters on the same or
on different trees; sepals oblong, obtuse, as long as and broader than
the oblong or linear petals; stamens 5--8, scarlet or yellow, with
slender filaments exserted in the staminate and included in the
pistillate flower; ovary glabrous on a narrow slightly lobed glandular
disk; styles slightly united above the base, with long exserted
stigmatic lobes. Fruit ripening in the spring or early summer on
drooping stems 3'--4' long, scarlet, dark red or brown or yellow, with
thin erect wings, convergent at first, divergent at maturity, 1/2'--1'
long and 1/4'--1/2' wide; seeds dark red, with a rugose coat, 1/4' long,
germinating as soon as it falls to the ground.

A tree, 80 deg.--120 deg. high, with a tall trunk 3 deg.--4-1/2 deg. in diameter,
upright branches usually forming a rather narrow head, and branchlets
green or dark red when they first appear, becoming dark or bright red
and lustrous at the end of their first summer and marked by numerous
longitudinal white lenticels, and gray faintly tinged with red in their
second year. Winter-buds obtuse, 1/8' long, with thick dark red outer
scales, rounded on the back and ciliate on the margins, and inner scales
becoming 3/4'--1' long, narrow-oblong, rounded at apex and bright
scarlet. Bark of young stems and of the branches smooth and light gray,
becoming on old trunks 1/4'--1/2' thick, dark gray, and divided by
longitudinal ridges separating on the surface into large plate-like
scales. Wood very heavy, close-grained, not strong, light brown often
slightly tinged with red, with thick rather lighter colored sapwood;
used in large quantities in the manufacture of chairs and other
furniture, in turnery, for wooden ware and gun-stocks.

Distribution. Borders of streams, wet swamps, upland forests and rarely
on dry rocky hillsides and sand dunes; Newfoundland, southward to
southern Florida (banks of the Miami River, Dade County, on the east
coast and to Cypress swamps east of Everglade, Lee County, on the west
coast) and westward through Quebec to latitude 49 deg. north, and Ontario to
the sandy shores of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (Brevort, Mackinac
County, on Lake Michigan and White Fish Point, Chippewa County, on Lake
Superior), western Wisconsin, northwestern Minnesota (Buckeye County),
southeastern Iowa (Johnson County), central Oklahoma, and the valley of
the Trinity River, Texas; on the mountains of North Carolina to
altitudes of 4500 deg.; one of the commonest and most generally distributed
trees of eastern North America, ranging between more degrees of latitude
than any other American tree; most abundant southward especially in the
valley of the Mississippi River, and of its largest size in the river
swamps of the lower Ohio and its tributaries; in the north often
covering with small trees low wet swamps; on the sand dunes and ridges
of northern Michigan reduced to a low shrub. On var. _tomentosum_ leaves
usually 5-lobed, cordate or rarely rounded at base, with glabrous or
pubescent petioles and branchlets; widely distributed but rare; near
Cranberry Island, Buckeye Lake, Licking County, Ohio; Biltmore, Buncombe
County, North Carolina; neighborhood of Augusta, Richmond County,
Georgia; top of Flagstaff Mountain, Barclay, Talladega County, Alabama;
Panther Burn, Sharkey County, Mississippi; near Little Rock, Pulaski
County, Arkansas; near Page, Leflore County, Oklahoma, and Larissa,
Cherokee County, Texas; connected by trees of this variety with
pubescent branchlets and winter-buds, and broad-ovate 3--5-lobed
slightly cordate leaves and pubescent petioles with


                   Acer rubrum var. Drummondii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 629]

Leaves often broader than long, usually 5-lobed, cordate or truncate at
base, 3'--6' long and wide, with a stout midrib and veins, until nearly
fully grown covered above with scattered hairs and clothed below with
thick snow-white tomentum, and more or less pubescent during the season;
petioles stout, hoary-tomentose, 1-1/4'--4' in length, becoming nearly
glabrous in the autumn. Flowers bright scarlet. Fruit ripening with or
before the unfolding of the leaves late in March or in April, bright
scarlet, with convergent wings 1-1/4'--2-1/2' long and 1/2'--3/4' wide.

A tree, usually not more than 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with small erect branches
forming a narrow head and slender branchlets coated when they first
appear with matted pale hairs, becoming glabrous and dark reddish brown
in their second season.

Distribution. Deep swamps, eastern Louisiana to the valley of the Neches
River (Beaumont, Jefferson County, and Concord, Hardin County), eastern
Texas and northward through southern and eastern Arkansas to western
Mississippi, western Tennessee and Kentucky, southeastern Missouri
(Butler, Stoddard, Dunklin and Mississippi Counties), southern Illinois
(Gallatin, Pulaski and Richland Counties), and southwestern Indiana
(swamp eighteen miles west of Decker, Knox County, _C. C. Deam_). A form
growing at Hattiesburg, Forrest County, Mississippi, at Glen Gordon,
Covington, St. Tammany Parish, and Chopin, Natchitoches Parish,
Louisiana, near Beaumont, Jefferson County, Texas, and at Poplar Bluff,
Butler County, Missouri, with 3-lobed leaves rounded at base (f.
_rotundatum_ Sarg.) shows in the shape of the leaves a transition from
the var. _Drummondii_ to


               Acer rubrum var. tridens Wood. Red Maple.

                 _Acer carolinianum_ Britt., not Walt.

[Illustration: Fig. 630]

Leaves obovate, usually narrowed from above the middle to the rounded or
rarely cuneate base, 3-lobed at apex, with acute or acuminate erect or
slightly spreading lobes, simple or furnished with short lateral
secondary lobes, remotely serrate except toward the base, with incurved
glandular teeth, and often ovate by the suppression of the lateral lobes
and acute or acuminate, thick and firm in texture, glaucous and usually
pubescent or rarely tomentose or tomentulose below, 2'--3' long and
1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; petioles slender, glabrous or pubescent. Flowers
sometimes tawny yellow. Fruit usually much smaller and rarely also
yellow.

Distribution. Usually with the species; Massachusetts and central New
York, southward usually in the coast region and the middle districts to
western Florida, along the Gulf coast to the valley of the Trinity
River, Texas, and through western Louisiana, and Arkansas to
northeastern Mississippi, southern Missouri, western Tennessee and
Kentucky and southern Illinois; in North Carolina occasionally ascending
on the Appalachian Mountains to altitudes of 3000 deg.; often the prevailing
Red Maple in southern Missouri and northwestern Louisiana; in the swamps
of western Florida and southwestern Georgia the form with leaves densely
tomentose below and pubescent petioles prevails.


            13. Acer Negundo L. Box Elder. Ash-leaved Maple.

[Illustration: Fig. 631]

Leaves usually 3, rarely 5--7-foliolate, with a slender glabrous petiole
2'--3' in length, the enlarged base often furnished with a minute rim of
deciduous white hairs, and in falling leaving a large conspicuous scar
surrounding the stem; leaflets ovate to elliptic or obovate, acuminate,
and often long-pointed at apex, rounded or cuneate and often
unsymmetrical at base, coarsely and irregularly serrate usually only
above the middle or nearly entire, and occasionally slightly and
irregularly lobulate; when they unfold more or less hoary-tomentose
below and slightly pubescent above, and at maturity thin, light green,
paler on the lower than on the upper surface, glabrous above,
villose-pubescent along the under side of the midrib and veins, often
furnished with conspicuous tufts of axillary hairs, otherwise glabrous
or slightly pubescent below, 2-1/2'--4' long, and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide,
on slender glabrous petiolules, that of the terminal leaflet 3/4'--1'
long and much longer than those of the smaller lateral leaflets. Flowers
on slender glabrous or rarely hairy pedicels, minute, apetalous,
yellow-green, the staminate and pistillate on separate trees, expanding
just before or with the leaves from buds developed in the axils of the
last leaves of the previous year, the staminate fascicled, the
pistillate in narrow drooping racemes, sometimes furnished near the base
with one or two smaller 3-lobed or rarely elliptic leaves; calyx
5-lobed, hairy, campanulate in the staminate flower, much smaller in the
pistillate flower and divided to the base into 5 narrow sepals; corolla
0; stamens 4--6, with slender exserted hairy filaments and long linear
anthers narrowed and apiculate at apex, 0 in the pistillate flower;
ovary on a narrow rudimentary disk, pubescent, only partly inclosed by
the calyx; style separating from the base into 2 long stigmatic lobes.
Fruit attaining nearly its full size in summer, pendent on glabrous
stems 1'--2' long, in graceful racemes 6'--8' in length, ripening in the
autumn, deciduous from the stems persistent on the branches until the
following spring, 1-1/2'--2' long, with narrow acute pubescent nutlets
diverging at an acute angle and constricted below into a stipe-like
base, and thin reticulate straight or falcate wings undulate toward the
apex; seeds narrowed at the ends, smooth, bright red-brown, 1/2' long.

A tree 50 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, dividing near the
ground into a number of stout wide-spreading or erect branches, and
slender pale green lustrous glabrous branchlets. Winter-buds terminal
acute, 1/8' long, rather longer than the obtuse lateral buds, the scales
tomentose, those of the inner pairs accrescent, becoming 1' long at
maturity, deciduous, leaving conspicuous scars visible at the base of
the branchlet for two or three years. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/2'
thick, pale gray or light brown and deeply divided into broad rounded
ridges separating on the surface into short thick scales. Wood light,
soft, close-grained, not strong, creamy white, with thick hardly
distinguishable sapwood; occasionally manufactured into cheap furniture,
and sometimes used for the interior finish of houses, for wooden ware,
cooperage, and paper pulp. Small quantities of maple sugar are
occasionally made from this tree.

Distribution. Banks of streams and lakes, and the borders of swamps;
western Vermont, western Massachusetts and Connecticut, central New York
and southwestern Ontario, and southward to west-central Florida
(Hernando County) and westward to Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, Missouri,
eastern Kansas, Arkansas, eastern Oklahoma, western Louisiana, and
eastern and southern Texas to the valley of the lower Rio Blanco.

Often planted in the United States, especially in the western states and
in eastern Canada, and in western and northern Europe, especially the
varieties with variegated leaves.

Passing into the following varieties:

Var. violaceum Kirch., with slender pale or bluish violet glabrous
branchlets covered with a glaucous bloom and rather larger winter-buds.
Leaves 3--11, usually 3--7-foliolulate, the leaflets slightly thicker,
lanceolate to oblong-ovate or obovate, often entire or irregularly
dentate, occasionally lobed, the terminal leaflet sometimes 3-lobed,
usually pubescent and furnished with tufts of axillary hairs on the
lower surface. Fruit glabrous, usually constricted at the base. Western
Massachusetts through Ohio to northern Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa and
South Dakota, and to northern and southwestern Missouri; in Nez Perces
County, Idaho.

Var. texanum Pax., with branchlets covered with pale tomentum. Leaves
3-foliate, the leaflets ovate, or the terminal obovate, acuminate,
short-pointed at apex, rounded or cuneate at base, coarsely serrate
above the middle or entire, only slightly and irregularly lobed, early
in the season villose along the midrib and veins above and thickly
coated below with matted pale hairs, and at maturity nearly glabrous on
the upper surface and covered below with loose pubescence, 3'--4' long
and 2'--3' wide. Fruit puberulous, constricted into a short stipe-like
base. Western and southwestern Missouri, southeastern Kansas, Arkansas,
Oklahoma and eastern Texas to the valley of the San Antonio River.
Passing into forma _latifolia_ Sarg. differing only in its glabrous
branchlets, and distributed from eastern Texas through Louisiana to
western Mississippi, western North Carolina, Virginia and southern Ohio.

Var. interior Sarg., with branchlets covered with close pale pubescence,
or rarely nearly glabrous. Leaves trifoliate, with puberulous petioles,
rachis and petiolules, the long-stalked leaflets ovate to lanceolate, or
the terminal sometimes obovate, acuminate and long-pointed at apex,
cuneate, rounded or cordate at base, coarsely serrate, sometimes
distinctly 3-lobed at base, glabrous or villose on the midrib below, or
in Arizona sometimes sparingly pubescent on the lower surface, 3'--4'
long and 1-1/2'--4' wide. Fruit glabrous, not at all, slightly or at the
north conspicuously constricted at the base. Southern Manitoba,
Saskatchewan and Alberta to Wyoming, and through the mountain regions of
Colorado and Utah to New Mexico and Arizona.

Var. arizonicum Sarg., with glabrous branchlets thickly covered with a
glaucous bloom. Leaves thin, 3-foliolulate; petioles slender, glabrous,
1-3/4'--3' long, often turning bright red late in summer; leaflets
oblong-ovate to rhombic, acuminate and long-pointed at apex, rounded or
cuneate at base, coarsely serrate, often slightly lobed near the middle,
glabrous with the exception of conspicuous tufts of axillary hairs,
2-1/2'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide; petiolules slender, glabrous, usually
bright red, that of the terminal leaflet 3/4'--1' long, the others not
more than 1/8' in length. Fruit in glabrous racemes 3' or 4' long, the
body glabrous, spreading, not constricted at base. A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg.
high. Bark fissured. Mountain canyons, central and southern Arizona up to
8000 deg. altitude, and in Socorro County, New Mexico. More distinct is


                  Acer Negundo var. californicum Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 632]

Leaves trifoliate with tomentose or nearly glabrous rachis and
petiolules; leaflets oblong-ovate to rhombic, acuminate and long-pointed
at apex, cuneate or unsymmetrically rounded at base, coarsely serrate
above the middle, or nearly entire, when they unfold hoary-tomentose
below and densely pubescent above, occasionally deeply lobed, glabrous
on the upper surface except along the midrib and veins, thickly coated
on the lower surface with matted pale hairs and furnished with large
axillary tufts. Fruit on pubescent pedicels, puberulous or nearly
glabrous, not constricted or rarely slightly constricted at base.

A tree, 20 deg.--50 deg. high, with dark bark, hoary-tomentose branchlets and
winter-buds.

Distribution. California, valley of the lower Sacramento River and the
interior valleys of the coast ranges from the Bay of San Francisco to
Santa Barbara County and in elevated canyons on the western slopes of the
San Bernardino Mountains; widely distributed but nowhere abundant.

Occasionally planted in California.




                        XXXVI. HIPPOCASTANACEAE.


Trees or rarely shrubs, with stout terete branchlets conspicuously
marked by triangular leaf-scars, fetid bark, thick fleshy roots, and
large scaly winter-buds, the inner scales accrescent with the young
shoots and often brightly colored. Leaves opposite, digitately compound,
without stipules, deciduous; leaflets 3--9, lanceolate or ovate,
serrate, pinnately veined. Flowers polygamo-monoecious, showy, white,
red, or pale yellow, on stout jointed pedicels from the axils of minute
caducous bracts, racemose or nearly unilateral on the branches of large
terminal thyrsi or panicles, appearing later than the leaves, only those
near the base of the branches of the inflorescence perfect and fertile;
calyx 5 or rarely 2-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud, unequal,
campanulate or tubular, the lobes imbricated in the bud, mostly oblique
or posteriorly gibbous at base; disk hypogynous, annular, depressed,
lobed, more or less gibbous posteriorly; petals 4 or 5, imbricated in
the bud, alternate with the lobes of the calyx, deciduous, the anterior
petal often abortive, unguiculate, the margins of the claw commonly
involute; stamens 6--8, rarely 5, generally 7, inserted on the disk,
free, unequal; filaments filiform; anthers ellipsoid,
glandular-apiculate, attached on the back below the middle, introrse,
2-celled, the contiguous cells opening longitudinally; ovary sessile,
oblong or lanceolate, 3-celled, echinate or glabrous, rudimentary in the
staminate flower; style slender, elongated, generally more or less
curved; stigma terminal, entire, mostly acute; ovules 2 in each cell,
borne on the middle of its inner angle, amphitropous, the upper
ascending, the micropyle inferior, the lower pendulous, the micropyle
superior. Fruit an echinate or smooth coriaceous capsule, 3-celled and
loculicidally 3-valved, the cells 1-seeded by abortion, often by
suppression 1 or 2-celled, and then 1 or 2-seeded, the remnants of the
abortive cells and seeds commonly visible at its maturity. Seeds without
albumen, round when one is developed, or, when more than one, flattened
by mutual pressure; seed-coat coriaceous, dark chestnut-brown or pale
orange-brown, smooth and lustrous, with a broad opaque light-colored
hilum; embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons very thick and
fleshy, often conferruminate, unequal, incurved on the short conic
radicle, remaining under ground in germination; plumule conspicuously
2-leaved.

The Horsechestnut family is composed of the widely distributed genus
Aesculus and of Billia Peyr., a genus of two species of Mexican and
Central American trees, differing from Aesculus in its 3-foliolate
leaves.




                             1. AESCULUS L.


Characters of the family; leaves 5--9-foliolate.

Aesculus with fifteen or sixteen species, is represented in the floras
of the three continents of the northern hemisphere and is most abundant
in the southeastern United States. It produces soft straight-grained
light-colored wood and bitter and astringent bark. The seeds contain a
bitter principle, aesculin. _Aesculus Hippocastanum_ L., of the
mountains of Greece, the common Horsechestnut of gardens, is largely
planted as an ornamental tree in all countries with temperate climates,
and now occasionally grows spontaneously in the eastern states.

The generic name is the classical name of an Oak-tree.


        CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF NORTH AMERICA.

  Winter-buds without a resinous covering. Pavia.
    Calyx campanulate (_occasionally tubular in 3_); margins of the
          petals ciliate, eglandular; flowers usually yellow. Octandrae.
      Fruit covered with prickles; flowers yellow; petals nearly equal
            in length, shorter than the stamens.
                                                    1. A. glabra (A, C).
      Fruit without prickles; flowers yellow or red; petals unequal in
            length, longer than the stamens.
        Pedicels and calyx glandular-villose.
                                                  2. A. octandra (A, C).
        Pedicels and calyx without glandular hairs.
                                                    3. A. georgiana (C).
    Calyx tubular; margins of the unequal petals without hairs,
          glandular; fruit without prickles. Eupaviae.
      Lower surface of the leaves glabrous or slightly pubescent along
            the midrib; flowers red; seeds dark chestnut-brown.
                                                        4. A. Pavia (C).
      Lower surface of the leaves tomentose or pubescent; flowers red
            and yellow, red, or in one form yellow; seed light
            yellow-brown.
                                                     5. A. discolor (C).
  Winter-buds resinous; petals nearly equal in length, shorter than the
        stamens; fruit without prickles. Calothyrsus.
                                                  6. A. californica (G).


         1. Aesculus glabra Willd. Ohio Buckeye. Fetid Buckeye.

[Illustration: Fig. 633]

Leaves with a slender petiole 4'--6' long and enlarged at the end, a
rachis often furnished on the upper side with clusters of dark brown
chaff-like scales surrounding the base of the petiolules, and 5 rarely 7
(var. _Buckleyi_ Sarg.) oval-oblong or obovate acuminate leaflets
gradually narrowed to the elongated entire base, finely and unequally
serrate above, at first sessile, becoming slightly petiolulate at
maturity, covered on the lower surface like the petioles when they first
appear with floccose deciduous hairs most abundant on the midrib and
veins, and at maturity glabrous with the exception of a few hairs along
the under side of the conspicuous yellow midrib and in the axils of the
principal veins, or rarely covered below with close dense pubescence
persistent during the season (var. _pallida_, Kirch.); yellow-green,
paler on the lower than on the upper surface, 4'--6' long and
1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; turning yellow in the autumn before falling.
Flowers pale yellow-green, mostly unilateral, 1/2'--1-1/2' long or more
than twice as long as the pedicels, appearing in April and May in
clusters 5'--6' long and 2'--3' wide, and more or less densely covered
with pubescence, with short usually 4--6-flowered branches; calyx
campanulate; petals nearly equal, puberulous, the thin limb about twice
as long as the claw, in the lateral pair broad-ovate or oblong, and in
the superior pair oblong-spatulate, much narrower, sometimes marked with
red stripes; stamens usually 7, with long exserted curved pubescent
filaments and orange-colored slightly hairy anthers; ovary pubescent,
covered with long slender deciduous prickles thickened and tubercle-like
at base. Fruit on a stout stem 1/2'--1' long, ovoid or irregularly
obovoid, pale brown, 1'--2' long, with thin or sometimes thick valves,
roughened by the enlarged persistent bases of the prickles of the ovary;
seeds 1'--1-1/2' broad.

A tree, occasionally 70 deg. high, with a trunk rarely 2 deg. in diameter, small
spreading branches, and branchlets orange-brown and covered at first
with short fine pubescence, soon glabrous, reddish brown, and marked by
scattered orange-colored lenticels; usually much smaller, and rarely
more than 30 deg. high. Winter-buds 2/3' long, acuminate, with thin nearly
triangular pale brown scales, the outer bright red on the inner surface
toward the base, those of the inner pair strap-shaped, prominently
keeled on the back, minutely apiculate and slightly ciliate along the
margins, and at maturity 1-1/2'--2' long and bright yellow. Bark of
young stems and of the branches dark brown and scaly, becoming on old
trees 3/4' thick, ashy gray, densely furrowed, and broken into thick
plates roughened on the surface by numerous small scales. Wood light,
soft, close-grained, not strong, often blemished by dark lines of decay,
nearly white, with thin dark-colored sapwood of 10--12 layers of annual
growth; used in the manufacture of artificial limbs, wooden ware, wooden
hats, and paper pulp; occasionally sawed into lumber. An extract of the
bark has been used as an irritant of the cerebro-spinal system.

Distribution. River-bottoms and the banks of streams in rich moist soil;
western slopes of the Alleghany Mountains, western and southwestern
Pennsylvania to northern Alabama, and westward to central and southern
Iowa, southeastern Nebraska, northern and central Missouri and
northeastern Kansas; nowhere abundant; most common and of its largest
size in the valley of the Tennessee River in Tennessee and northern
Alabama.

A shrubby form (var. _micrantha_ Sarg.) with flowers not more than 1/2'
long near Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas. In southern Missouri,
Arkansas and probably Oklahoma _Aesculus glabra_ is replaced by the var.
_leucodermis_ Sarg. with glabrous leaves pale green or glaucescent
below. A tree occasionally 60 deg. high, well distinguished from the type by
the smooth pale nearly white bark of the trunk and large branches,
becoming on old trunks light brown and separating into oblong flakes,
and by its later flowers; the var. _pallida_ in Iowa, Missouri and
Arkansas; the var. _Buckleyi_ in Jackson County, Missouri, eastern
Kansas, Ohio and Mississippi.

The Ohio Buckeye is occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in
the eastern United States and Europe; hardy as far north as eastern
Massachusetts.

x _Aesculus Bushii_ Schn., probably a hybrid of _Aesculus discolor_ var.
_mollis_ Sarg. and _Aesculus glabra_ var. _leucodermis_ Sarg., has been
found in the neighborhood of Fulton, Hempstead County, Arkansas; and
what is evidently a hybrid of _Aesculus discolor_ var. _mollis_ and the
typical form of _Aesculus glabra_ occurs near Starkville, Oktibbeha
County, Mississippi.

x _Aesculus mississippiensis_ Sarg., a probable hybrid between _Aesculus
glabra_ and _Aesculus Pavia_ with characters intermediate between those
of its supposed parents, occurs near Brookville, Noxubee County,
Mississippi. The mingling of a species of the Octandrae and of the
Eupaviae in these hybrids of Aesculus is shown by the presence of both
hairs and glands on the margins of the petals.


               2. Aesculus octandra Marsh. Sweet Buckeye.

[Illustration: Fig. 634]

Leaves with slender or slightly pubescent petioles 4'--6' long, and 5--7
elliptic or obovate-oblong leaflets, acuminate and usually abruptly
long-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, sharply
and equally serrate, glabrous above except on the midrib and veins
sometimes clothed with reddish brown pubescence, when they unfold more
or less canescent-pubescent on the lower surface, becoming glabrous at
maturity, with the exception of a few pale or rufous hairs along the
stout midrib and in the axils of the principal veins, dark yellow-green,
duller on the lower than on the upper surface, 4'--6' long, and
1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; petiolules 1/12'--1/2' in length; turning yellow in
the autumn before falling. Flowers opening in early spring when the
leaves are about half grown, 1'--1-1/2' long, pale or dark yellow,
rarely red, pink or cream-colored (var. _virginica_ Sarg.), on short
glandular-villose pedicels mostly unilateral on the branches of the
pubescent clusters 5'--7' in length; calyx campanulate,
glandular-villose; petals connivent, very unequal, puberulent, the claws
villose within, limb of the superior pair spatulate, minute, the long
claws exceeding the lobes of the calyx, those of the lateral pair
obovate or nearly round and subcordate at base; stamens usually 7,
rather shorter than the petals, with straight or inclining subulate
villose filaments; ovary pubescent. Fruit 2'--3' long, generally
2-seeded, with thin smooth or slightly pitted pale brown valves; seeds
1-1/2' to nearly 2' wide.

A tree, sometimes 90 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 2-1/2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, small rather pendulous branches, and glabrous or nearly
glabrous branchlets orange-brown when they first appear, becoming in
their second year pale brown and marked by numerous irregularly
developed lenticels. Winter-buds 2/3' long, rather obtuse, with
broad-ovate pale brown outer scales rounded on the back, minutely
apiculate, ciliate, and slightly covered with a glaucous bloom, the
inner scales becoming sometimes 2' long, bright yellow or occasionally
scarlet. Bark of the trunk about 3/4' thick, dark brown, divided by
shallow fissures and separating on the surface into small thin scales.
Wood light, soft, close-grained, difficult to split, creamy white, with
thick hardly distinguishable sapwood; used in the manufacture of
artificial limbs, for wooden ware, wooden hats, paper pulp, and
occasionally sawed into lumber.

Distribution. Rich river-bottoms and mountain slopes; southwestern
Pennsylvania (Alleghany, Greene and Fayette Counties), southward along
the mountains to east Tennessee, and northwestern Georgia, and westward
to north central Ohio (near Plymouth, Richard County), southeastern and
southern Indiana (near Aurora, Dearborn County, and on the banks of Dry
River near Leavenworth, Crawford County, _C. C. Deam_) and to southern
Illinois (near Golconda, Pope County, shrub 6'--12' high, _E. J.
Palmer_); the var. _virginica_ at White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia.

Occasionally cultivated in the parks of the eastern United States and
Europe.

x _Aesculus hybrida_ DC., with red and yellow flowers, believed to be a
hybrid of _Aesculus octandra_ and _Aesculus Pavia_, appeared in the
Botanic Garden at Montpelier in France early in the nineteenth century,
and in many varieties is cultivated in Europe and occasionally in the
eastern United States.


                      3. Aesculus georgiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 635]

Leaves with slender glabrous petioles 4-1/2'--6' in length, and 5
leaflets oblong-obovate, abruptly acuminate and long-pointed at apex,
gradually narrowed and acuminate at base, finely often doubly serrate
with rounded teeth pointing forward, sparingly covered early in the
season, especially on the upper side of the midrib and veins, with short
caducous hairs, yellow-green above, green, glabrous and lustrous or
pubescent (var. _pubescens_ Sarg.) below, 4-1/2'--6' long,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout orange-colored midrib and 20--30 pairs
of slender primary veins; petiolules stout, puberulous early in the
season, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers opening in April and May
1'--1-1/8' long, on slender puberulous pedicels, in broad pubescent
panicles, 4'--6' in length; calyx campanulate or tubular, puberulous,
about 5/12' in diameter, red on the upper side, pale yellow on the lower
side or entirely red or yellow, 5-lobed, the lobes oblong-ovate,
narrowed and rounded at apex, finely serrate on the margins; petals
connivent, obovate, rounded at apex, gradually narrowed below, those of
the superior and lateral pairs very unequal in size, puberulous and
glandular on the outer surface, pubescent on the inner surface, ciliate
on the margins, bright yellow or red, their claws furnished on the
margins with long white hairs, those of the superior pair as long as the
lateral petals; stamens 7, shorter than the petals; filaments villose,
especially below the middle; ovary covered with matted pale hairs;
styles exserted, villose. Fruit on stout pendulous pedicels, globose,
usually 1-seeded, 1'--1-1/4' in diameter, with thin light brown slightly
pitted valves; seed globose, dark chestnut-brown.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--10' in diameter, slender erect
and spreading branches and stout glabrous branchlets, orange-green and
marked by pale lenticels when they first appear, becoming light reddish
brown in their first winter; more often a large or small round-topped
shrub 3 deg.--5 deg. tall and broad. Bark of the trunk thin, dark brown, the
surface separating into small thin scales. Winter-buds about 1/3' long,
with light reddish brown scales, narrowed, rounded and short-pointed at
apex. The common Buckeye of the Piedmont region of North and South
Carolina and northern Georgia.

Distribution. Central North Carolina (Durham and Orange Counties),
southward to eastern (Richmond County) and central Georgia; northern
Alabama (Madison, Etowah and Tuscaloosa Counties), and near Pensacola,
Escambia County, Florida. The var. _pubescens_ occasionally arborescent
in habit, common in the woods west of Augusta, Richmond County, and in
De Kalb, Rabun and Floyd Counties, Georgia, ranging northward to Orange
County, North Carolina, and ascending on the Blue Ridge to altitudes of
3000 deg.; in northern Alabama.

x _Aesculus Harbisonii_ Sarg., a probable hybrid between _A. discolor_
var. _mollis_ and _A. georgiana_, has appeared in the Arnold Arboretum
among plants of _A. georgiana_ raised from seeds collected near Stone
Mountain, De Kalb County, Georgia.

A distinct form of _Aesculus georgiana_ is


                Aesculus georgiana var. lanceolata Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 636]

Leaves with glabrous petioles 3-1/2'--5-1/2' in length, and 5 lanceolate
or slightly oblanceolate leaflets long-acuminate at apex, cuneate at
base, and finely glandular-serrate, when the flowers open early in May
thin yellow-green above, pale below, glabrous with the exception of
occasional hairs on the under side of the slender midrib and of minute
axillary tufts, 6'--8' long and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide; petiolules
1/12'--1/6' in length. Flowers on stout puberulous pedicels, bright red,
in narrow crowded clusters, 8'--10' long; calyx narrow-campanulate,
otherwise as in the type. Fruit not seen.

A tree 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--10' in diameter, small
erect and spreading branches forming a narrow head, and slender glabrous
branchlets orange-brown when they first appear, becoming dark gray-brown
and marked by pale lenticels in their second year.

Distribution. Georgia, rich woods near Clayton, Rabun County.


               4. Aesculus Pavia L. Red-flowered Buckeye.

[Illustration: Fig. 637]

Leaves with slender petioles glabrous or puberulous early in the season
and 4'--7' long, and 5 short-petiolulate, oblong-obovate, acuminate
leaflets, gradually narrowed at base, coarsely often doubly serrate
above with incurved teeth, slightly pubescent early in the season along
the upper side of the midrib and veins, and glabrous or slightly
pubescent below, and at maturity thin, lustrous and glabrous, dark green
on the upper surface, pale yellow-green on the lower surface, often
furnished with conspicuous tufts of axillary hairs, 3-1/2'--6' long and
1-1/4'--1-3/4' wide, with a thin midrib and from 18--30 pairs of slender
primary veins. Flowers in narrow pubescent panicles, 4-1/2'--8' in
length, on slender pubescent pedicels; calyx tubular, dark red,
puberulous on both surfaces, minutely lobed, the lobes rounded, much
shorter than the light red petals; petals connivent, unequal,
oblong-obovate, rounded at apex, glandular on the outer surface and on
the margins, gradually narrowed below into a long slender villose claw;
claw of the lateral petals about as long or shorter than the calyx,
those of the superior pair much longer than the calyx, their blades not
more than one-third as large as the blades of the lateral pair; stamens
exserted; filaments villose like the ovary. Fruit obovoid or subglobose,
light brown, smooth, generally pitted, usually 1 or 2-seeded, pendulous
on slender stems; seeds usually about 1' in diameter, dark
chestnut-brown and lustrous with a small hilum.

Occasionally a tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with a tall trunk 8'--10' in
diameter covered with smooth dark bark, large erect branches forming an
open head, and stout light orange-brown branchlets marked in their
second year by conspicuous emarginate scars of fallen leaves showing the
ends of 3 fibro-vascular bundles; usually a shrub, often flowering when
not more than 3' high.

Distribution. Southeastern Virginia, southward to western Florida to the
valley of the Suwanee River (near Old Town, Lafayette County), and
westward to eastern Louisiana, usually in the neighborhood of the coast;
in Alabama ranging inland to Jefferson and Dallas Counties and in
Louisiana to West Feliciana Parish; in southern Kentucky (near Bowling
Green, Warren County).


                  5. Aesculus discolor Pursh. Buckeye.

[Illustration: Fig. 638]

Leaves with slender grooved villose or pubescent usually ultimately
glabrous petioles 4' or 5' long, and 5 oblong-obovate or elliptic
leaflets, acuminate and usually long-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed
and acuminate at the entire base, finely or coarsely and sometimes
doubly crenulate-serrate above, dark green, lustrous and glabrous except
along the slender yellow midrib and veins on the upper surface, lighter
colored and tomentulose or tomentose on the lower surface, 4'--5' long,
1-1/2'--2' wide, nearly sessile or raised on slender petiolules up to
1/2' in length. Flowers opening from the first to the middle of April,
usually 3/4'--1' long, on slender pubescent pedicels much thickened on
the fruit, sometimes 1/4' long, and mostly aggregated toward the end of
the short branches of the narrow pubescent inflorescence 6'--8' in
length; calyx red, rose color or yellow more or less deeply tinged with
red, tubular, short and broad or elongated, puberulous on the outer
surface, tomentose on the inner surface, with rounded lobes; petals
yellow, shorter than the stamens, connivent, unequal, oblong-obovate,
rounded at apex, puberulous on the outer surface and glandular on the
margins with minute dark glands, those of the superior pair about half
as wide as those of the lateral pair, with claws much longer than the
calyx; filaments and ovary villose. Fruit ripening and falling in
October, usually only a few fruits maturing in a cluster, generally
obovoid or occasionally subglobose, mostly 2-seeded, 1-1/2'--2-1/2'
long, with very thin, light brown slightly pitted valves; seeds light
yellow-brown, sometimes 1-1/2' in diameter, with a comparatively small
hilum and a thin shell.

Rarely arborescent and occasionally 25 deg. high, with a straight trunk 6'
or 7' in diameter, stout branches forming a narrow symmetric head, and
slender branchlets marked by numerous small pale lenticels, green and
puberulous at first, becoming gray slightly tinged with red during their
first winter and only slightly darker in their second year; usually a
small or large shrub. Winter-buds broad-ovoid, obtusely pointed, about
1/4' long, with rounded apiculate light red-brown scales. Bark thin,
smooth, and pale.

Distribution. Rich woods; Shell Bluff on the Savannah River, Burke
County, Georgia; near Birmingham, Jefferson County, and Selma, Dallas
County, Alabama; near Campbell, Dunklin County, Missouri; Comal Springs,
New Braunfels County, and Sutherland Springs, Wilson County, Texas; rare
and local, and found as a tree only near Birmingham, Alabama; more
abundant is the var. _mollis_ Sarg. (_Aesculus austrina_ Small) with
bright red flowers; a tree up to 25 deg. or 30 deg. high, or more often a large
or small shrub; valley of the lower Cape Fear River (near Wilmington,
New Hanover County), North Carolina, southward near the coast to the
neighborhood of Charleston, South Carolina, through Georgia to the
neighborhood of Rome, Floyd County, and southward to western Florida; in
Alabama widely distributed from Jefferson County southward; widely
distributed in Mississippi except in the neighborhood of the Gulf coast,
to West Feliciana Parish, eastern Louisiana; more common and generally
distributed in western Louisiana, and through eastern Texas to the
valley of the San Antonio River (neighborhood of San Antonio, Bexar
County) and to that of the upper Guadalupe River (near Boerne, Kendall
County), ranging northward through Arkansas to southern Missouri and
western Tennessee.

On the Edwards Plateau of western Texas _Aesculus discolor_ is
represented by the var. _flavescens_ Sarg., with yellow flowers,
appearing a few days earlier than those of the var. _mollis_; a shrub
9'--12' high, or often much smaller; interesting as the only form of
Eupaviae with yellow flowers; San Marcos, Hays County, common on the
slopes above Comal Springs, near New Braunfels, Comal County, near
Boerne, Kendall County (with the var. _mollis_), Kerrville, Kerr County,
and Cancan, Uvalde County.


                 6. Aesculus californica Nutt. Buckeye.

[Illustration: Fig. 639]

Leaves with slender grooved petioles 3'--4' long, and 4--7 usually 5
oblong-lanceolate acuminate leaflets narrowed and acuminate or rounded
at base, sharply serrate, 4'--6' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, dark green
above, paler below, slightly pubescent when they first appear, becoming
glabrous or nearly so, on petiolules 1/2'--1' long; falling early, often
by midsummer. Flowers white or pale rose color, 1'--1-1/4' long,
appearing from May to July when the leaves are fully grown, on short
pedicels mostly unilateral on the long branches of the densely flowered
long-stemmed pubescent cluster 3'--9' in length; calyx 2-lobed, slightly
toothed, much shorter than the narrow oblong petals; stamens 5--7, with
long erect exserted slender filaments and bright orange-colored anthers;
ovary densely pubescent. Fruit obovoid, often somewhat gibbous on the
outer side, with thin smooth pale brown valves, usually 1-seeded, 2'--3'
long, on a slender stalk 1/4'--1/2' in length; seeds pale orange-brown,
1-1/2'--2' broad.

A tree, rarely 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 4 deg.--5 deg. in
diameter, often much enlarged at base, stout wide-spreading branches,
forming a round-topped head, and branchlets glabrous and pale reddish
brown when they first appear, becoming darker in their second season;
more often a shrub, with spreading stems 10 deg.--15 deg. high forming broad
dense thickets. Winter-buds acute, covered with narrow dark brown scales
rounded on the back and thickly coated with resin. Bark of the trunk
about 1/4' thick, smooth, and light gray or nearly white. Wood soft,
light, very close-grained, white or faintly tinged with yellow, with
thin hardly distinguishable sapwood of 10--12 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. California, borders of streams, valley of the south fork
of the Salmon River, Siskiyou County, south along the coast ranges to
San Luis Obispo County and on the western slope of the Sierra Nevada,
usually at altitudes between 2000 deg. and 2500 deg., occasionally to 5000 deg., to
the northern slopes of Tejon Pass, Kern County, and to Antelope Valley,
Los Angeles County.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the Pacific states,
and in western and southern Europe.




                          XXXVII. SAPINDACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with alternate pinnate petiolate persistent or
deciduous leaves, without stipules. Flowers regular or irregular,
polygamo-dioecious, polygamo-monoecious or polygamous; calyx of 4 or 5
sepals or lobes imbricated in the bud; petals 4 or 5 imbricated in the
bud; disk annular, fleshy, 5-lobed, or unilateral and oblique; stamens
usually 7--10, inserted on the disk; filaments free; anthers introrse,
2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary 2--4 or 3-celled;
styles terminal; stigmas capitate or lobed; ovule solitary or 2 in each
cell, anatropous or amphitropous. Fruit a drupe or capsule. Seed usually
solitary, without albumen; seed-coat bony, coriaceous or crustaceous.

Of the one hundred and twenty-six genera of this family, which is
chiefly confined to the tropics and is more abundant in the Old than in
the New World, four have arborescent representatives in the United
States.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit baccate.
    Fruit dark orange-color or yellow, with thin semitranslucent
          coriaceous flesh; ovules 1 in each cell of the ovary; leaflets
          subcoriaceous to coriaceous.
                                                            1. Sapindus.
    Fruit purple, with thick juicy flesh; ovules 2 in each cell of the
          ovary; leaflets thin, persistent.
                                                             2. Exothea.
  Fruit a drupe; leaves 3-foliolate, persistent.
                                                            3. Hypelate.
  Fruit a 3-valved capsule; leaves 4 or 5, rarely 3-foliolate,
        deciduous.
                                                            4. Ungnadia.




                       1. SAPINDUS L. Soapberry.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branches, without a terminal bud, marked by
large obcordate leaf-scars showing the ends of 3 equidistant
fibro-vascular bundles, small globose axillary buds often superposed in
pairs, the upper bud the larger, and thick fleshy roots. Leaves equally
or rarely unequally pinnate. Flowers regular, minute,
polygamo-dioecious, on short pedicels from the axils of minute deciduous
bracts, in ample axillary or terminal panicles; sepals 4 or 5, unequal,
slightly united at base; petals 4 or 5, equal, alternate with the
sepals, inserted under the thick edge of the annular fleshy entire
crenately lobed disk, unguiculate, naked or furnished at the summit of
the claw on the inside with a 2-cleft scale, deciduous; stamens usually
8 or 10, inserted on the disk immediately under the ovary, equal;
filaments subulate or filiform, often pilose, exserted in the staminate,
much shorter in the pistillate flower; anthers oblong, attached near the
base; pistils 2 or 3, united; ovary sessile, entire or 2--4-lobed,
2--4-celled, narrowed into a short columnar style, rudimentary in the
staminate flower; stigma 2--4-lobed, the lobes spreading; ovule solitary
in each cell, ascending from below the inner angle of the cell; raphe
ventral; micropyle inferior. Fruit baccate, coriaceous, 1--3-seeded,
usually formed of 1 globose coriaceous carpel, with the rudiments of the
others remaining at its base, or of 2 or sometimes 3 carpels more or
less connate by their base and then 2--3-lobed. Seed solitary in each
carpel, obovoid or globose; seed-coat bony, smooth, black or dark brown;
tegmen membranaceous or fleshy; hilum oblong, surrounded by an ariloid
tuft of long pale silky hairs; embryo incurved or straight; cotyledons
thick and fleshy, incumbent; radicle very short, inferior, near the
hilum.

Sapindus is widely distributed through the tropics, especially in Asia,
occasionally extending into colder regions. About forty species have
been distinguished; of these three are found within the territory of the
United States.

Sapindus contains a detersive principle which causes the pulp of the
fruit to lather in water, and makes it valuable as a substitute for
soap. The bark, which is bitter and astringent, has been used as a
tonic. The seeds of several of the species are strung for chaplets and
bracelets and are used as buttons.

The generic name, from _sapo_ and _Indus_, refers to the detersive
properties and use of the first species known to Europeans, a native of
the West Indies.


            CONSPECTUS OF THE SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves persistent.
    Rachis of the leaf interrupted-winged, with usually broad wings;
          leaflets 4--9, oblong-lanceolate and acute to elliptic-ovate
          or oblong, tomentulose below; petals without scales; fruit
          globose, orange-brown.
                                                    1. S. saponaria (D).
    Rachis of the leaf without wings narrow-margined or marginless;
          leaflets 7--13, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, often somewhat
          falcate, glabrous below; petals with scales; fruit somewhat
          oblong, dorsally keeled, yellow.
                                                   2. S. marginatus (C).
  Leaves deciduous, their rachis without marginal borders; leaflets
        8--18, lanceolate, mostly falcate, soft-pubescent or ultimately
        glabrous below; petals with scales; fruit globose, not keeled,
        turning black in drying.
                                                3. S. Drummondii (C, E).


                        1. Sapindus saponaria L.

[Illustration: Fig. 640]

Leaves 6'--7' long, with a broad winged rachis, the wings narrow and
often nearly obsolete below the lowest pair of leaflets, and sometimes
nearly 1/2' wide below the upper pair, and usually 7--9 elliptic to
oblong-lanceolate leaflets, rounded or slightly emarginate at apex,
gradually narrowed at base and very short-petiolulate, soft-pubescent on
the lower surface when they unfold, and at maturity rather coriaceous,
yellow-green, paler and tomentulose below, prominently
reticulate-venulose, 3'--4' long and 1-1/2' wide, with a yellow midrib
and primary veins, those of the lowest pair smaller than the others;
rarely reduced to a single leaflet. Flowers appearing in Florida in
November, usually produced 3 together on short pedicels, in terminal
panicles 7'--10' in length, with an angulate peduncle and branches;
calyx-lobes acute, concave, ciliate on the margins, the 2 outer rather
smaller than those of the inner rank, much shorter than the white,
ovate, short-clawed petals, without scales, rounded at apex and covered,
especially toward the base, with long scattered hairs; ovary slightly
3-lobed; stamens included or slightly exserted, with hairy filaments
broadened at base. Fruit ripening in spring or in early summer, globose,
2/3'--3/4' in diameter, with thin orange-brown semitranslucent flesh;
seeds obovoid, black, 1' in diameter.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 10'--12'
in diameter, erect branches and slender branchlets at first slightly
many-angled and puberulous, soon glabrous, orange-green and marked by
white lenticels, becoming in their second season terete, pale brown
faintly tinged with red. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/2' thick, light gray
and roughened by oblong lighter colored excrescences, the outer layer
exfoliating in large flakes exposing the nearly black inner bark. Wood
heavy, rather hard, close-grained, light brown tinged with yellow, with
thick yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Cape Sable, shores and islands of
Caximbas Bay, Key Largo, Elliott's Key, and the shores of Bay Biscayne,
Dade County; in Florida most common in the region of Cape Sable, and of
its largest size on some of the Ten Thousand Islands, Lee County;
generally distributed through the West Indies to Venezuela and Ecuador.


                     2. Sapindus marginatus Willd.

                      _Sapindus manatensis_ Radlk.

[Illustration: Fig. 641]

Leaves 6'--7' long, with a slender wingless or narrow-margined or
marginless rachis, and 7--13 lance-oblong acuminate more or less falcate
leaflets, glabrous, dark green, and lustrous on the upper surface, paler
and glabrous or puberulous on the lower surface along the slender
midrib, sessile or very short-petiolulate, 2'--5' long, 3/4'--1-1/4'
wide, the lower usually alternate, the upper opposite. Flowers appearing
in early spring, more or less tinged with red and nearly 1/8' in
diameter, on short stout tomentose pedicels, in panicles 4'--5' long and
usually about 3' wide, with a villose stem and branches; sepals acute,
concave, ciliate on the margins, much shorter than the ovate-oblong,
short-clawed, ciliate petals furnished on the inner surface near the
base with a 2-lobed villose scale; filaments villose; ovary 3-lobed.
Fruit conspicuously keeled on the back, short-oblong to slightly
obovoid, about 3/4' long, with thin light yellow translucent flesh;
seeds obovoid, dark brown.

A tree, rarely more than 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 1 deg. in
diameter, and stout pale brown or ultimately ashy gray branchlets.

Distribution. Hurricane Island at the mouth of Medway River, Liberty
County, Georgia (_Miss J. King_); hummocks, peninsular of Florida to
Alachua and Manatee Counties; not common; in Cuba.


          3. Sapindus Drummondii Hook. & Arn. Wild China-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 642]

Leaves appearing in March and April, with a slender grooved puberulous
rachis, without wings, and 4--9 pairs of alternate obliquely lanceolate
acuminate leaflets, glabrous on the upper surface and covered with short
pale pubescence on the lower surface, coriaceous, prominently
reticulate-venulose, pale yellow-green, 2'--3' long, 1/2'--2/3' wide,
short-petiolulate; deciduous in the autumn or early winter. Flowers
appearing in May and June in clusters 6'--9' long and 5'--6' wide, with
a pubescent many-angled stem and branches; sepals acute and concave,
ciliate on the margins, much shorter than the obovate white petals
rounded at apex, contracted into a long claw hairy on the inner surface
and furnished at base with a deeply cleft scale hairy on the margins;
filaments hairy, with long soft hairs. Fruit ripening in September and
October, persistent on the branches until the following spring,
glabrous, not keeled, yellow, 1/2' in diameter, turning black in drying;
seeds obovoid, dark brown.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 1-1/2 deg.--2 deg. in diameter,
usually erect branches, and branchlets at first slightly many-angled,
pale yellow-green, pubescent, becoming in their second year terete, pale
gray, slightly puberulous, and marked by numerous small lenticels. Bark
of the trunk 1/3'--1/2' thick, separating by deep fissures into long
narrow plates broken on the surface into small red-brown scales. Wood
heavy, strong, close-grained, light brown tinged with yellow, with
lighter colored sapwood of about 30 layers of annual growth; splitting
easily into thin strips and largely used in the manufacture of baskets
used in harvesting cotton, and for the frames of pack-saddles.

Distribution. Moist clay soil or dry limestone uplands; southwestern
Missouri to northeastern and southern Kansas, eastern Louisiana
(Tangipahoa Parish _R. S. Cocks_), and to extreme western and
southwestern Oklahoma, through eastern Texas to the Rio Grande, over the
Edwards Plateau, and in the mountain valleys of western Texas and of
southern New Mexico and Arizona; in northern Mexico.




                            2. EXOTHEA Macf.


A tree, with thin scaly bark, and terete branchlets covered with
lenticels. Leaves petiolate, abruptly pinnate or 3 or rarely
1-foliolate, glabrous, without stipules, persistent; leaflets oblong or
oblong-ovate, acute, rounded or emarginate at apex, with entire undulate
margins, obscurely veined, thin, dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface and slightly paler on the lower surface. Flowers regular,
polygamo-dioecious, on short pedicels from the axils of minute deciduous
bracts covered with thick pale tomentum, in ample terminal or axillary
wide-branched panicles clothed with orange-colored pubescence; sepals 5,
ovate, rounded at apex, ciliate on the margins, puberulous, persistent;
petals 5, white, ovate, rounded at apex, short-unguiculate, alternate
with and rather longer and narrower than the sepals; disk annular,
fleshy, irregularly 5-lobed, puberulous; stamens 7 or 8, inserted on the
disk, as long as the petals in the staminate flower, much shorter in the
pistillate flower; filaments filiform, glabrous, anthers oblong, with a
broad connective, rudimentary in the staminate flower; ovary sessile on
the disk, conic, pubescent, 2-celled, contracted into a short thick
style, rudimentary in the staminate flower, stigma large, declinate,
obtuse; ovules 2 in each cell, suspended from the summit of the inner
angle, collateral, anatropous, raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit
a nearly spherical 1-seeded berry containing the rudiment of the second
cell and tipped with the short remnant of the style, surrounded at base
by the persistent reflexed sepals; flesh becoming thick, dark purple,
and juicy at maturity. Seed short-oblong to subglobose, solitary,
suspended; seed-coat thin, coriaceous, orange-brown and lustrous; embryo
subglobose, filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons fleshy,
plano-convex, puberulous; radicle superior, very short, uncinate, turned
toward the small hilum and inclosed in a lateral cavity of the
seed-coat.

The genus is represented by a single West Indian species.

The generic name is from {exotheo}, in allusion to its removal from a
related genus.


            1. Exothea paniculata Radlk. Ironwood. Ink Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 643]

Leaves appearing in April, on stout grooved petioles 1/2'--1' in length;
leaflets 4'--5' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide. Flowers opening in Florida in
April, 1/4' across when expanded, the staminate and pistillate on
separate plants. Fruit fully grown by the end of June and then
1/2'--5/8' long, and dull orange color, remaining on the branches during
the summer, ripening in the autumn; seeds 1/4'--3/8' in diameter.

A tree, sometimes 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--15' in diameter,
slender upright branchlets orange-brown when they first appear, becoming
reddish brown in their second year and thickly covered by small white
lenticels. Bark of the trunk 1/8'--1/4' thick, the bright red surface
separating into large scales. Wood very hard and heavy, strong,
close-grained, bright red-brown, with lighter colored sapwood of 10--12
layers of annual growth; valued for piles and also used in Florida in
boat-building, for the handles of tools, and many small articles.

Distribution. Florida, Mosquito Inlet on the east coast to the shores of
Bay Biscayne and on the Everglade Keys, Dade County, and on the southern
keys; on the Bahamas, on many of the Antilles, and in Guatemala; on the
Florida Keys generally distributed, but not common.




                           3. HYPELATE P. Br.


A glabrous tree or shrub, with smooth bark and slender terete
branchlets. Leaves long-petioled, the petioles sometimes narrow-winged,
3-foliolate, the terminal leaflet rather larger than the others,
persistent; leaflets sessile, obovate, rounded or rarely acute or
emarginate at apex, entire, with thickened revolute margins and a
prominent midrib, coriaceous, feather-veined, the veins arcuate and
connected near the margins, dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface, bright green on the lower surface. Flowers regular,
polygamo-monoecious, minute, on slender pedicels from the axils of
minute deciduous bracts, in few-flowered long-stemmed wide-branched
terminal or axillary panicles; calyx 5-lobed, the lobes ovate, rounded
at apex, slightly puberulous on the outer surface, ciliate on the
margins, deciduous by a circumscissile line, petals 5, rather longer
than the calyx-lobes, rounded, spreading, ciliate on the margins, white;
stamens 7 or 8, inserted on the lobes of the annular fleshy disk;
filaments filiform, as long as the petals in the staminate flower, much
shorter in the pistillate flower; anthers oblong, attached on the back
near the bottom, the cells spreading from above downward; ovary sessile
on the disk, slightly 3-lobed, 3-celled, contracted into a short stout
style, rudimentary in the staminate flower; stigma large, declinate,
obscurely 3-lobed; ovules 2 in each cell, borne on the middle of its
inner angle, superposed, amphitropous, the upper ascending, with the
micropyle inferior, the lower pendulous, with the micropyle superior.
Fruit an ovoid black drupe crowned with the remnants of the persistent
style and supported on the persistent base of the disk; flesh thin and
fleshy; walls of the stone thick and crustaceous. Seed solitary by the
abortion of the upper ovule, suspended, obovoid; seed-coat thin,
slightly wrinkled; embryo conduplicate, filling the cavity of the seed;
cotyledons thin, foliaceous, irregularly folded, incumbent on the long
radicle.

The genus with a single species is distributed from southern Florida to
the Bahamas, Cuba, Porto Rico, St. Martin, Anguilla and Jamaica.

_Hypelate_ is the ancient name of the Butcher's Broom.


               1. Hypelate trifoliata Sw. White Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 644]

Leaves unfolding in June and persistent until their second season or
longer; petioles stout, 1-1/2'--2' in length, with narrow green wings;
leaflets 1-1/2'--2' long and 3/4'--1-1/4' wide. Flowers appearing in
Florida in June, rather less than 1/8' in diameter, in few-flowered
panicles 3'--4' long, on a slender peduncle, the staminate and
pistillate in separate panicles on the same tree. Fruit ripening in
September, 3/8' long, with a sweet rather agreeable flavor.

A tree, sometimes 35 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 18'--20' in
diameter, and branchlets pale green when they first appear, becoming
gray during their first season and bright red-brown the following year;
generally much smaller. Bark of the trunk rarely 1/8' thick, marked by
shallow depressions and numerous minute lenticels. Wood very heavy,
hard, close-grained, rich dark brown, with thin darker colored sapwood
of 4 or 5 layers of annual growth; very durable in contact with the soil
and valued in Florida for posts; also used in shipbuilding and for the
handles of tools.

Distribution. Southern Florida, Upper Metacombe, Umbrella and Windley's
Keys; rare.




                           4. UNGNADIA Endl.


A tree or shrub, with thin pale gray fissured bark, slender terete
slightly zigzag branchlets, without a terminal bud, marked by large
conspicuous obcordate leaf-scars, small obtuse nearly globose
winter-buds covered with numerous chestnut-brown imbricated scales, and
thick fleshy roots. Leaves long-petioled, 5 or 7 or rarely 3-foliolate,
deciduous; leaflets ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, rounded or cuneate, and
often oblique at base, irregularly crenulate-serrate, coated when they
first appear on the lower surface like the petiole with dense pale
tomentum, and pilose above, glabrous at maturity with the exception of a
few hairs on the lower surface along the principal veins, pinnately
veined, reticulate-venulose, the terminal leaflet long-petiolulate, the
others short-petiolulate to subsessile. Flowers irregular, polygamous,
in small pubescent fascicles or corymbs appearing just before or with
the leaves from the axils of those of the previous year, usually from
separate buds, or occasionally from the base of leafy branches; calyx
5-lobed, hypogynous, the lobes oblong-lanceolate, somewhat united
irregularly at base only, deciduous; petals 4 by the suppression of the
anterior one, or 5 and then alternate with the lobes of the calyx,
hypogynous on the margin of a thickened truncate torus, unguiculate,
bright rose color, deciduous, the claw as long as the lobes of the
calyx, nearly erect, clothed with tomentum, especially on the inner
surface, conspicuously appendaged at the summit with a fimbricated crest
of short fleshy tufted hairs, the blade obovate, spreading, often
erose-crenulate; disk unilateral, oblique, tongue-shaped, surrounding
and connate with the base of the stipe of the ovary; stamens 7--10,
usually 8 or 9, inserted on the oblique edge of the disk, much exserted
and unequal, the anterior ones shorter than the others, equal or almost
so and shorter than the petals in the pistillate flower; filaments
filiform; anthers oblong, attached near the base; ovary ovoid, 3-celled,
pilose, raised on a long stipe, rudimentary in the staminate flower;
style subulate, filiform, elongated, slightly curved upward; stigma
minute, terminal; ovules 2, borne on the inner angle of the cell near
its middle, ascending, the micropyle inferior. Fruit a coriaceous
3-celled loculicidally 3-valved broad-ovoid capsule, conspicuously
stipitate, crowned with the remnants of the style, rugosely roughened
and dark reddish brown, loculicidally 3-valved, the valves somewhat
cordate, bearing the dissepiment on the middle. Seed generally solitary
by abortion, almost globose; seed-coat coriaceous, very smooth and
shining, dark chestnut-brown or almost black; hilum broad; tegmen thin;
embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons thick and fleshy,
nearly hemispheric, conferruminate, incumbent on the short conic
descending radicle turned toward the hilum, remaining below ground in
germination.

Ungnadia with a single species is confined to Texas, New Mexico, and
northern Mexico.

The name is in honor of Baron Ferdinand von Ungnad, Ambassador of the
Emperor Rudolph II. at the Ottoman Porte who sent seeds of the
Horsechestnut-tree from Constantinople to Vienna in the middle of the
sixteenth century.


              1. Ungnadia speciosa Endl. Spanish Buckeye.

[Illustration: Fig. 645]

Leaves appearing from March to April with or just after the flowers,
6'--12' long, with a petiole 2'--6' in length, rather coriaceous
leaflets, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface and pale and
rugose on the lower surface, 3'--5' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, the
terminal leaflet on a petiolule 1/4'--1' in length. Flowers 1' across
when expanded, in crowded clusters 1-1/2'--2' long. Fruit 2' broad,
opening in October, the empty pods often remaining on the branches until
the appearance of the flowers the following year; seeds 1/2'--5/8' in
diameter.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter,
dividing at some distance from the ground into a number of small upright
branches, and branchlets light orange-brown and covered during their
first season with short fine pubescence, and pale brown tinged with red,
glabrous and marked by scattered lenticels in their second year; more
often a shrub, with numerous stems. Winter-buds about 1/8' in diameter.
Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/4' thick, light gray and broken by
numerous shallow reticulated fissures. Wood heavy, close-grained, rather
soft and brittle, red tinged with brown, with lighter colored sapwood.
The sweet seeds possess powerful emetic properties and are reputed to be
poisonous.

Distribution. Borders of streams, river-bottoms and limestone hills, and
westward on the sides of mountain canyons; valley of the Trinity River,
Dallas County and of the lower Brazos River, Texas, to the mountains of
southeastern New Mexico, and southward into Mexico; most common and of
its largest size forty to fifty miles from the Texas coast west of the
Colorado River.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the southern United
States.




                          XXXVIII. RHAMNACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly or naked buds, watery bitter astringent
juice, simple leaves, and minute deciduous stipules (_persistent in
Krugiodendron_). Flowers small, mostly greenish, perfect
(_polygamo-dioecious in one species of Rhamnus_); calyx 4--5-lobed, the
lobes valvate in the bud; petals 4--5, inserted on the calyx near the
margin of the conspicuous disk lining the short calyx-tube, and
infolding the stamens, or 0; stamens as many as and alternate with the
calyx-lobes, free, inserted at or below the margins of the disk;
filaments slender, subulate; anthers introrse, versatile, 2-celled, the
cells opening longitudinally; pistils of 2--3 united carpels; ovary
2--3-, or rarely 1-celled by abortion, partly immersed in the disk;
style terminal; stigma 2--4-lobed; ovules 1 in each cell, erect,
anatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle inferior. Fruit drupaceous,
supported on the tube of the calyx and bearing the remnants of the
style. Seed usually with scanty oily albumen; embryo with broad
cotyledons; radicle inferior, next the hilum.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit more or less fleshy.
    Fruit with a single stone; petals 0.
      Sepals without crests.
        Leaves alternate; branches spinescent.
                                                            1. Condalia.
        Leaves nearly opposite; branches not spinescent.
                                                            2. Reynosia.
      Sepals crested; leaves mostly opposite.
                                                       3. Krugiodendron.
    Fruit with 2 or 3 nutlets; petals 4 or 5, or 0; leaves alternate.
                                                             4. Rhamnus.
  Fruit crustaceous, 3-lobed, separating into 3 longitudinally 2-valved
        nutlets.
    Sepals inflexed; petals narrowed into a long slender claw.
                                                           5. Ceanothus.
    Sepals spreading; petals sessile.
                                                           6. Colubrina.




                            1. CONDALIA Cav.


Trees or shrubs, with rigid spinescent branches and minute scaly buds.
Leaves alternate, subsessile, obovate or oblong, entire, feather-veined.
Flowers axillary, solitary or fascicled, greenish white, on short
pedicels; calyx with a short broad-obconic tube and a 5-lobed limb, the
lobes ovate, acute, membranaceous, spreading and persistent; disk
fleshy, flat, slightly 5-angled, surrounding the free base of the ovary;
petals 0; stamens 5, inserted on the free margin of the disk between the
lobes of the calyx; filaments incurved, shorter than the calyx-lobes;
ovary 1-celled, conic, gradually narrowed into a short thick style;
stigma 3-lobed; ovule ascending from the base of the cell. Fruit ovoid
or subglobose; flesh thin; stone thick-walled, crustaceous. Seed
compressed; seed-coat thin and smooth; cotyledons oval, flat.

Condalia with nine or ten species is confined to the New World and is
distributed from western Texas and southern California to Brazil and
Argentina. Of the six species found within the territory of the United
States one is a small tree.

The generic name commemorates that of Antonio Condal, a Spanish
physician of the eighteenth century sent to South America on a
scientific mission in 1754.


            1. Condalia obovata Hook. Purple Haw. Log Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 646]

Leaves often fascicled on short spinescent lateral branchlets, spatulate
to oblong-cuneate, mucronate, when they first appear pubescent,
especially on the lower surface, at maturity glabrous, rather thin, pale
yellow-green, 1'--1-1/2' long, and about 1/3' wide, with a conspicuous
midrib and usually 3 pairs of prominent primary veins; unfolding in May
and June and falling irregularly during the winter. Flowers in
2--4-flowered short-stemmed fascicles, on branchlets of the year. Fruit
ripening irregularly during the summer, 1/4' long, dark blue or black,
with a sweet pleasant flavor.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, erect rigid
zigzag branchlets terminating in a stout spine and covered at first with
soft velvety pubescence, becoming glabrous before the end of their first
season, pale red-brown and often covered with thin scales; more often a
shrub. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, divided into flat shallow
ridges, the dark brown surface tinged with red separating into thin
scales. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, light red, with light
yellow sapwood of 7--8 layers of annual growth; burning with an intense
heat and valued as fuel.

Distribution. Southwestern Texas from Jackson County (Vanderbilt) and
Corpus Christi, Nueces County, to the Rio Grande and to Comal and
Valverde Counties; in northeastern Mexico; of tree-like habit and of its
largest size on the high sandy banks of the lower Rio Grande and its
tributaries; often covering large areas with dense impenetrable
chaparral.




                          2. REYNOSIA Griseb.


Trees or shrubs, with rigid unarmed terete branches, and scaly buds.
Leaves mostly opposite, entire, coriaceous, short-petiolate,
reticulate-veined, persistent. Flowers minute, on stout pedicels
bibracteolate near the base and two or three times longer than the
flower, in small axillary sessile umbels; calyx persistent, 5-lobed, the
lobes deltoid or ovate, acute or acuminate, spreading, petaloid,
deciduous; disk fleshy; petals 0; stamens 5, inserted on the margin of
the disk, rather shorter than the calyx-lobes; filaments incurved;
anthers oval; ovary free from the disk, almost superior, conic,
2--3-celled, contracted into a short erect thick style; stigma
2--3-lobed. Fruit drupaceous; flesh thin; stone crustaceo-membranaceous.
Seed ovoid or subglobose; seed-coat very thin, conspicuously rugose and
tuberculate; embryo axile in copious subcorneous ruminate albumen;
cotyledons oblong.

Reynosia is distributed from southern Florida and the Bahama Islands to
the Antilles. Four species are recognized; of these, one, a small tree,
extends into southern Florida.

The generic name is in honor of Alvaro Reynoso (1830--1888), the
distinguished Cuban chemist and writer on agriculture and scientific
subjects.


      1. Reynosia septentrionalis Urb. Red Ironwood. Darling Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 647]

Leaves oblong to ovate or obovate, or sometimes nearly orbicular,
rounded, truncate or frequently emarginate and usually minutely
apiculate at apex, gradually narrowed at base into a short broad
petiole, very thick and coriaceous, dark green on the upper, rather
paler or often rufous on the lower surface, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/2'
broad, with thickened revolute margins, a stout broad midrib, about five
pairs of primary veins spreading nearly at right angles, and numerous
reticulate veinlets; unfolding in April and remaining on the branches
for one and sometimes for two years. Flowers yellowish green appearing
in May, 1/12' long; sepals ovate, acute. Fruit ripening in Florida in
November or frequently not until the following spring, short-obovoid,
1/2' long, purple or nearly black, edible, with an agreeable flavor.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, stout terete
rigid branchlets slightly puberulous when they first appear, soon
becoming glabrous and gray faintly tinged with red, growing darker in
their second season, then often covered by small tubercles and marked by
the prominent elevated leaf-scars. Winter-buds minute, chestnut-brown.
Bark of the trunk 1/16'--1/8' thick, dark-red-brown, and divided into
large plate-like scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, strong,
close-grained, rich dark brown, with light brown sapwood of 15--20
layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, coast and islands from the Marquesas group to the
shores of Bay Biscayne and the Everglade Keys, Dade County; common and
generally distributed; on the Bahama Islands.




                         3. KRUGIODENDRON Urb.


A small tree or shrub, with slender unarmed terete branches roughened by
numerous small lenticels, and minute scaly buds. Leaves opposite or
obliquely opposite, or sometimes alternate on lower branches, ovate or
oval, often emarginate, coriaceous, entire, short-petiolate,
feather-veined, persistent; stipules acuminate, persistent. Flowers
greenish yellow, on short slender pedicels, in axillary simple or
dichotomously branched cymes; calyx broad-obconic, 5-lobed, the lobes
triangular, acute, erect or spreading, conspicuously crested on the
inner surface, deciduous; disk annular, broad, fleshy, 5-lobed,
surrounding the base of the ovary; petals 0; stamens 5, inserted under
the margin of the disk; anthers ovoid or ovoid-orbicular, obtuse; ovary
conic, imperfectly 2-celled; styles short and thick, united nearly to
the apex, the branches spreading and stigmatic on the inner face; ovule
ascending from the base of the cell. Fruit 1-seeded, oval or ovoid;
flesh thin and black; wall of the stone thin and bony. Seed ellipsoid,
compressed, without albumen; seed-coat membranaceous; embryo filling the
cavity of the seed; cotyledons thick and fleshy, obovate or elliptic.

Krugiodendron, with a single species, is confined to southern Florida
and the West Indies.

The generic name is in honor of Leopold Krug (1833--1898), a student of
the flora of the Antilles.


             1. Krugiodendron ferreum Urb. Black Ironwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 648]

Leaves bright green and lustrous above, pale yellow-green below,
glabrous with the exception of a few scattered hairs on the upper
surface and on the petiole, 1'--1-1/2' long and 3/4'--1' wide, with
entire or slightly undulate margins; persistent for two or three years;
petioles stout, 1/4' in length. Flowers on bibracteolate pedicels 1/4'
long, in 3--5-flowered cymes on peduncles sometimes 1/2' in length,
usually much shorter and often branched near the apex, on branchlets of
the year; calyx about 1/16' long. Fruit generally solitary, 1/3' in
length, on a stem 1/3'--1/2' long.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, with a trunk 8'--10' in diameter, and
slender branchlets at first green and covered with dense velvety
pubescence, becoming glabrous in their second year, and then gray
faintly tinged with red and roughened by small crowded lenticels;
generally much smaller and more often shrubby than arborescent. Bark of
the trunk about 1/4' thick and divided into prominent rounded
longitudinal ridges broken on the surface into short thick light gray
scales. Wood exceedingly heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, brittle,
rich orange-brown, with thin lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Cape Canaveral on the east coast to the shores of
Bay Biscayne and on the Everglade Keys, Dade County, near Cape Sable,
and on the southern keys; one of the commonest of the small trees of the
region; on the Bahama Islands and on several of the Antilles.




                             4. RHAMNUS L.


Trees or shrubs, with terete often spinescent branches, without a
terminal bud, scaly or naked axillary buds and acrid bitter bark. Leaves
alternate or rarely obliquely opposite, conduplicate in the bud,
petiolate, feather-veined, entire or dentate, stipulate. Flowers perfect
or polygamo-dioecious, in axillary simple or compound racemes or
fascicled cymes; calyx campanulate, 4--5-lobed, the lobes
triangular-ovate, erect or spreading, keeled on the inner surface,
deciduous; disk thin below, more or less thickened above; petals 5,
inserted on the margin of the disk, ovate, unguiculate, emarginate,
infolded round the stamens, deciduous, or 0; stamens 4 or 5; filaments
very short; anthers oblong-ovoid or sagittate, rudimentary and sterile
in the pistillate flower; ovary free, ovoid, included in the tube of the
calyx, 2--4-celled, rudimentary in the staminate flower; styles united
below, with spreading stigmatic lobes or terminating in a 2--3-lobed
obtuse stigma; ovule erect from the base of the cell. Fruit drupaceous,
oblong or spherical; flesh thick and succulent, inclosing 2--4 separable
cartilaginous 1-seeded nutlets. Seeds erect, obovoid, grooved
longitudinally on the back, with a cartilaginous seed-coat, the raphe in
the groove, or convex on the back, with a membranaceous seed-coat, the
raphe lateral next to one margin of the cotyledons; embryo large,
surrounded by thin fleshy albumen; cotyledons oval, foliaceous, with
revolute margins, or flat and fleshy.

Rhamnus with about sixty species is widely distributed in nearly all the
temperate and in many of the tropical parts of the world with the
exception of Australasia and the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Of the
five species indigenous to the United States three attain the size of
small trees. The fruit and bark of Rhamnus are drastic, and yield yellow
and green dyes. The European _Rhamnus cathartica_ L., the Buckthorn, has
long been used as a hedge plant in northern Europe, and in eastern North
America, where it has now become sparingly naturalized.

The generic name is from {rhamnos}, the classical name of the Buckthorn.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers polygamo-dioecious, in sessile umbels; calyx 4-lobed; petals
        0; anthers oblong-ovoid; lobes of the stigma elongated,
        spreading; fruit red; seed grooved on the back; seed-coat
        cartilaginous; leaves often sharply toothed, persistent;
        winter-buds scaly.
                                                       1. R. crocea (G).
  Flowers perfect, in pedunculate umbels; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5;
        anthers sagittate; lobes of the stigma short and obtuse; fruit
        black; seed rounded on the back; seed-coat membranaceous; leaves
        deciduous; winter-buds naked.
    Peduncles shorter than the petioles.
                                                  2. R. caroliniana (C).
    Peduncles longer than the petioles.
                                                 3. R. Purshiana (B, G).


                        1. Rhamnus crocea Nutt.

Leaves persistent, often in fascicles, elliptic, broad-ovate to
suborbicular, rounded and often apiculate at apex, glandular-denticulate
with minute teeth, coriaceous, yellow-green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale and frequently bronzed or copper color on the lower
surface, glabrous or often puberulous while young, with a prominent
midrib and slender primary veins, 1/4'--3/4' long; petioles short and
stout; stipules minute, acuminate. Flowers polygamo-dioecious, on
slender often puberulous pedicels, in small clusters from the axils of
the leaves or of small lanceolate persistent bracts on shoots of the
year; calyx 4-lobed, with acuminate lobes, about 1/8' long; petals 0;
stamens rather shorter than the calyx, with short stout incurved
filaments and large ovoid anthers, minute and rudimentary in the
pistillate flower; ovary ovoid, contracted into a long slender style
divided above the middle into two wide-spreading acuminate stigmatic
lobes, rudimentary in the staminate flower. Fruit red, obovoid, slightly
grooved or lobed at maturity, 1/4' long, with thin dry flesh and 1--3
nutlets; seed broad-ovoid, pointed at apex, deeply grooved on the back
and 1/8' long, with a thin membranaceous pale chestnut-colored coat.

A shrub, 6'--3 deg. high, with slender rigid often spinescent branchlets
forming thickets.

Distribution. Coast mountains of central and southern California.
Passing into


                 Rhamnus crocea var. ilicifolia Greene.

[Illustration: Fig. 649]

Leaves oval or orbicular, spinulose-dentate, often golden beneath and
1'--1-1/2' long and 3/4'--1' wide. Flowers with 4 or occasionally 5
calyx-lobes and stamens.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, stout
spreading branches, and slender branchlets yellow-green and puberulous
or glabrate when they first appear, becoming dark red or reddish brown
and glabrous in their second season. Winter-buds obtuse, barely more
than 1/16' long, with small puberulous apiculate imbricated scales
ciliate on the margins. Bark of the trunk usually from 1/16'--1/8'
thick, the dark gray surface slightly roughened by minute tubercles.

Distribution. California, valley of the Sacramento River southward along
the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada, and on the coast ranges and
southern mountains to San Diego County; Arizona, Oak Creek and Sycamore
Canyons, near Flagstaff, Coconino County, (_P. Lowell_), Copper Canyon,
west of Camp Verde, Yavapai County, and on the Pinal and Santa Catalina
Mountains.

Passing into


                  Rhamnus crocea var. insularis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 650]

A form with larger less prominently toothed leaves sometimes 3' long and
1-1/2' wide, rather larger flowers, with shorter and broader calyx-lobes
a less deeply divided style, and larger fruits. A tree often growing to
the height of 25 deg.--30 deg., flowering later than the var. _ilicifolia_, and
not uncommon on the islands of the Santa Barbara group and on the
mountains of the adjacent mainland. A form (f. _pilosa_ Trel.) with
narrow revolute leaves densely pilose throughout, occurs in the Santa
Maria valley of the mountains near San Diego.


              2. Rhamnus caroliniana Walt. Indian Cherry.

[Illustration: Fig. 651]

Leaves deciduous, elliptic-oblong or broad-elliptic, acute or acuminate,
cuneate or somewhat rounded at base, remotely and obscurely serrate, or
crenulate, densely coated when they unfold with rusty brown tomentum,
and at maturity thin, dark yellow-green above, paler below, glabrous or
somewhat hairy on the lower surface, 2'--6' long and 1' to nearly 2'
wide, with a prominent yellow midrib and about 6 pairs of conspicuous
yellow primary veins; turning yellow in the autumn before falling;
petioles slender, pubescent, 1/2' to nearly 1' in length; stipules
nearly triangular. Flowers appearing from April to June when the leaves
are almost fully grown, on slender pedicels about 1/4' long, in
few-flowered pubescent umbels, on peduncles varying from 1/8'--1/2' in
length; calyx 5-lobed, with a narrow turbinate tube and triangular
lobes; petals 5, broad-ovate, deeply notched at apex and folded round
the short stamens; ovary contracted into a long columnar style
terminating in a slightly 3-lobed stigma. Fruit ripening in September
and sometimes remaining on the branches until the beginning of winter,
globose, 1/3' in diameter, black, with thin sweet rather dry flesh and
2--4 nutlets; seeds obtuse at apex, rounded on the back, reddish brown,
about 1/5' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, small spreading
unarmed branches, and slender branchlets light red-brown and puberulent
or covered with a glaucous bloom when they first appear, becoming
slightly angled, gray, and glabrous, and marked during their second
season by the small horizontal oval leaf-scars; more often a tall shrub,
with numerous stems 15 deg.--20 deg. high. Winter-buds naked, hoary-tomentose.
Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, slightly furrowed, ashy gray and
often marked by large black blotches. Wood rather hard, light,
close-grained, not strong, light brown, with lighter colored sapwood of
5 or 6 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Borders of streams on rich bottom-lands, and on limestone
ridges; Virginia to western Florida and westward through the valley of
the Ohio River to southern Iowa and southeastern Nebraska, eastern
Kansas, the valley of the Washita River, Oklahoma (Ardman County), and
to Kendall, Kerr and Uvalde Counties, western Texas; occasionally
tree-like in western Florida and Mississippi, and of its largest size
only in southern Arkansas and the adjacent portions of Texas; very
abundant on the limestone barrens of central Kentucky and Tennessee.


            3. Rhamnus Purshiana DC. Bearberry. Coffee-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 652]

Leaves deciduous, broad-elliptic, obtuse or bluntly pointed at apex,
rounded or slightly cordate at base, finely serrate, or often nearly
entire, with undulate margins, thin, villose with short hairs on the
lower surface and on the veins above, 1-1/2'--7' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide,
conspicuously netted-veined, with a broad and prominent midrib and
primary veins; turning pale yellow late in the autumn before falling;
petioles stout, often pubescent, 1/2'--1' in length; stipules
membranaceous, acuminate. Flowers on slender pubescent pedicels 1/4'--1'
long, in axillary cymes on slender pubescent peduncles 1/2'--1' in
length on shoots of the year; calyx nearly campanulate, with 5 spreading
acuminate lobes; petals 5, minute, ovate, deeply notched at apex, and
folded round the short stamens; stigma 2 or 3-lobed. Fruit globose or
broad-obovoid, black, 1/3'--1/2' in diameter, slightly or not at all
lobed, with thin rather juicy flesh, and 2 or 3 obovoid nutlets usually
1/3' long, rounded on the back, flattened on the inner surface, with 2
bony tooth-like enlargements at base, 1 on each side of the large scar
of the hilum, and a thin gray or pale yellow-green shell; seeds obtuse
at apex, rounded on the back, seed-coat thin and papery, yellow-brown on
the outer surface, bright orange color on the inner surface like the
cotyledons.

A tree, 35 deg.--40 deg. high, with a slender trunk often 18'--20' in diameter,
separating 10 deg.--15 deg. from the ground into numerous stout upright or
sometimes nearly horizontal branches, and slender branchlets coated at
first with fine soft pubescence, pale yellow-green or reddish brown, and
pubescent, glabrous, or covered with scattered hairs in their second
season and then marked by the elevated oval horizontal leaf-scars; often
shrubby and occasionally prostrate. Winter-buds naked, hoary-tomentose.
Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/4' thick, dark brown to light brown
or gray tinged with red, broken on the surface into short thin scales.
Wood light, soft, not strong, brown tinged with red, with thin lighter
colored sapwood. The bark possesses the drastic properties peculiar to
that of other species of the genus, and is a popular domestic remedy in
Oregon and California, and under the name of Cascara Sagrada has been
admitted into the American materia medica.

Distribution. Rich bottom-lands and the sides of canyons, usually in
coniferous forests; shores of Puget Sound eastward along the mountain
ranges of northern Washington to the Bitter Root Mountains of Idaho and
the shores of Flat Head Lake, Montana, and southward to central
California; Arizona, southern slope of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado
River, Coconino County (_A. Rehder_), Cave Creek Canyon, Chiricahua
Mountains, Cochise County (_J. W. Toumey_).

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of western Europe and of the
eastern United States.




                            5. CEANOTHUS L.


Small trees or shrubs, with slender terete branches, without a terminal
bud, and small scaly axillary buds. Leaves petiolate, 3-ribbed from the
base, or pinnately veined, persistent in the arborescent species.
Flowers on colored pedicels, in umbellate fascicles collected in dense
or prolonged terminal or axillary thyrsoid cymes or panicles, blue or
white; calyx colored, with a turbinate or hemispheric tube and 5
triangular membranaceous petaloid lobes; disk fleshy, thickened above;
petals 5, inserted under the margin of the disk, unguiculate,
wide-spreading, deciduous, the long claw infolded round the stamens;
stamens 5, inserted with and opposite the petals, persistent, filaments
spreading; ovary partly immersed in and more or less adnate to the disk,
3-celled, sometimes 3-angled, the angles often surmounted by a fleshy
gland persistent on the fruit; styles short, united below; stigmas
3-lobed with spreading lobes; ovule erect from the base of the cell.
Fruit 3-lobed, subglobose, with a thin outer coat, soon becoming dry,
and separating into 3 crustaceous or cartilaginous longitudinally
2-valved nutlets. Seeds erect, obovoid, lenticellate, with a broad basal
excrescence surrounding the hilum; seed-coat thin, crustaceous; albumen
fleshy; embryo axile; cotyledons oval or obovate.

Ceanothus is confined to the temperate and warmer regions of North
America, with about thirty species, mostly belonging to California. The
leaves, bark, and roots are astringent and tonic. Of the species of the
United States three are small trees.

The generic name is from {keanothos}, the classical name of some spiny
plant.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Branchlets not spinose, leaves 3-ribbed.
    Leaves broad-ovate to elliptic, subcordate or rounded at base, pale
          and tomentose below.
                                                     1. C. arboreus (G).
    Leaves elliptic, acute at base, glabrous except on the veins below.
                                                 2. C. thyrsiflorus (G).
  Branchlets spinose; leaves with a single midrib, mostly elliptic,
        rounded or subcordate at base, glabrous.
                                                     3. C. spinosus (G).


                     1. Ceanothus arboreus Greene.

[Illustration: Fig. 653]

Leaves broad-ovate or elliptic, acute, conspicuously glandular-crenate,
dark green and softly puberulent on the upper surface, pale and densely
tomentose on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--4' long and 1'--2-1/2' wide,
with prominent veins; petioles stout, pubescent, 1/2'--1' in length;
stipules subulate from a broad triangular base, 1/4' long. Flowers pale
blue opening in July and August, on slender hairy pedicels 1/2'--1'
long, from the axils of large scarious caducous bracts, in ample
compound densely hoary-pubescent thyrsoid clusters 3'--4' long and
1-1/2'--2' wide, on a leafy or naked axillary peduncle at the end of
young branches. Fruit black, 1/4' across.

A round-headed tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a straight trunk 6'--10' in
diameter, dividing 4 deg.--5 deg. from the ground into many stout spreading
branches, and slender slightly angled pale brown branchlets covered with
short dense tomentum, becoming in their second season terete, nearly
glabrous, roughened with scattered lenticels and marked by large
elevated leaf-scars; often a shrub. Bark of the trunk dark brown, about
1/8' thick, and broken into small square plates separating into thick
scales.

Distribution. Santa Catalina, Santa Cruz, and Santa Rosa Islands of the
Santa Barbara group off the coast of southern California; most abundant
and of its largest size on the northern slopes of Santa Cruz; on the
other islands usually shrubby, with numerous slender stems.


    2. Ceanothus thyrsiflorus Eschs. Blue Myrtle. California Lilac.

[Illustration: Fig. 654]

Leaves oblong or oblong-ovate, minutely glandular-serrate, smooth and
lustrous on the upper surface and paler and slightly pubescent on the
lower surface, especially along the 3 prominent ribs, 1'--1-1/2' long
and 1/2'--1' wide; petioles stout, 1/3'--1/2' in length; stipules
membranaceous, acute. Flowers blue or white, appearing in early spring
in small pedunculate corymbs from the axils of minute deciduous bracts,
and collected into slender rather loose thyrsoid clusters 2'--3' long in
the axils of upper leaves or of small scarious bracts, and usually
surmounted by the terminal leafy shoot of the branch. Fruit ripening
from July to December, black; seeds 1/12' long, smooth, dark brown or
nearly black.

A tree, occasionally 35 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--14' in diameter,
dividing 5 deg.--6 deg. from the ground into many small wide-spreading branches,
and conspicuously angled pale yellow-green branchlets slightly pubescent
when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous; more often a tall or low
shrub. Bark of the trunk thin, with a bright red-brown surface
separating into thin narrow appressed scales. Wood close-grained, rather
soft, light brown, with thin darker colored sapwood.

Distribution. Shady hillsides on the borders of the forest and often in
the neighborhood of streams; coast mountains of California from
Mendocino County to the valley of the San Luis Rey River, San Diego
County; of its largest size northward, and in the Redwood-forests of the
Santa Cruz Mountains; southward often a low shrub, frequently flowering
on the wind-swept shores of the ocean when only 1 deg.--2 deg. high.


                   3. Ceanothus spinosus Nutt. Lilac.

[Illustration: Fig. 655]

Leaves elliptic to oblong, full and rounded, apiculate or often slightly
emarginate or gradually narrowed and pointed or rarely 3-lobed at apex,
and rounded or cuneate at base, when they unfold villose-pubescent below
along the stout midrib and obscure primary veins, soon glabrous,
coriaceous, usually about 1' long and 1/2' wide; petioles stout,
1/6'--1/3' in length, at first villose, becoming nearly glabrous; leaves
on vigorous shoots sometimes ovate, conspicuously 3-nerved, irregularly
serrate with incurved apiculate teeth, or coarsely dentate, and often
1-1/2' long and 5/8' wide; stipules minute, acute. Flowers light or dark
blue, very fragrant, opening from March until May, in lax corymbs from
the axils of acute pubescent red caducous bracts on upper leafy
branchlets of the year, the whole inflorescence forming an open thyrsus
often 5'--6' long and 3'--4' thick, leafless toward the apex. Fruit
depressed, obscurely lobed, crestless, black, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 5'--6' in diameter, upright branches
forming a narrow open head, and slender divaricate angled branchlets
pubescent or puberulous when they first appear, soon glabrous, bright
green, ultimately reddish brown, frequently terminating in sharp
leafless thorn-like points; more often shrubby. Bark of the trunk thin,
red-brown, roughened by small closely appressed scales.

Distribution. California, common in mountain canyons near the coast of
Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angeles Counties; often forming a dense
undergrowth in the forest, which it enlivens for many weeks in early
spring by its large clusters of bright blue flowers.




                          6. COLUBRINA Brong.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branches and scaly buds. Leaves alternate,
petiolate, pinnately veined or triple-veined from the base, often
ferrugineo-tomentose on the lower surface, persistent. Flowers axillary,
in contracted few-flowered cymes or fascicles, yellow or greenish
yellow; calyx-tube hemispheric, persistent, 5-lobed, the lobes
spreading, triangular-ovate, keeled on the inner surface, deciduous by a
circumscissile line; disk fleshy, annular, 5-angled or indistinctly 5 or
10-lobed; petals 5 yellow or white, inserted under the margin of the
disk, shorter than the lobes of the calyx, cucullate, unguiculate,
infolding the stamens; stamens 5, opposite to and inserted with the
petals; filaments incurved; anthers ovoid; ovary surrounded by and
confluent with the disk, 3-celled, subglobose, contracted into a slender
3-lobed style, the obtuse lobes stigmatic on the inner face; ovule
erect, from the base of the cell. Fruit subglobose, 3-lobed, the outer
coat thin and septicidally dehiscent into 3 1-seeded crustaceous nutlets
2-valved at apex. Seeds erect, broad-obovoid, compressed, 3-angled;
seed-coat coriaceous, smooth and shining; embryo axile in thick fleshy
albumen; cotyledons orbicular, flat or incurved, thin or fleshy.

Colubrina with about a dozen species is confined to the tropics, with
the largest number of species in the New World. Of the four species
found within the territory of the United States three are arborescent.

The generic name is from _coluber_, a serpent, probably on account of
the peculiar twisting of the deep furrows on the stems of some of the
species.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves thin, elliptic, ovate or lanceolate, glabrous at maturity.
                                                    1. C. reclinata (D).
  Leaves thick or coriaceous.
    Leaves oblong to elliptic, rounded or acute at apex, densely
          soft-pubescent.
                                                     2. C. cubensis (D).
    Leaves elliptic to ovate-lanceolate, bluntly pointed at apex,
          coriaceous, rusty-pubescent beneath.
                                                  3. C. arborescens (D).


               1. Colubrina reclinata Brong. Naked Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 656]

Leaves elliptic, ovate or lanceolate, usually contracted at apex into a
blunt point, cuneate or somewhat rounded and furnished with 2
conspicuous marginal glands at base, and entire when they unfold in
early summer thin, glabrous or finely puberulent below and along the
principal veins, and at maturity thin, yellow-green, 2-1/2'--3' long and
1-1/2' to nearly 2' wide, with a stout midrib and arcuate primary veins;
persistent until their second year; petioles slender, 1/2' in length.
Flowers in cymes rather shorter than the petioles, on shoots of the
year, pubescent, soon becoming glabrate. Fruit 1/4' in diameter and dark
orange-red, ripening late in the autumn, on pedicels 1/2' in length;
seeds light red-brown, 1/8' long.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, divided by
numerous irregular deep furrows multiplying and spreading in all
directions, and branchlets slightly angled when they first appear,
puberulent and reddish brown, soon becoming glabrate, and in their
second season nearly terete, gray or light brown, and marked by numerous
small light-colored lenticels. Bark of the trunk thin, orange-brown,
exfoliating in large papery scales. Wood heavy, hard, very strong, dark
brown tinged with yellow, with thin light yellow sapwood of 8--10 layers
of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, on Umbrella Key, the north end of Key Largo, and
on some of the small keys south of Elliott's Key; of its largest size
and forming a forest of considerable extent on Umbrella Key; on the
Bahama Islands and on many of the Antilles.


                      2. Colubrina cubensis Brong.

[Illustration: Fig. 657]

Leaves oblong to elliptic, gradually narrowed and rounded or acute and
apiculate at apex, rounded or cuneate at the often unsymmetric base,
slightly crenulate-serrate with broad rounded teeth, thick, dull dark
green and soft-pubescent on the upper surface, pale and pubescent on the
lower surface, 3-1/2'--5' long and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide, with a prominent
pubescent yellow midrib and slender primary veins; petioles slender,
yellow, densely pubescent, 1/3'--1/2' in length; stipules
linear-lanceolate, long-acuminate, pubescent, 1/3' in length. Flowers
minute on pedicels 1/6' long, from the axils of ovate acuminate villose
caducous bracts, in villose cymes on peduncles longer than the petioles;
calyx densely pubescent, the lobes triangular, ovate, acute, about as
long as the yellow petals. Fruit globose, about 1/3' in diameter.

A tree in Florida from 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter
(_teste J. K. Small_) and slender light red-brown pubescent branchlets.

Distribution. Florida, hummocks of the Everglade Keys, Dade County; on
the Bahama Islands and in Cuba and Hispaniola.


                     3. Colubrina arborescens Sarg.

                      _Colubrina Colubrina_ Mills.

[Illustration: Fig. 658]

Leaves coriaceous, persistent, elliptic to ovate-lanceolate, gradually
narrowed and bluntly pointed at apex, narrowed and rounded or cuneate at
base, entire, dark green, glabrous and lustrous on the upper surface,
pale and coated on the lower surface with thick rusty pubescence and
sometimes marked by conspicuous glands mostly at the end of small veins,
2'--4-1/2' long and 1-1/4'--2-1/2' wide, with a thick midrib; petioles
stout, rusty-pubescent, 1/2'--3/4' in length; stipules oblong,
acuminate, rusty-pubescent, caducous. Flowers minute, in axillary cymes
shorter than the petioles, covered with persistent rusty pubescence and
generally produced on short axillary branches; petals white or nearly
white. Fruit on a stout rusty-pubescent pedicel, about 1/2' long, on a
much thickened peduncle, obovoid to subglobose, dark purple or nearly
black, 5/12' in diameter; nutlets light yellow; seed about 1/6' long.

A tree, sometimes 25 deg. high, with a straight trunk 8'--12' in diameter,
large erect branches and stout branchlets densely rusty-pubescent when
they first appear, and light gray, puberulous and marked by small dark
lenticels in their second year; in Florida more often a shrub.

Distribution. Florida, on the Everglade and southern keys; on the Bahama
Islands and on several of the Antilles.




                            XXXIX. TILIACEAE.


Trees, shrubs, or herbs, with alternate simple leaves, and free
stipules. Flowers regular, perfect; sepals valvate in the bud,
deciduous; corolla hypogynous; stamens numerous, with 2-celled anthers,
the cells opening longitudinally; pistil compound; styles united into 1;
stigma capitate. Fruit capsular or nut-like. Seeds with albumen; embryo
with broad foliaceous cotyledons.

The Linden family with forty-four genera is chiefly tropical, with more
representatives in the southern than in the northern hemisphere. Of the
three North American genera only Tilia is arborescent.




                     1. TILIA L. Bass Wood. Linden.


Trees, with terete moderately stout branchlets, without a terminal bud,
large compressed acute axillary buds, with numerous imbricated scales,
those of the inner rank accrescent, mucilaginous juice, and tough
fibrous inner bark. Leaves conduplicate in the bud, long-petiolate,
2-ranked, cordate or truncate at the oblique base, acute or acuminate,
serrate, deciduous, their petioles in falling leaving large elevated
horizontal leaf-scars displaying the ends of numerous fibro-vascular
bundles; stipules ligulate, membranaceous, caducous. Flowers
nectariferous, fragrant, on slender clavate pedicels, in axillary or
terminal cymes, with minute caducous bracts at the base of the branches,
their peduncle more or less connate with the axis of a large
membranaceous light green ligulate often obovate persistent
conspicuously reticulate-veined bract; sepals 5, distinct; petals 5,
imbricated in the bud, alternate with the sepals, sometimes thickened
and glandular at the narrow base, creamy white or yellow, deciduous;
stamens inserted on a short hypogynous receptacle; filaments filiform,
forked near the apex, collected into 5 clusters and united at base with
each other and (in the American species) with a spatulate petaloid scale
(_staminodium_) placed opposite each petal, the branches of the filament
bearing oblong extrorse half anthers; ovary sessile, tomentose,
5-celled, the cells opposite the sepals; style erect, dilated at apex
into 5 spreading stigmatic lobes; ovules 2 in each cell, ascending from
the middle of its inner angle, semianatropous, the micropyle
centripetal-inferior. Fruit nut-like, woody, subglobose to short-oblong
or ovoid, sometimes ribbed, tomentose, 1-celled by the obliteration of
the partitions, 1 or 2-seeded. Seeds obovoid, amphitropous, ascending;
seed-coat cartilaginous, light reddish brown; embryo large, often
curved, in fleshy albumen; cotyledons reniform or cordate, palmately
5-lobed, the margins irregularly involute or crumpled; radicle inferior.

Tilia with some thirty species is widely distributed in the temperate
regions of the northern hemisphere with the exception of western
America, central Asia, and the Himalayas. Tilia produces soft
straight-grained pale-colored light wood, largely used for the interior
finish of buildings, in cabinet-making, for the sounding-boards of
pianos, wood-carving and wooden ware, and in the manufacture of paper.
The tough inner bark is largely manufactured into mats, cords,
fish-nets, coarse cloths, and shoes. Lime-flower oil, obtained by
distilling the flowers of the European species, is used in perfumery.
The flowers yield large quantities of nectar, and honey made near
forests of Tilia is unsurpassed in flavor and delicacy. Many of the
species are planted as shade and ornamental trees, and some of the
European species are now common in the gardens and parks of the eastern
United States.


            CONSPECTUS OF THE SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Surface of the leaves glabrous at maturity.
    Leaves glabrous or almost glabrous when they unfold, coarsely
          serrate.
      Leaves furnished with conspicuous tufts of axillary hairs, their
            lower surface light green and lustrous; pedicels glabrous or
            nearly glabrous.
                                                       1. T. glabra (A).
      Leaves usually without tufts of axillary hairs, their lower
            surface not lustrous; pedicels densely hoary-tomentose.
                                                         2. T. nuda (C).
    Leaves hoary-tomentose when they unfold.
      Leaves soon glabrous.
        Leaves coarsely serrate with stout teeth, their veinlets
              conspicuous; branchlets stout, bright red.
                                                     3. T. venulosa (A).
        Leaves finely serrate with straight or incurved teeth, their
              veinlets less conspicuous; branchlets slender, pale
              reddish brown.
                                                   4. T. littoralis (C).
        Leaves crenately serrate, glaucescent on the lower surface.
                                                 5. T. crenoserrata (C).
      Leaves covered below early in the season with articulate hairs,
            becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous.
        Leaves thin, coarsely serrate, green or glaucescent on the lower
              surface, with or without tufts of axillary hairs; summer
              shoots not pubescent.
                                                    6. T. floridana (C).
        Leaves subcoriaceous, finely serrate, bluish green and lustrous
              below early in the season; tufts of axillary hairs minute,
              usually wanting; summer shoots pubescent.
                                                      7. T. Cocksii (C).
  Surface of the leaves pubescent below during the season.
    Lower surface of the leaves covered with short gray firmly attached
          pubescence; tufts of axillary hairs not conspicuous.
                                                  8. T. neglecta (A, C).
    Lower surface of the leaves covered with articulate easily detached
          hairs.
      Branchlets without straight hairs.
        Leaves ovate, acuminate, usually obliquely truncate at base,
              glabrous above, their pubescence brownish or white.
                                                  9. T. caroliniana (C).
        Leaves oblong-ovate, cordate or obliquely cordate at base,
              pubescent above early in the season.
                                                      10. T. texana (C).
        Leaves semiorbicular to broad-ovate, abruptly short-pointed,
              deeply and usually symmetrically cordate at base.
                                                     11. T. phanera (C).
      Branchlets covered with straight hairs; leaves ovate, abruptly
            short-pointed, oblique and truncate at base.
                                                  12. T. lasioclada (C).
  Surface of the leaves tomentose below during the season with close
        firmly attached tomentum.
    Tomentum white, gray, or brown; leaves usually glabrous on the upper
          surface; branchlets and winter-buds glabrous (_occasionally
          pubescent in varieties of 13_).
      Branchlets slender; petioles not more than 1-1/2' in length;
            leaves oblong-ovate, acuminate or abruptly pointed, oblique
            and truncate or cordate at base; tomentum on the leaves of
            upper branches often brown; flowers 1/4'--1/3' long.
                                             13. T. heterophylla (A, C).
      Branchlets stout; petioles up to 3' in length; leaves
            oblong-ovate, acuminate, obliquely truncate at base;
            tomentum always white; flowers 5/12'-1/2' long.
                                                   14. T. monticola (A).
    Tomentum pale or brownish; leaves thickly covered above early in the
          season with fascicled hairs; branchlets tomentose; winter-buds
          pubescent.
                                                   15. T. georgiana (C).


                1. Tilia glabra Vent. Linden. Bass Wood.

                          _Tilia americana_ L.

[Illustration: Fig. 659]

Leaves broad-ovate, contracted at apex into a slender acuminate entire
point, obliquely cordate or sometimes almost truncate at base, coarsely
serrate with incurved glandular teeth, often slightly pubescent when
they first appear soon glabrous with the exception of tufts of rusty
brown hairs in the axils of the principal veins below, thick and firm,
dark dull green on the upper surface, lighter, yellow-green and lustrous
on the lower surface, 5'--6' long and 3'--4' wide; turning pale yellow
in the autumn before falling; petioles slender, 1-1/2'--2' in length.
Flowers 1/2' long, opening early in July on slender slightly angled
pubescent pedicels, in few-flowered slender-branched glabrous cymes;
peduncle slender, glabrous, the free portion 3-1/2'--4' long, its bract
rounded or pointed at apex, 4'--5' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, decurrent
nearly to the base or to within 1/2'--1' of the base of the peduncle;
sepals ovate, acuminate, densely hairy on the inner surface and slightly
pubescent on the outer surface, a third shorter than the lanceolate
petals; staminodia oblong-obovate, bluntly pointed at apex, a third
shorter than the petals; ovary villose; style covered with rufous
tomentum. Fruit short-oblong to oblong-obovoid, rounded or pointed at
apex, 1/3'--1/2' long, and covered with short thick rufous tomentum.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg., or sometimes 120 deg.--130 deg. high, with a tall
trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, small often pendulous branches forming a broad
round-topped head, slender smooth glabrous light gray or light brown
branchlets marked by numerous oblong dark lenticels, becoming darker in
their second and dark gray or brown and conspicuously rugose in their
third year. Winter-buds dark red, ovoid, about 1/4' long. Bark of the
trunk about 1' thick, deeply furrowed, the light brown surface broken
into small thin scales. Wood light brown faintly tinged with red, with
thick hardly distinguishable sapwood of 55--65 layers of annual growth;
employed in the manufacture of paper pulp, and under the name of white
wood largely used in wooden ware, cheap furniture, the panels of
carriages, and for the inner soles of shoes.

Distribution. Rich often moist soil, formerly often in nearly pure
forests; northern New Brunswick to the eastern shores of Lake Superior,
the southern shores of Lake Winnipeg and the valley of the Assiniboine
River, and southward to Pennsylvania, Ohio, eastern Kentucky, southern
Michigan, Indiana and Illinois, eastern Nebraska and northern Missouri.

Often cultivated as a shade and ornamental tree in the northeastern
states, and occasionally in Europe.


                          2. Tilia nuda Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 660]

Leaves thin, ovate, abruptly pointed at apex, obliquely truncate or
unsymmetrically cordate at base, and coarsely serrate with long slender
straight or slightly curved conspicuously glandular teeth, as they
unfold, dark red and sparingly pubescent on the midrib and veins,
glabrous at the end of a few days, without or rarely with small axillary
tufts, dark green on the upper surface, pale yellow-green or glaucous
(var. _glaucescens_ Sarg.) on the lower surface, 4'--4-1/2' long and
2-1/2'--3-1/2' wide; petioles slender, glabrous, 2'--2-1/2' in length.
Flowers opening early in June, about 1/3' long, on hoary-tomentose
pedicels, in broad usually 10 or 12, sometimes 30 or 40-flowered
long-branched glabrous cymes; peduncle glabrous, the free portion
4/5'--1-1/4' in length, its bract oblong, often slightly falcate,
cuneate or rounded at base, rounded at apex, glabrous, 3'--4' long,
1/2'--1-1/4' wide, decurrent nearly to the base of the peduncle; sepals
acute, rusty-tomentose on the outer surface, glabrous on the inner
surface; petals oblong-ovate, narrowed at the rounded apex; staminodia
oblong-obovate rounded at the broad apex; style glabrous. Fruit ripening
in September, subglobose to depressed-globose, covered with rusty
tomentum, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter.

Usually a small tree with pale furrowed or sometimes checkered bark,
small spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and slender
glabrous orange or red-brown branchlets. Winter-buds ovoid, obtusely
pointed, dull red, glabrous, 1/6'--1/5' long.

Distribution. Central and southwestern Mississippi (Hinds and Adams
Counties); Dallas County, Alabama; West Feliciana and Calcasieu
Parishes, Louisiana, to the valley of the Brazos River, eastern Texas,
and to Hempstead County (Fulton and McNab), southern Arkansas; the var.
_glaucescens_ with the type, and near Page, Le Flore County, Oklahoma;
in wet woods subject to overflow at San Augustine, San Augustine County,
Texas, a variety (var. _brevipedunculata_ Sarg.), differs from the type
in the less coarsely serrate smaller leaves glaucescent below, in the
shorter free portion of the peduncle of the inflorescence and its
broader bract. A tree 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with slender glabrous dark
red-brown branchlets.


                        3. Tilia venulosa Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 661]

Leaves broad-ovate, abruptly acuminate at apex, cordate or
unsymmetrically cordate or obliquely truncate or cordate at base,
coarsely serrate with gland-tipped teeth pointing forward, covered when
they unfold with pale tomentum, soon becoming pubescent, and glabrous
before the flowers open, dark yellow-green on the upper surface, paler
on the lower surface, 4'--4-3/4' long and broad, with a prominent pale
yellow midrib slightly villose on the upper side near the base, and 9 or
10 pairs of remote primary veins without axillary tufts and connected by
conspicuous cross veinlets; petioles stout, glabrous, 1-3/4'--2' in
length. Flowers opening early in July, 1/3' long, on slightly pubescent
pedicels, in broad slender-branched nearly glabrous cymes; peduncle
stout, glabrous, red, the free portion 1'--1-1/2' in length, its bract
oblong to slightly obovate, gradually narrowed and rounded at base,
rounded at apex, glabrous on the upper surface, pubescent below on the
midrib and veins, 3-1/2'--6' long and 1-1/4'--1-1/2' wide, longer than
the peduncle and decurrent nearly to its base or to within 1'--1-1/2' of
its base; sepals ovate, acute, pale pubescent on the outer surface,
villose and furnished at base on the inner surface with a tuft of long
white hairs, a third shorter than the lanceolate acuminate petals;
staminodia oblong-obovate, rounded at apex, about as long as the sepals;
stigma slightly villose at base. Fruit ripening the end of September,
subglobose, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter, covered with loose light brown
pubescence.

A tree, 60 deg.--75 deg. high, with stout red glabrous branchlets. Winter-buds
ovoid, cylindric, obtusely pointed, dark red, 1/4'--1/3' in length.

Distribution. North Carolina, rocky "coves" in rich soil, Hickory Nut
Gap, in the Blue Ridge, and near Saluda, Polk County, passing into var.
_multinervis_ Sarg., differing from the type in its obliquely truncate,
not cordate, leaves with 12 or 13 pairs of more crowded primary veins,
ellipsoid fruit, slender branchlets, and smaller winter-buds; a single
tree near Saluda, Polk County.


                       4. Tilia littoralis Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 662]

Leaves ovate, abruptly short-pointed and acute or acuminate at apex,
unsymmetric and rounded on one side and cuneate on the other, or
symmetric and cuneate or oblique and truncate at base, and finely
serrate with straight or incurved glandular teeth, covered above when
they unfold with scattered fascicled hairs and tomentose below, soon
glabrous, and when the flowers open, thin, yellow-green, paler, rarely
glaucous (var. _discolor_ Sarg.) on the lower than on the upper surface,
3'--4' long and 1-3/4'--2' wide, with a slender midrib and primary veins
and small conspicuous tufts of rusty brown axillary hairs; petioles
slender, glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves on young vigorous shoots
broad-ovate, truncate or slightly cordate at base, more coarsely
serrate, pubescent with fascicled hairs especially on the midrib and
veins, 4'--5' long and 3'--4' wide; petioles densely pubescent. Flowers
opening the middle of June, 1/3' long, on pale tomentose pedicels, in
small, compact, mostly 9--15-flowered, pubescent cymes; peduncle covered
with scattered fascicled hairs, the free portion 3/5'--1' long, its
bract gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, rounded at apex, ciliate
on the margins, pubescent on the midrib, otherwise glabrous, 2'--7'
long, 1/4'--2/5' wide, longer or shorter than and decurrent to the base
or nearly to the base of the peduncle; sepals acuminate, pale pubescent
on the outer surface, villose on the inner surface along the margins and
at the base with long white hairs; petals acuminate; staminodia
oblong-obovate, rounded at apex. Fruit ellipsoid to depressed-globose,
apiculate, covered with pale brown tomentum, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter.

A tree with slender glabrous branchlets densely coated when they first
appear with pale pubescence, soon glabrous, light reddish brown during
their first summer, often bright red during their first winter, becoming
purple the following year and ultimately light gray-brown. Winter-buds
ovoid, glabrous or puberulous, bright red, about 1/5' long and
1/12'--1/8' in diameter.

Distribution. Georgia, shore of Colonel's Island near the mouths of the
North Newport and Medway Rivers, near Durham, Liberty County; the var.
_discolor_ with the type


                      5. Tilia crenoserrata Sarg.

                  _Tilia floridana_ Sarg., not Small.

Leaves ovate, abruptly narrowed and acuminate at apex, usually oblique
and unsymmetrically cordate or truncate or occasionally symmetrical and
cordate at base, crenately serrate, the teeth tipped with minute glands,
covered when they unfold with pale caducous tomentum, and at maturity
dark green and lustrous above, glaucescent below, glabrous with the
exception of minute axillary tufts of rusty hairs, mostly 3-1/2'--5-1/2'
long and 2-3/4'--3' wide; petioles slender, glabrous, about 1-1/4' in
length. Flowers opening the middle of June, 1/3' long, on
hoary-tomentose pedicels, in compact mostly 10--18-flowered tomentose
cymes; peduncle glabrous, the free portion 1'--1-1/2' in length, its
bract oblong-obovate, cuneate at base, rounded at apex, glabrous, 3'--5'
long, usually about 4/5' wide, decurrent nearly to the base of the
peduncle; sepals acute, hoary-tomentose on the outer surface, coated
with pale tomentum mixed with long white hairs on the inner surface;
petals narrow-acuminate; staminodia oblong-obovate, notched at apex.
Fruit ripening from the middle to the end of August, ellipsoid,
conspicuously apiculate at apex, rusty-tomentose, 1/3'--2/5' long and
1/4'--1/3' in diameter.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg., rarely 60 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' rarely 18'--20'
in diameter, and slender glabrous red-brown branchlets. Winter-buds
ovoid, acute, dark dull red, glabrous, 1/6'--1/5' long.

Distribution. Near Albany, Dougherty County, Georgia, to central Florida
(Levy, Columbia, Alachua, Putnam, Seminole and Orange Counties).


                        6. Tilia floridana Ashe.

[Illustration: Fig. 663]

Leaves broad-ovate, acuminate or abruptly acuminate at apex, cordate or
obliquely truncate at base and coarsely serrate with apiculate teeth,
tinged with red and tomentose below when they unfold, fully grown and
glabrous or nearly glabrous when the flowers open late in May or in
early June, and at maturity thin, glabrous, dark yellow-green on the
upper surface, pale or rarely covered below with a silvery white bloom
(var. _hypoleuca_ Sarg.), 3-1/2'--5' long and 2-1/2'--3-1/2' wide, with
a slender midrib and primary veins; in the east usually without axillary
tufts, often present and sometimes conspicuous westward; petioles
slender, glabrous, 3/4'--1' in length. Flowers opening in early summer
1/5'--1/4' long, on hoary-tomentose rarely puberulous (var. _australis_
Sarg.) pedicels, in few-flowered rather compact pubescent corymbs;
peduncle pubescent, the free portion 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length, its bract
oblong-obovate to oblong, rounded at apex, often falcate, glabrous,
3'--6' long, 1/2'--3/4' wide, decurrent nearly to the base of the
peduncle; sepals narrow, ovate, acuminate, hoary-tomentose on the outer
surface, sparingly villose on the inner surface, two-thirds as long as
the lanceolate petals; staminodia oblong-obovate, acute, nearly as long
as the petals; style glabrous. Fruit ripening in August and September,
subglobose to ellipsoid, rusty-tomentose, 1/2' in diameter.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--15' in diameter, and slender
glabrous red-brown or yellow branchlets. Winter-buds obtuse, dark
red-brown, glabrous, about 1/6' long.

Distribution. North Carolina (Polk County) to western Florida and
westward through northern and central Alabama, central Mississippi,
northern and western Louisiana, eastern and over the Edwards Plateau to
Kerr, Bandera and Uvalde Counties, Texas, and through southern and
western Arkansas to eastern Oklahoma, Missouri and eastern Kentucky; in
northeastern Mexico; the var. australis in Blount County, Alabama. A
variety (var. _oblongifolia_ Sarg.) with narrower more elongated leaves
with more prominent tufts of axillary hairs occurs in Putnam, Leon and
Gadsden Counties, Florida, on the bluffs of the Alabama River near
Berlin, Dallas County, Alabama, in Hinds, Rankin and Adams Counties,
Mississippi, in West Feliciana, Iberia (Avery Island) and Natchitoches
Parishes, Louisiana, in Hempstead and Salina Counties, Arkansas, and in
Harris, Anderson and Livingston Counties, Texas.


                         7. Tilia Cocksii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 664]

Leaves ovate, abruptly acuminate at apex, very oblique at the truncate
or rounded base, dentate with small remote glandular apiculate teeth,
covered when they unfold with loose floccose pubescence, nearly glabrous
when fully grown early in April, when the flowers open the middle of May
dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, pale blue-green and
lustrous below, and at mid-summer when the fruit ripens, subcoriaceous,
dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, with slender primary veins without or occasionally with minute
axillary tufts, and connected by conspicuous straight or curved
veinlets, 3-1/2'--4' long and 2-1/2'--3' wide; petioles slender,
glabrous, 3/4'--1' in length; leaves on leading summer branchlets
sometimes obliquely cordate, more coarsely serrate, covered on the upper
surface with short fascicled hairs, and floccose-pubescent on the lower
surface, 4'--5' long and 4'--4-3/4' wide, their petioles puberulous.
Flowers opening the middle of May, 1/4' long, on tomentose pedicels, in
compact pubescent many-flowered cymes; peduncle slender, glabrous, the
free portion only 3/5'--4/5' in length, its bract oblong, occasionally
slightly obovate, rounded at the ends, hoary-tomentose on the under
surface and pubescent on the upper surface when it first appears, and
when the flowers open puberulous below and glabrous above, 3-1/2'--6'
long, 1/2'--3/5' wide and shorter than and decurrent to the base of the
peduncle; sepals ovate, acuminate, pale pubescent on the outer surface,
villose at the base on the inner surface, a third shorter than the
lanceolate acuminate petals; staminodia oblong-obovate, rounded at apex,
about half the length of the petals; style glabrous. Fruit ripening the
middle of July, globose to depressed-globose, covered with loose brown
tomentum, 1/4' in diameter.

A small tree with slender dull red glabrous branchlets, the leading
branchlets in summer more or less pubescent. Winter-buds ovoid, acute,
dull red, glabrous or pubescent on leading shoots, 1/5'--1/4' long.

Distribution. Louisiana, river banks and low woods, Lake Charles and
West Lake Charles, Calcasieu Parish.


                        8. Tilia neglecta Spach.

                   _Tilia Michauxii_ Sarg., not Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 665]

Leaves thick and firm, acute or abruptly narrowed and long-pointed at
apex, obliquely concave or unsymmetrically cordate at base, coarsely
serrate with straight apiculate teeth pointing forward, dark green,
smooth, glabrous and lustrous above, covered below except on the midrib
and veins more or less thickly with short gray pubescence often slightly
tinged with brown, and furnished with conspicuous tufts of axillary
hairs, usually 4'--5-1/2' long and 2-1/2'--4-1/2' wide; petioles stout,
glabrous, 1-1/4'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers opening in June and July
about 2/5' long, on pubescent or nearly glabrous pedicels, in
long-branched slender glabrous mostly 5--15-flowered cymes; peduncle
slender, glabrous, the free portion 1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length, its bract
gradually narrowed and cuneate or unsymmetrically cuneate or rounded at
base, rounded at apex, glabrous, 2-3/4'--4-1/2' long, 2/5'--4/5' wide
and longer than and decurrent nearly to the base or to within 3/5' of
the base of the peduncle; sepals broad-ovate, acute, ciliate on the
margins, glabrous on the outer surface, covered on the inner surface
with long white hairs, about half as long as the lanceolate petals
rounded and notched at apex and rather longer than the spatulate
staminodia; stamens included; style villose toward the base. Fruit
ripening in September, ellipsoid, ovoid, obovoid, or depressed-globose,
rounded or acute or rarely gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex,
rarely 5-angled, covered with rusty or pale pubescence, usually about
1/3' in diameter.

A tree, 75 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 3 deg. in diameter, smooth
often pendulous branches forming a broad round head, and slender
glabrous branchlets. Winter-buds ovoid, rounded at the narrowed apex,
about 1/5' long, with glabrous red-brown or light brown scales. Bark of
the trunk about 1' thick, deeply furrowed, pale reddish brown and
covered with small thin scales.

Distribution. Rich moist soil, Province of Quebec, near Montreal, to the
coast of Massachusetts and New York, through the middle states to the
valley of the Potomac River and along the Appalachian Mountains to those
of North Carolina, and to Iuka, Tishomingo County, Mississippi, and from
central and western New York to northern Missouri.


                       9. Tilia caroliniana Mill.

[Illustration: Fig. 666]

Leaves ovate, oblique and truncate or cordate at base, abruptly
long-pointed at apex, coarsely dentate with broad apiculate glandular
teeth pointing forward, and coated below with a rusty or pale easily
detached pubescence of fascicled hairs, coated when they unfold with
hoary tomentum, soon glabrous on the upper surface, and at maturity dark
yellow-green and lustrous above, 2-3/4'--4-1/2' long and 2-1/2'--5'
wide; petioles stout, glabrous, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers opening
the middle of June, 1/4' long, on slender pubescent pedicels, in small
stout-branched pubescent mostly 8--15-flowered cymes; peduncle slender,
pubescent, the free portion 3/4'--1-1/4' long, its bract oblong-obovate,
cuneate at base, rounded or acute at apex, nearly glabrous on the upper
surface when it first appears, pubescent becoming glabrous or almost
glabrous below, 4'--5' long and 4/5' wide, longer or shorter than and
decurrent to the base or nearly to the base of the peduncle; sepals
ovate, acuminate, ciliate on the margins, brown and covered with pale
pubescence on the outer surface, coated on the inner surface with long
white hairs; petals lanceolate, acuminate, a third longer than the
sepals; staminodia oblong-obovate, rounded at apex, rather shorter than
the petals; style tomentose at base or glabrous. Fruit subglobose,
ellipsoid or obovoid, 1/8' in diameter.

A large tree with slender red-brown glabrous or slightly pubescent
branchlets. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, glabrous or rarely pubescent,
about 1/4' long.

Distribution. Coast of North Carolina (Wrightsville Beach and the
neighborhood of Wilmington, New Hanover County), southward in the
immediate neighborhood of the coast to Liberty County, Georgia; western
Louisiana to southern Arkansas (Hempstead and Clark Counties) common,
and through eastern Texas to the Edwards Plateau (near Boerne, Kendall
County); in Orizaba. Passing into


                 Tilia caroliniana var. rhoophila Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 667]

Differing from the type in its pubescent branchlets and winter-buds, its
usually larger leaves, and in its tomentose corymbs of more numerous
flowers. Leaves broad-ovate, abruptly short-pointed and acuminate at
apex, oblique and truncate or cordate at base, coarsely serrate with
broad apiculate teeth pointing forward, dark green and lustrous on the
upper surface, pale and thickly covered on the lower surface with
persistent white or brownish pubescence, 4'--5' long and 2-1/2'--5'
wide, with a slender midrib and primary veins pubescent on the lower
side, and small conspicuous axillary tufts of pale hairs; petioles
stout, thickly coated with pubescence, 1'--1-3/4' in length; leaves on
vigorous shoots often 6' long, and 5-1/2' wide, and occasionally 10'
long and 9' wide. Flowers 1/4' long, on short hoary-tomentose pedicels,
in wide thin-branched pubescent many-flowered (sometimes 50) cymes;
peduncle thickly covered with fascicled hairs, the free portion 1/4'
long, its bract oblong, unequally rounded at base, rounded at apex,
glabrous on the upper surface, pubescent on the lower surface, 4'--6'
long, 1'--2' wide, usually shorter than and decurrent nearly to the base
of the peduncle; sepals acuminate, coated on the outer surface with pale
or slightly rusty pubescence, villose and furnished at base on the inner
surface with tufts of long hairs; petals lanceolate, acuminate and
ciliate at apex, about a third longer than the sepals; staminodia
spatulate, acute, about half the length of the petals; style coated at
base with long white hairs. Fruit subglobose, covered with rusty
tomentum, about 1/3' in diameter.

A tree with slender branchlets thickly coated during their first year
with pale pubescence, dark red-brown or gray and puberulous during their
second season. Winter-buds covered with pale pubescence.

Distribution. Western Louisiana (Calcasieu and Jefferson Davis Parishes)
to Hempstead County, Arkansas, and through eastern Texas to the valley
of the upper Guadalupe River, Kerr County.


                         10. Tilia texana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 668]

Leaves thin, oblong-ovate, abruptly contracted into a long slender
acuminate point, cordate or obliquely cordate at base, finely dentate
with broad apiculate teeth, early in the season pubescent above with
scattered fascicled hairs and covered below with brownish slightly
attached pubescence, and in the autumn light yellow-green, lustrous and
nearly glabrous on the upper surface, slightly pubescent on the lower
surface, 4'--5-1/2' long and 3-1/4'--5' wide, with a slender midrib and
primary veins sparingly villose on the upper side and nearly glabrous on
the lower side, and small axillary tufts of brownish hairs; petioles
slender, pubescent with fascicled hairs, 1'--1-1/2' in length; leaves on
vigorous shoots often furnished with one or two large lateral acuminate
serrate lobes, more coarsely dentate and more thickly covered on the
lower surface with pubescence, often 5-1/2'--6' long and 3-1/2'--6'
wide. Flowers opening the middle of June, 1/4' long, on slender
tomentose pedicels, in small villose-pubescent mostly 7--10-flowered
cymes; peduncle slender, slightly villose-pubescent, the free portion
1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length, its bract oblong-ovate to slightly obovate,
unsymmetrically cuneate at base, rounded and occasionally lobed at apex,
glabrous on the upper surface, densely pubescent early in the season,
later becoming nearly glabrous on the lower surface, 3'--6' long and
3/4'--1-1/4' wide, longer or shorter than the peduncle and decurrent to
its base or to within 1-1/2' of its base; sepals ovate, acute, pale
pubescent on the outer surface, covered on the inner surface with white
hairs longer and more abundant near the base; petals lanceolate,
acuminate, a third longer than the sepals; staminodia linear-lanceolate,
acuminate; style hoary-tomentose at base. Fruit ellipsoid, covered with
rusty brown tomentum, 1/3' long and 1/4' broad.

A small tree with slender branchlets thickly covered during their first
season with close pale pubescence, and pale and puberulous or glabrous
in their second year; on vigorous terminal branchlets often with
thicker, light rusty brown pubescence. Winter-buds ovoid, obtusely
pointed, thickly covered with pale pubescence, 1/4' long.

Distribution. Texas, Brazos and Cherokee Counties, on Spring Creek near
Boerne, Kendall County, and on the rocky banks of the Guadalupe River at
Kerrville, Kerr County.


                        11. Tilia phanera Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 669]

Leaves semiorbicular to broad-ovate, deeply and usually symmetrically
cordate at base, abruptly short-pointed at apex, finely dentate with
straight or incurved apiculate teeth, glabrous above when they unfold
with the exception of a few hairs on the midrib and veins, and thickly
coated below with hoary tomentum, and at maturity thin, blue-green,
smooth and lustrous on the upper surface, paler and often brownish and
coated with a floccose easily detached pubescence of fascicled hairs or
scabrate (var. _scabrida_ Sarg.) on the lower surface, 2'--4' wide and
usually rather broader than long, with a slender midrib and primary
veins pubescent on the lower side, and small axillary clusters of rusty
brown hairs; petioles slender, coated when they first appear with hoary
tomentum, glabrous or slightly pubescent in the autumn, 1'--1-1/2' in
length. Flowers opening the middle of June, 1/5' long, on tomentose
pedicels, in compact villose mostly 16--20-flowered cymes; peduncle
villose, the free portion 1-1/4' in length, its bract obovate, cuneate
at base, broad and rounded at apex, floccose-pubescent on the lower
surface, nearly glabrous on the upper surface, 3'--3-1/2' long and
1/2'--1' wide, longer than the peduncle and decurrent to its base or to
within 1/4' of its base; sepals acuminate, pale pubescent on the outer
surface, villose on the margins and furnished at base on the inner
surface with a tuft of long white hairs, broader and shorter than the
lanceolate acuminate petals; staminodia oblong-obovate, rounded at apex,
style glabrous except at the base. Fruit ripening the end of September,
ellipsoid, covered with rusty tomentum, 1/3'--2/5' long and 1/4' wide,
on a stout, densely floccose-pubescent pedicel.

A tree with slender light gray-brown often zigzag branchlets covered
when they first appear with fascicled hairs and deciduous during their
first summer. Winter-buds ovoid, obtusely pointed, terete, reddish
brown, glabrous, 1/6'--1/5' long.

Distribution. Texas, banks of Spring Creek, near Boerne, Kendall County;
the var. _scabrida_ on a low limestone bluff of the Blanco River, near
Blanco, Blanco County, near College Station, Brazos County, and at
Velasco, Brazoria County.


                       12. Tilia lasioclada Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 670]

Leaves ovate, abruptly contracted at apex into a short acuminate point,
oblique and truncate or on weak branchlets, often nearly symmetric and
deeply cordate at base, and finely serrate with straight apiculate
teeth, covered above when they unfold with soft caducous hairs and
pubescent below, and at maturity thick, bright green, smooth and
lustrous on the upper surface, pale and covered on the lower surface
with a thick floccose easily detached pubescence of fascicled hairs,
pale on those of lower leaves and often rufous on those of upper
branches, 4'--6' long and 3-1/4'--5' wide, with a slender midrib and
veins covered below with straight hairs mixed with fascicled hairs, and
small conspicuous axillary tufts; petioles covered when they first
appear with straight hairs mixed with fascicled hairs, soon glabrous,
usually 1-1/4'--1-1/2' in length, those of the leaves of weak branchlets
very slender and often 2'--2-1/2' long. Flowers in May, 1/6'--1/5' long,
on stout villose pedicels, in long-branched mostly 10--15-flowered cymes
more or less thickly covered with straight white hairs; peduncle covered
with long white hairs, the free portion 1'--1-1/4' in length, its bract
rounded and unsymmetric or acute at base, rounded or acute at apex, the
midrib more or less thickly covered on the lower side with straight
hairs, otherwise glabrous, 3-1/2'--5' long and 1' wide, decurrent nearly
to the base or to within 1' of the base of the peduncle; sepals narrow,
acute, pubescent on the outer surface, villose on the inner surface,
about one-third as long as the lanceolate acuminate petals; staminodia
spatulate, rounded and often lobed at apex, about as long as the sepals;
style slightly villose at base. Fruit ripening in September, globose or
depressed-globose, covered with rusty tomentum, about 2/5' in diameter.

A tree, sometimes 60 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--24' in diameter, heavy
branches forming a broad round-topped head, and stout red-brown
branchlets sometimes glabrous in early summer and sometimes covered more
or less thickly during their first and second seasons with long straight
hairs.

Distribution. Valley of the Savannah River, near Abbeville, South
Carolina, to Shell Bluff, Burke County, Georgia; River Junction, Gadsden
County, Florida.


                      13. Tilia heterophylla Vent.

[Illustration: Fig. 671]

Leaves ovate, obliquely truncate or rarely slightly cordate at base,
gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex, finely dentate with apiculate
gland-tipped teeth, pubescent above when they unfold with caducous
fascicled hairs, and at maturity dark green and glabrous on the upper
surface, covered on the lower surface with thick, firmly attached, white
or on upper branches often brownish tomentum, and usually furnished with
small axillary tufts of rusty brown hairs, 3-1/4'--5-1/4' long and
2-1/2'--2-3/4' wide; petioles slender, glabrous, 1-1/2'--1-3/4' in
length. Flowers 1/4' long, opening in early summer, on pedicels
pubescent with fascicled hairs, in wide mostly 10--20-flowered pubescent
corymbs; peduncle glabrous, the free portion 1/12'--1/6' in length, its
bract narrowed and rounded at apex, unsymmetrically cuneate at base,
pubescent on the upper surface, tomentose on the lower surface when it
first appears, becoming glabrous, 4'--6' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide,
nearly sessile or decurrent to within 1-1/2' of the base of the
peduncle; sepals acuminate, pale-pubescent on the outer surface, villose
on the inner surface and furnished at base with a tuft of long white
hairs; petals lanceolate, acuminate, a third longer than the sepals;
staminodia oblong-ovate, acute, sometimes notched at apex; style villose
at base with long white hairs. Fruit ellipsoid, apiculate at apex,
covered with rusty brown tomentum, about 1/3' long.

A large tree with slender, glabrous, reddish or yellowish brown
branchlets and oblong-ovate slightly flattened glabrous winter-buds
1/5'--1/3' in length, the outer scales slightly ciliate at apex.

Distribution. White Sulphur Springs, Greenbrier County, West Virginia;
Piedmont region of North and South Carolina and Georgia; near
Tallahassee, Leon County, River Junction, Gadsden County, and Rock Cave,
Jackson County, Florida; near Selma and Berlin, Dallas County, Alabama;
Vevay, Switzerland County, and near the Ohio River, Jefferson County,
Indiana; not common. Passing into the var. _amphiloba_ Sarg., differing
from the type in the fascicled hairs on the upper surface of the young
leaves and in the often pubescent branchlets; woods in sandy soil near
River Junction, Gadsden County, Florida, and Valley Head, DeKalb County,
Alabama; and into var. _nivea_ Sarg., differing from the type in the
white tomentum on the lower surface of the leaves, the glabrous styles,
in the tomentum on the lower side of the floral bract when the flowers
open, the pubescent gray or pale reddish brown branchlets and in the
puberulous winter-buds; deep woods, River Junction, Gadsden County,
Florida. More important is


                Tilia heterophylla var. Michauxii Sarg.

                        _Tilia Michauxii_ Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 672]

Leaves ovate to ovate-oblong, acute or abruptly short-pointed at the
broad apex, cordate, obliquely cordate, or rarely obliquely truncate at
base, and coarsely serrate with apiculate teeth, pubescent above when
they unfold with caducous fascicled hairs, and hoary-tomentose beneath,
and at maturity thin, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface and
coated below with short white or grayish white tomentum, 3-1/2'--6' long
and 3-1/2'--5' wide, with a slender yellow midrib and primary veins
usually without axillary tufts; petioles slender, sparingly villose when
they first appear, soon glabrous, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in length. Flowers 1/3'
long, opening about the 1st of July, on slender puberulous pedicels 1/4'
in length, in wide long-stemmed puberulous cymes; peduncle pubescent,
becoming glabrous, the free portion 1-3/4'--2' in length, its bract
obovoid, rounded or acute at apex, 3-1/2'--5' long and 1/2'--1' wide,
decurrent to within 1/3'--3/4' of the base of the peduncle; sepals
ovate, acuminate, ciliate on the margins, puberulous on the outer
surface, tomentose on the inner surface, 1/4' long, shorter than the
lanceolate acuminate petals; staminodia oblong-obovoid, rounded or
emarginate at apex; style glabrous. Fruit ripening in September,
subglobose, rusty-tomentose, 1/4'--1/3' in diameter.

A large tree with slender glabrous light red-brown branchlets.
Winter-buds ovoid, acute, slightly flattened, red, about 1/4' in length.
Bark of the trunk 1' thick, deeply furrowed, reddish or grayish brown
and covered with small thin scales.

Distribution. Pennsylvania, valley of the Susquehanna River (Lancaster
County) to southern and western New York and through southern Ohio,
Indiana, and Illinois to northeastern Missouri (near Ilasco, Ralls
County), and southward through eastern Kentucky and Tennessee to
northeastern Mississippi, and along the Appalachian Mountains to
northern Georgia; southern Georgia (Dougherty and Decatur Counties),
Dallas County, Alabama; southwestern Missouri (Eagle Rock, Barry
County), and northwestern Arkansas (Eureka Springs, Carroll County, and
Cotter, Marion County).


                       14. Tilia monticola Sarg.

             _Tilia heterophylla_ Sarg., in part, not Vent.

[Illustration: Fig. 673]

Leaves thin, gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex, ovate to
oblong-ovate, very oblique and truncate or obliquely cordate at base,
finely serrate with straight or incurved apiculate teeth, smooth, dark
green and lustrous on the upper surface, thickly coated on the lower
surface with hoary tomentum, 4'--7' long and 3'--5' wide; petioles
slender, glabrous, 1-1/2'--3' in length. Flowers from the middle to the
end of July, 2/5'--1/2' long, on stout sparingly pubescent pedicels, in
mostly 7--10-flowered thin-branched glabrous cymes; peduncle slender,
glabrous, the free portion 1-1/3'--1-1/2' in length, its bract gradually
narrowed and cuneate or rounded at base, narrowed and rounded at apex,
glabrous, 4'--5-1/2' long and 4/5'--1' wide, decurrent to within
1/24'--1/8' of the base of the peduncle; sepals ovate, acute, ciliate on
the margins, covered on the outer surface with short pale pubescence and
with silky white hairs on the inner surface; petals lanceolate,
acuminate, twice longer than the sepals; staminodia oblong-lanceolate,
rounded at the narrowed apex, as long or nearly as long as the petals;
style clothed at the base with long white hairs. Fruit ripening in
September, ovoid to ellipsoid, covered with pale rusty tomentum,
1/4'--1/3' long and about 1/4' in diameter.

A tree rarely exceeding 60 deg. in height with a trunk 3 deg.--4-1/2 deg. in
diameter, slender branches forming a narrow rather pyramidal head, and
stout glabrous branchlets usually bright red during their first year,
becoming brown in their second season. Winter-buds compressed, ovoid,
acute or rounded at apex, light red, covered with a glaucous bloom,
1/3'--1/2' long. Bark of the trunk 3/5' in thickness, deeply furrowed,
the surface broken into small thin light brown scales.

Distribution. Appalachian Mountains at altitudes usually from
2500 deg.--3000 deg., Farmer Mountain, on New River, Connell County, Virginia,
to Johnson City, Washington County. Tennessee, and to Highlands, Macon
County, North Carolina.


                       15. Tilia georgiana Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 674]

Leaves ovate, abruptly short-pointed at apex, slightly unsymmetric and
usually cordate on lateral branches and often oblique or truncate on
leading branches at base, and finely dentate with glandular teeth
pointing forward, when they unfold deeply tinged with red, covered above
by fascicled hairs and tomentose below, when the flowers open the middle
of June dark yellow-green, dull and scabrate above and covered below
with a thick coat of tomentum, pale on those of lower branches and
tinged with brown on those from the top of the tree, and conspicuously
reticulate-venulose, and at maturity thick, dull yellow-green, pubescent
or glabrous above, rusty or pale tomentose below, sometimes becoming
nearly glabrous in the autumn, 2-1/2'--4' long and 2'--3' wide; petioles
slender, tomentose, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers 1/4'--1/3' long, on
slender pubescent pedicels, in compact slender-branched pubescent mostly
10--15-flowered corymbs; peduncle slender, densely pubescent, the free
portion 1'--1-1/2' in length, its bract oblong to obovate, rounded at
apex, rounded or cuneate at base, pubescent, becoming nearly glabrous,
2-1/2'--4' long and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, decurrent to the base or to
within 1' of the base of the peduncle; sepals ovate, acuminate, coated
on the outer surface with pale pubescence and on the inner surface with
pale hairs longest and most abundant at the base, not more than one-half
the length of the lanceolate acuminate narrow petals; staminodia
oblong-obovate to spatulate, acute, about two-thirds as long as the
petals; style glabrous or furnished with a few hairs at the very base.
Fruit ripens early in September on pubescent pedicels,
depressed-globose, occasionally slightly grooved and ridged, covered
with thick rusty tomentum, 1/5'--1/4' in diameter.

A small tree, with slender branchlets thickly coated during their first
season with pale tomentum, and dark red-brown or brown and puberulous in
their second year. Winter-buds covered with rusty brown pubescence,
1/4'--1/3' long.

Distribution. Coast of South Carolina, near Charleston; Colonel's Island
near the mouths of the North Newport and Medway Rivers, near Dunham,
Liberty County, and at Brunswick, Glynn County, Georgia, to central and
western Florida.


                   Tilia georgiana var. crinita Sarg.

              _Tilia pubescens_ Sarg., in part, not Vent.

[Illustration: Fig. 675]

Differing in the longer and more matted usually rusty brown hairs of the
pubescence, usually less closely attached to the under surface of the
leaves and often conspicuous on the young branches.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 15' in diameter,
and slender branchlets densely rusty pubescent during their first
season, and during their third year becoming glabrous, red-brown, rugose
and marked by occasional small lenticels. Winter-buds acuminate, dark
reddish brown and covered with short reddish pubescence. Bark of the
trunk 1/2'--3/4' thick, furrowed and divided into parallel ridges, the
red-brown surface broken into short thick scales.

Distribution. Sandy woods near Bluffton, Beaufort County, and in the
neighborhood of Charleston, South Carolina, and on Colonel's Island near
the mouth of the North Newport and Medway Rivers, near Dunham, Liberty
County, Georgia.




                           XL. STERCULIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with bitter astringent juice, mucilaginous bark, and
alternate simple leaves, with stipules. Flowers perfect, regular; calyx
of 5 sepals, imbricated in the bud; corolla 0 (in _Fremontia_); anthers
extrorse; pistil of 5 united carpels; ovary 5-celled; styles united;
ovules anatropous.

A family of about fifty genera mostly confined to the tropics. Its most
important species, _Theobroma Cacao_ L., of the West Indies, produces
chocolate from the cotyledons. _Firmiana simplex_ F. N. Meyer, of this
family and a native of southern China, is often planted as an ornamental
tree in the southern states, where it has sometimes become naturalized,
and in California.




                           1. FREMONTIA Torr.


A tree or shrub, with stellate pubescence and naked buds. Leaves
broad-ovate, lobed, thick, prominently veined, usually rufous on the
lower surface, persistent; stipules minute, deciduous. Flowers solitary,
terminal or opposite the leaves, pedicellate, subtended by 3 or rarely 5
minute caducous bracts; calyx subcampanulate, hypogynous, deeply
5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud, petaloid, yellow, spreading,
obovate, often mucronate, 1' long, the 3 outer a little smaller than the
others, pubescent on the outer surface, with a hairy cavity at the base
of the inner surface; corolla 0; stamens 5; filaments alternate with the
sepals, united to the middle into a column; anthers oblong-linear,
incurved at the ends, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary
5-celled, the cells opposite the sepals; style filiform, elongated,
terminated by an acute undivided stigmatic point; ovules numerous in
each cell, horizontal. Fruit an ovoid acuminate 4 or 5-valved
loculicidally dehiscent capsule densely coated with long matted hairs,
the inner surface of the cells villose-pubescent. Seeds oval; seed-coat
crustaceous, puberulous, with a small fleshy marginal deciduous ariloid
appendage on the chalaza; embryo straight, in thick fleshy albumen;
cotyledons oblong, foliaceous, three or four times longer than the short
radicle.

_Fremontia_, named in honor of John C. Fremont, the distinguished
explorer of western North America, is represented by a single species.


              1. Fremontia californica Torr. Slippery Elm.

                  _Fremontodendron californicum_ Cov.

[Illustration: Fig. 676]

Leaves usually 3-lobed, rarely entire or sometimes 5--7-lobed, 1-1/2' in
diameter; petioles stout, 1/2'--2/3' in length. Flowers appearing in
July in great profusion on short spur-like lateral branchlets. Fruit 1'
long; seeds very dark red-brown, about 3/16' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 12'--14' in diameter, stout
rigid branches spreading almost at right angles, and stout terete
branchlets thickly coated when they first appear with rufous pubescence,
becoming glabrous and light red-brown; more often a low intricately
branched shrub. Bark of the trunk rarely more than 1/4' thick, deeply
furrowed, the dark red-brown surface broken into numerous short thick
scales. Wood hard, heavy, close-grained, dark brown tinged with red,
with thick lighter colored sapwood. The mucilaginous inner bark is
sometimes used domestically in poultices.

Distribution. Lower slopes of the California mountains; western base of
Mt. Shasta to the San Pedro Martir Mountains, Lower California; nowhere
common west of the Sierra Nevada, but of its largest size on their
western foothills; most abundant east of the Sierra Nevada in the region
of the Mohave Desert, growing as a low shrub and sometimes forming
thickets several acres in extent.

Occasionally cultivated in western and southern Europe as an ornamental
plant.




                             XLI. THEACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with simple alternate leaves, without stipules. Flowers
perfect, regular, hypogynous; sepals and petals 5, imbricated in the
bud; stamens numerous; anthers 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; pistil of 3--5 united carpels; ovary 3--5-celled; styles
as many as the cells of the ovary, partly united. Fruit capsular; embryo
with large cotyledons.

The Camellia family with eighteen genera is principally confined to the
tropics of the New World and to southern and eastern Asia. Two genera
are represented in the flora of the southern United States, and of these
Gordonia is arborescent. Its most important genus, Camellia of eastern
Asia, contains the Tea plant, _Camellia Thea_ Link, and several species
cultivated for the beauty of their flowers.




                            1. GORDONIA Ell.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, with an acuminate terminal bud,
slender acuminate naked axillary buds, and watery juice. Leaves
pinnately veined, entire or crenate, subcoriaceous and persistent, or
thin and deciduous. Flowers axillary, solitary, long-stalked or
subsessile; calyx subtended by 2--5 caducous bracts; sepals unequal,
rounded, concave, coriaceous, persistent; petals free or slightly
united, obovate, concave, white, deciduous; stamens numerous, filaments
short, united at base into a fleshy cup adnate to the base of the petals
and inserted with them, or long and inserted directly on the petals;
anthers introrse, yellow; ovary sessile; style elongated, erect, 5-lobed
at the stigmatic apex; ovules 4--8 in each cell, pendulous in 2 series
from its inner angle, collateral, anatropous. Fruit a woody oblong or
subglobose 5-celled capsule loculicidally 5-valved, with a persistent
axis angled by the projecting placentas. Seeds 2--8 in each cell
pendulous, flat, without albumen; seed-coat woody, usually produced
upward into an oblong wing; embryo mostly straight or oblique, with
oblong flat or oblique cotyledons; radicle short, superior.

Gordonia with sixteen species is confined to the south Atlantic states
of North America and to tropical Asia and the Malay Archipelago.

The generic name is in honor of James Gordon (1728--1791), a well-known
London nurseryman.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers long-pedicellate; filaments united into a cup; capsule ovoid,
        the valves not splitting from the base; seeds winged; leaves
        persistent.
                                                   1. G. Lasianthus (C).
  Flowers subsessile; filaments distinct; capsule globose, the valves
        septicidally splitting from the base; seeds without wings;
        leaves deciduous.
                                                    2. G. alatamaha (C).


             1. Gordonia Lasianthus Ell. Bay. Loblolly Bay.

[Illustration: Fig. 677]

Leaves coriaceous, lanceolate to oblong, acute at apex, gradually
narrowed to the cuneate base, finely or remotely crenately serrate,
usually above the middle only, dark green, smooth and lustrous, 4'--5'
long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, persistent; finally turning scarlet and
dropping irregularly through the year; petioles stout, wing-margined
toward the apex, channeled, about 1/2' in length. Flowers pungently
fragrant, about 2-1/2' in diameter, expanding in July and continuing to
open successively during two or three months, on stout red pedicels
thickening from below upward, 2-1/2'--3' long, and usually furnished
with 3 or 4 ovate minute subfloral bractlets; sepals ovate to oval, 1/2'
long, ciliate on the margins with long white hairs, and covered on the
outer surface with dense velvety pale lustrous pubescence; petals
rounded at apex, gradually contracted at base, silky-puberulent on the
back, white, incurved, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long and 1' broad, stamens united
into a shallow fleshy deeply 5-lobed cup pubescent on the inner surface
and adnate to the base of the petals; ovary ovoid, pubescent, gradually
contracted into the stout style persistent on the fruit. Fruit ovoid,
acute, pubescent, 3/4' long, and 1/2' in diameter, splitting to below
the middle; seeds winged, nearly square, slightly concave on the inner
surface and rounded on the outer surface, rugose, dotted with small pale
brown excrescences, nearly 1/16' long and half the length of the thin
membranaceous oblique pale brown wing pointed or rounded at apex; embryo
filling the cavity of the seed, nearly straight; cotyledons subcordate,
foliaceous.

A short-lived tree, 60 deg.--75 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 18'--20'
in diameter, small branches growing upward at first and ultimately
spreading into a narrow compact head, and dark brown rugose branchlets
marked during several years by the horizontal slightly obcordate
leaf-scars; or rarely a low shrub. Winter-buds 1/4'--1/3' long, and
covered with pale silky lustrous pubescence. Bark of the trunk nearly 1'
thick, deeply divided into regular parallel rounded ridges, their dark
red-brown scaly surface broken into many irregular shallow furrows. Wood
light, soft, close-grained, not durable, light red, with lighter colored
sapwood of 40--50 layers of annual growth; occasionally used in
cabinet-making.

Distribution. Shallow swamps and moist depressions in Pine-barrens;
southeastern Virginia southward near the coast to the shores of Indian
River on the east coast and to Cape Romano on the west coast of Florida,
ranging to the interior of the peninsula from Lake to De Soto Counties,
and westward along the Gulf coast to southern Mississippi; most abundant
in Georgia and east Florida; gradually becoming less abundant westward.


                2. Gordonia alatamaha Sarg. Franklinia.

[Illustration: Fig. 678]

Leaves obovate-oblong, rounded or pointed at apex, gradually narrowed to
the long cuneate base, remotely serrate, usually above the middle only,
with small glandular teeth, bright green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, 5'--6' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide;
turning scarlet in the autumn before falling; petioles stout,
wing-margined above, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers 3'--3-1/2' in
diameter, appearing about the middle of September, on short stout
pedicels at first pubescent, finally glabrous, from the axils of crowded
upper leaves, and marked by the broad conspicuous scars of 2 minute
lateral subfloral pubescent bractlets; sepals nearly circular, 1/2' in
diameter, ciliate on the margins, and covered on the outer surface with
short lustrous silky pale hairs; petals obovate, crenulate, white,
membranaceous, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1' broad, and densely coated on the
outer surface with fine pubescence; filaments distinct, inserted on the
petals; ovary conspicuously ridged, pubescent, truncate, and crowned
with a slender deciduous style nearly as long as the stamens. Fruit
globose, slightly pubescent, 3/4' in diameter, the valves splitting
nearly to the middle and septicidally from the base to the middle; seeds
6--8, or by abortion fewer in each cell, closely packed together on the
whole length of the thick axile placenta, nearly 1/2' long, angled by
mutual pressure, without wings.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with stout slightly angled dark red-brown
branchlets covered with small pale oblong horizontal lenticels, and
conspicuously marked by large prominent obcordate leaf-scars, with a
marginal row of large fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds
compressed, reddish brown, puberulous, 1/4'--1/3' long. Bark of
cultivated plants smooth, thin, dark brown.

Distribution. Near Fort Barrington on the Altamaha River, Georgia; not
seen in a wild state since 1790, and now only known by cultivated
plants.

Often cultivated in the eastern states and hardy as far north as eastern
New York and occasionally in eastern Massachusetts, and rarely in
western and central Europe.




                           XLII. CANELLACEAE.


Trees, with pungent aromatic bark, and alternate pellucid-punctate
entire penniveined persistent leaves, without stipules. Flowers perfect,
regular, cymose; sepals and petals imbricated in the bud; stamens
numerous, hypogynous, with filaments united into a tube inclosing the
pistil, and narrow extrorse anthers adnate to the tube and
longitudinally 2-celled; pistil of 2--3 united carpels; ovary free,
1-celled, with 2--5 parietal placentas; styles thick; stigmas
2--5-lobed; ovules 2 or many. Fruit a berry; seeds 2 or several;
seed-coat thick, crustaceous; embryo small in fleshy oily albumen.

The Wild Cinnamon family with five genera and a few species is confined
to tropical America, south Africa and Madagascar, one species reaching
the shores of southern Florida.




                           1. CANELLA P. Br.


A tree, with scaly bark, stout ashy gray branchlets conspicuously marked
by large orbicular leaf-scars, and minute buds. Leaves obovate, rounded
or slightly emarginate at apex, gradually narrowed to the cuneate base,
petiolate, coriaceous. Flowers small, in many-flowered subcorymbose
terminal or subterminal panicles of several dichotomously branched cymes
from the axils of upper leaves or from minute caducous bracts; sepals 3,
suborbicular, concave, coriaceous, erect, their margins ciliate,
persistent; petals 5, hypogynous, in a single row on the slightly convex
receptacle, oblong, concave, rounded at apex, fleshy, twice as long as
the sepals, white or rose color; stamens about 20, staminal tube
crenulate at the summit and slightly extended above the anthers; ovary
cylindric or oblong-conic, 1-celled, with 2 parietal placentas; style
short, fleshy, terminating in a 2 or 3-lobed stigma; ovules numerous,
arcuate, horizontal or descending, attached by a short funicle,
imperfectly anatropous; micropyle superior. Fruit globose or slightly
ovoid, fleshy, minutely pointed with the base of the persistent style,
2--4-seeded. Seeds reniform, suspended; seed-coat black and shining;
embryo curved in the copious albumen; cotyledons oblong; radicle next
the hilum.

The genus consists of a single West Indian species, extending into
southern Florida and to Venezuela.

The generic name is from _canella_, the diminutive of the Latin _cana_
or _canna_, a cane or reed, first applied to the bark of some Old World
tree from the form of a roll or quill which it assumed in drying.


 1. Canella Winterana Gaertn. Cinnamon Bark. White Wood. Wild Cinnamon.

[Illustration: Fig. 679]

Leaves contracted into a short stout grooved petiole, 3-1/2'--5' long
and 1-1/2'--2' wide, bright green and lustrous. Flowers about 1/8' in
diameter, opening in the autumn. Fruit ripening in March and April,
bright crimson, soft and fleshy, 1/2' in diameter; seeds about 3/16'
long.

A tree, in Florida 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a straight trunk 8'--10' in
diameter, and slender horizontal spreading branches forming a compact
round-headed top. Bark of the trunk 1/8' thick, light gray, broken on
the surface into numerous short thick scales rarely more than 2'--3'
long and about twice as thick as the pale yellow aromatic inner bark.
Wood very heavy, exceedingly hard, strong, close-grained, dark
red-brown, with thick light brown or yellow sapwood of 25--30 layers of
annual growth. The bitter acrid inner bark is the wild cinnamon bark of
commerce. It has a pleasant cinnamon-like odor and is an aromatic
stimulant and tonic.

Distribution. Florida, region of Cape Sable, Munroe County (Flamingo
[_A. A. Eaton_], East Cape, Madeira Hammock), and widely distributed on
the southern keys, usually growing in the shade of other trees; on the
Bahama Islands and many of the Antilles.




                         XLIII. KOEBERLINIACEAE.


An intricately branched almost leafless tree or shrub, with thin
red-brown scaly bark, stout alternate glabrous branchlets covered with
pale green bark and terminating in a sharp rigid straight or slightly
curved spine. Leaves minute, early deciduous, alternate, narrow-obovate,
rounded at apex. Flowers perfect, on slender club-shaped puberulous
pedicels from the axils of minute scarious deciduous bracts, in short
umbel-like racemes below the end of the branches; calyx of 3 or 5 minute
sepals imbricated in the bud, deciduous; petals 4, convolute in the bud,
hypogynous, obovate or oblong, subunguiculate, white, much longer than
the sepals; disk 0; stamens 8, free, hypogynous, as long as the petals;
filaments thickened in the middle, subulate at the ends; anthers oval,
attached on the back near the base, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; ovary ovoid, 2-celled, contracted at base into a short
stalk and above into a simple subulate style; stigma terminal, obtuse,
slightly emarginate; ovules numerous, adnate in several series to the
fleshy placenta, horizontal or dependent, anatropous. Fruit a 2-celled
berry, black at maturity, subglobose, tipped with the remnants of the
pointed style; flesh thin and succulent, the cells 1 or 2-seeded by
abortion. Seed vertical, circinate-cochleate; seed-coat crustaceous,
slightly rugose, striate; albumen thin; embryo annular; cotyledons
semiterete; the radicle ascending.

The family is represented by a single genus.




                          1. KOEBERLINIA Zucc.


Characters of the family.

Koeberlinia with one species is North American.

The generic name is in honor of L. Koeberlin, a German botanist.


                      1. Koeberlinia spinosa Zucc.

[Illustration: Fig. 680]

Leaves not more than 1/8' long. Flowers appearing in May and June, about
1/4' in diameter. Fruit 3/16'--1/4' in diameter.

A bushy tree, rarely 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a short stout trunk sometimes
6 deg.--8 deg. long and a foot in diameter; more often a low branching shrub
forming impenetrable thickets often of considerable extent. Wood very
hard, heavy, close-grained, dark brown somewhat streaked with orange,
becoming almost black on exposure, with thin yellow or nearly white
sapwood of 12--15 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry gravelly mesas and foothills; valleys of the upper
Colorado River (Big Springs, Howard County), and of the lower Rio
Grande, Texas, westward through southern Texas and New Mexico to
southern Arizona, and southward through northern Mexico, and in Lower
California (San Jorge).




                            XLIV. CARICACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with bitter milky juice, and alternate long-petiolate
persistent simple or digitately compound leaves, without stipules.
Flowers unisexual or perfect, the perianth of the male and female
flowers dissimilar; stamens in two series, inserted on the corolla;
filaments free; anthers introrse. Fruit baccate.

The Pawpaw family with two genera is tropical American and Mexican, a
single representative of the family reaching the shores of southern
Florida.




                              1. CARICA L.


Short-lived trees, with erect simple or rarely branched stems composed
of a thin shell of soft fibrous wood surrounding a large central cavity
divided by thin soft cross partitions at the nodes, and covered with
thin green or gray bark marked by the ring-like scars of fallen
leaf-stalks, and stout soft fleshy roots. Leaves simple, palmately lobed
or digitate, crowded toward the top of the stem and branches, large,
flaccid, subpeltately palmately nerved, and usually deeply and often
compoundly lobed. Flowers regular, monoecious or polygamo-dioecious,
white, yellow, or greenish white, in axillary cymose panicles, the
staminate elongated, pedunculate, and many-flowered, the pistillate
abbreviated and few or usually 3-flowered, generally unisexual and
dioecious, occasionally polygamo-dioecious, each flower in the axil of a
minute ovate acute bract; calyx minute, 5-lobed, the lobes alternate
with the petals; corolla of the staminate flower salverform,
gamopetalous, the tube elongated, 5-lobed, the lobes oblong or linear,
contorted in the bud; stamens 10; filaments free, those of the outer row
alternate with the lobes of the corolla and elongated, the others
alternate with them and abbreviated; anthers 2-celled, erect, opening
longitudinally, often surmounted by their slightly elongated connective;
ovary rudimentary, subulate; pistillate flower, calyx minute, 5-lobed,
persistent under the fruit; corolla polypetalous, petals 5,
linear-oblong, erect, ultimately spreading above the middle, deciduous;
ovary free, sessile, 1-celled or more or less spuriously 5-celled; style
0 or abbreviated; stigmas 5, linear, radiating, dilated and subpalmately
lobed at apex; ovules indefinite, inserted in two rows on the placenta,
anatropous, long-stalked; micropyle superior; raphe ventral;
hermaphrodite flower, corolla gamopetalous, tubular-campanulate, the
lobes erect and spreading or subreflexed; stamens 10, in 2 ranks, or 5;
ovary obovoid-oblong, longer than the tube of the corolla, more or less
spuriously 5-celled below. Fruit slightly 5-lobed, l-celled or more or
less completely 5-celled, filled with soft pulp, many-seeded, that
produced from the hermaphrodite flower long-stalked, pendulous, usually
unsymmetric, gibbous, and smaller than that from the pistillate flower.
Seeds ovoid, inclosed in membranaceous silvery white sac-like arils,
occasionally germinating within the fruit; seed-coat crustaceous,
closely investing the membranaceous inner coat, the outer coat becoming
thick, rugose, succulent, and ultimately dry and leathery; embryo in the
axis of fleshy albumen; cotyledons ovate, foliaceous, compressed, longer
than the terete radicle turned toward the minute pale subbasilar hilum.

Carica with about twenty species is distributed from southern Florida
through the West Indies to southern Brazil and Argentina, and from
southern Mexico to Chile. One species grows probably indigenously in
Florida. The milky juice of Carica contains papain, which has the power
of digesting albuminous substances, and the leaves are often used in
tropical countries to make meat tender.

The generic name is formed from the Carib name of one of the species.


                      1. Carica Papaya L. Pawpaw.

[Illustration: Fig. 681]

Leaves ovate or orbicular, deeply parted into 5--7 lobes divided more or
less deeply into acute lateral lobes, these secondary divisions entire
or rarely lobed, the lowest lobes forming a deep basal sinus, thin,
flaccid, yellow-green, 15'--24' in diameter, with broad flat yellow or
orange-colored primary veins radiating from the end of the petiole
through the lobes, and small secondary veins extending to the point of
the lateral lobes and connected by conspicuous reticulate veinlets;
petioles stout, yellow, hollow, enlarged and cordate at base, sometimes
becoming 3 deg.--4 deg. in length before the leaves fall. Flowers often
beginning to appear on plants only 3 deg. or 4 deg. high and a few months old,
produced continuously throughout the year, the staminate in clusters on
slender spreading or pendulous peduncles 4'--12' long, the pistillate in
1--3-flowered short-stalked cymes; staminate flowers fragrant, filled
with nectar, their corolla 3/4'--1-1/4' long, with a slender tube and
acute lobes; anthers oblong, orange-colored, surmounted by the rounded
thickened end of the connective, those of the inner row almost sessile
and one third larger than those of the outer row, shorter than their
flattened filaments covered, like the connectives, with long slender
white hairs; pistillate flowers about 1' long, with erect petals,
without staminodia; ovary ovoid, ivory-white, slightly and obtusely
5-angled, 1-celled, and narrowed into a short slender style crowned by a
pale green stigma divided to the base into 5 radiating lobes dilated and
3-nerved at apex. Fruits hanging close together against the stem at the
base of the leaf-stalk, obovoid to ellipsoid, and obtusely
short-pointed, yellowish green to bright orange color; in southern
Florida not more than 4' long and 3' thick, and usually smaller, with a
thick skin closely adherent to the sweet insipid flesh forming a thin
layer outside the central cavity; seeds full and rounded, about 3/16'
long; outer portion of the seed-coat rugose at first when the fruit is
fully grown but still green, ivory-white, very succulent, and usually
separable from the smooth paler chestnut-brown lustrous interior
portion, the outer part turning black as the fruit ripens and becoming
adherent to the inner portion closely investing the thin lustrous light
red-brown inner coat.

A short-lived tree, in Florida attaining a height of 12 deg.--15 deg., with a
trunk seldom more than 6' in diameter; in the West Indies and other
tropical countries often twice as large, with a trunk occasionally
dividing into a number of stout upright branches. Bark thin, light
green, becoming gray toward the base of the stem.

Distribution. Florida from the southern shores of Bay Biscayne on the
west coast and of Indian River on the east coast to the southern keys,
growing sparingly in rich hummocks; common in all the West Indian
islands, in southern Mexico, and in the tropical countries of South
America; now naturalized in most of the warm regions of the world, where
it is universally cultivated for its fruit, which is considered one of
the most wholesome of all tropical fruits, and has been much improved by
selection.




                             XLV. CACTACEAE.


Succulent trees or shrubs, with copious watery juice, numerous spines
springing from cushions of small bristles (_areolae_), and minute
caducous alternate leaves, or leafless. Flowers large and showy,
perfect, usually solitary; calyx of numerous spirally imbricated sepals
forming a tube, those of the inner series petal-like; corolla of
numerous imbricated petals, in many series; stamens inserted on the tube
of the calyx, very numerous, in several series, with slender filaments
and introrse 2-celled oblong anthers, the cells opening longitudinally;
pistil of several united carpels; ovary 1-celled, with several parietal
placentas; styles united, terminal; stigmas as many as the placentas;
ovules numerous, horizontal, anatropous. Fruit a fleshy berry. Seeds
numerous, with albumen; cotyledons foliaceous; radicle turned toward the
hilum.

The Cactus family with twenty genera and a very large number of species
is most abundant in the dry region adjacent to the boundary of the
United States and Mexico, with a few species ranging northward to the
northern United States and southward to the West Indian islands, Brazil,
Peru, Chile and the Galapagos Islands. Two of the genera have
arborescent representatives in the flora of the United States.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Branches and stems columnar, ribbed, continuous; leaves 0;
        flower-bearing and spine-bearing areolae distinct; flowers close
        above spine-bearing areolae; tube of the flower elongated; seeds
        dark-colored.
                                                              1. Cereus.
  Branches jointed, tuberculate; leaves scale-like; flower-bearing and
        spine-bearing areolae not distinct; tube of the flower short and
        cup-shaped; seeds pale.
                                                             2. Opuntia.




                             1. CEREUS Haw.


Trees or shrubs, with columnar ribbed stems, and buds on the back of the
ridges from the axils of latent leaves, geminate, superposed, the upper
producing a branch or flower, the lower arrested and developed into a
cluster of spines surrounded by an elevated cushion or areola of chaffy
tomentose scales. Flowers lateral, elongated, the calyx-lobes forming an
elongated tube, those of the outer ranks adnate to the ovary,
scale-like, only their tips free, those of the inner ranks free,
elongated; petals cohering by their base with the top of the calyx-tube,
larger than its interior lobes, spreading, recurved; stamens numerous;
filaments adnate by their base to the tube of the calyx, those of the
interior ranks free, the exterior united into a tube; style filiform,
divided into numerous radiating linear branches stigmatic on the inner
face; stalks of the ovules long and slender, becoming thick and juicy in
the fruit. Seeds with very thin albumen; embryo straight; cotyledons
abbreviated, hooked at apex; radicle conic.

Cereus with at least two hundred species inhabits the dry southwestern
region of North America, the West Indies, tropical South America, and
the Galapagos Islands. Of the numerous species found within the
territory of the United States only one assumes the habit and size of a
tree. The fruit of several species is edible, and the ribs of the
durable woody frames of the stems of the large arborescent species are
used for the rafters of houses and for fuel. Many of the species are
planted in warm dry countries in hedges to protect cultivated fields,
and others are popular garden plants valued for their beautiful flowers,
which are sometimes nocturnal and exceedingly fragrant.

The generic name relates to the candle-like form of the stem of some of
the species.


                  1. Cereus giganteus Engelm. Suwarro.

[Illustration: Fig. 682]

Leaves 0. Flowers 4'--4-1/2' long and 2-1/2' wide, opening from May to
July in great numbers near the top of the stem, each surrounded on the
lower side by the radial spines of the cluster below it; ovary ovoid, 1'
long, rather shorter than the stout tube of the flower, and covered,
like the base of the tube, by the thick imbricated green outer
scale-like sepals, with small free triangular acute scarious mucronate
tips, furnished in their axils with short tufts of rufous hairs and
occasionally with clusters of chartaceous spines, gradually passing into
thin oblong-ovate or obovate larger sepals, mucronate or rounded at apex
and closely imbricated in many ranks; petals 25--35, obovate-spatulate,
obtuse, entire, thick and fleshy, creamy white, 2/3' long and much
reflexed after anthesis; stamens, with linear anthers emarginate at the
ends, and filaments united for half their length to the walls of the
calyx-tube, those of the exterior rows joined below into a long tube,
surrounding the stout columnar style glandular at base and divided at
apex into 12--15 green stigmas. Fruit ripening in August, ovoid or
slightly obovoid, 2-1/2' long and 1-1/3' wide, truncate and covered at
apex by the depressed pale scar left by the falling of the flower, light
red at maturity, separating into 3 or 4 fleshy valves bright red on
their inner surface and inclosing the bright scarlet juicy mass of the
enlarged funiculi and innumerable seeds; seeds obovoid, rounded, 1/6'
long, lustrous, dark chestnut-brown.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 2 deg. in diameter, thickest
below the middle and tapering gradually toward the ends, marked by
transverse superficial lines into rings 4'--8' long, representing the
amount of annual longitudinal growth, 8--12-ribbed at base with obtuse
ribs 4'--5' broad, and at summit 18--20-ribbed with obtuse deep
compressed ribs, branchless or furnished above the middle with a few,
usually 2 or 3, stout alternate or sometimes opposite upright branches
shorter but otherwise resembling the principal stem composed of a thick
tough green epidermis, a fleshy covering 3'--6' thick saturated with
bitter juice, and a circle of bundles of woody fibres making, with
annual layers of exogenous growth, dense tough elastic columns placed
opposite the depressions between the ribs, 1/2'--3' in diameter and
frequently united by branches growing at irregular intervals between
them, the woody frame remaining standing after the death of the plant
and the decomposition of its fleshy covering. Areolae pale, elevated,
about 1/2' in diameter, bearing clusters of stout straight spines with a
large dark fulvous base, sulcate or angled, tinged with red, with thick
stout spines in the centre of each cluster, the 4 basal horizontal or
slightly inclined downward, the lowest being the longest and stoutest
and sometimes 1-1/2' long and 1/12' thick, the upper shorter, more
slender and slightly turned upward, with a row of shorter and thinner
radial spines 12--16 in number surrounding the central group. Wood of
the columns strong, very light, rather coarse-grained, with numerous
conspicuous medullary rays, and light brown tinged with yellow; almost
indestructible in contact with the ground, little affected by the
atmosphere and largely used for the rafters of houses, for fences, and
by Indians for lances, bows, etc. The fruit is consumed in large
quantities by Indians.

Distribution. Low rocky hills and dry mesas of the desert; valley of
Bill Williams River through central and southern Arizona to the valley
of the San Pedro River and to the eastern border of the Colorado Desert
between the Needles and Yuma, Yuma County, Arizona, and southward in
Sonora.




                           2. OPUNTIA Adans.


Trees or usually shrubs, in the arborescent species of the United States
with subcylindric or clavate articulate tuberculate branches, covered
with small sunken stomata, and containing tubular reticulated woody
skeletons, and thick fleshy or fibrous roots. Leaves scale-like, terete,
subulate, caducous, bearing in their axils oblong or circular
cushion-like areolae of chaffy or woolly scales terminal on the branches
and furnished above the middle with many short slender slightly attached
sharp barbed bristles and toward the base with numerous stout barbed
spines surrounded in some species, except at apex, by loose papery
sheaths. Flowers diurnal, lateral, produced from areolae on branches of
the previous year between the bristles and spines, sessile, cup-shaped;
sepals flat, erect, deciduous; corolla rotate; petals obovate, united at
base, spreading; stamens shorter than the petals; filaments free or
slightly united below; anthers oblong; style cylindric, longer than the
stamens, obclavate below, divided at apex into 3--8 elongated or
lobulate lobes stigmatic on the inner face. Fruit sometimes proliferous,
covered by a thick skin, succulent and often edible, or dry, pyriform,
globose or ellipsoid, concave at apex, surmounted by the marcescent tube
of the flower, tuberculate, areolate, or rarely glabrous, truncate at
base, with a broad umbilicus at apex. Seeds immersed in the pulpy
placentas, compressed, discoid, often margined with a bony raphe; testa
pale, bony, sometimes marked by a narrow darker marginal commissure;
embryo coiled around the copious or scanty albumen; cotyledons large;
radicle thin, obtuse.

Opuntia with many species is distributed from southern New England
southward in the neighborhood of the coast to the West Indies, and
through western North America to Chile, Brazil, and Argentina, the
largest number of species occurring near the boundary of the United
States and Mexico. Of the species of the United States at least three
attain the size and habit of small trees. Cochineal is derived from a
scale-insect which feeds on the juices of some of the Mexican species,
and the fruit of several species is refreshing and is consumed in
considerable quantities in semitropical countries. The large-growing
species with flat branches are employed in many countries to form hedges
for the protection of gardens and fields; and the branches saturated
with watery juice are sometimes stripped of their spines and bristles
and fed to cattle.

_Opuntia_ is the classical name of some plant which grew in the
neighborhood of the city of Opus in Boeotia.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Tubercles of the branches full and rounded below the areolae.
    Joints pale olive color, easily separable, their tubercles broad,
          mammillate; spines yellow; flowers pink; fruit proliferous,
          usually spineless, often sterile.
                                                      1. O. fulgida (H).
    Joints green or purple, their tubercles narrow, ovoid; spines white
          to reddish brown; flowers purple; fruit yellow, sparingly
          spinescent, rarely proliferous.
                                                    2. O. spinosior (H).
  Tubercles of the branches not full and rounded below the areolae;
        joints elongated, dark green or purple, their tubercles
        elongated; spines brown or reddish brown; flowers green, tinted
        with red or yellow; fruit green, spinescent, rarely proliferous.
                                                   3. O. versicolor (H).


                   1. Opuntia fulgida Engelm. Cholla.

[Illustration: Fig. 683]

Leaves light green, gradually narrowed to the acuminate apex, 1/2'--1'
long. Flowers appearing from June to September, the earliest from
tubercles at the end of the branches of the previous year, the others
from the terminal tubercles of the immature fruit developed from the
earliest flowers of the season, 1' in diameter when fully expanded, with
ovaries nearly 1' long, 8--10 obtuse crenulate sepals, 5 erect stigmas,
and 8 light pink petals, those of the outer ranks cuneate, retuse,
crenulate on the margins, shorter than the lanceolate acute petals of
the inner ranks, the whole strongly reflexed at maturity. Fruit
proliferous, oval, rounded, 1'--1-1/4' long and nearly as broad, more or
less tuberculate, conspicuously marked by large pale tomentose areolae
bearing numerous small bristles, usually spineless or occasionally armed
with small weak spines, hanging in pendulous clusters usually of 6 or 7
and occasionally of 40--50 fruits in a cluster, one growing from the
other in continuous succession, the first the largest and containing
perfect seeds, the others frequently sterile, dull green when fully
ripe, with dry flesh, falling usually during the first winter or
occasionally persistent on the branches during the second season, and
then developing flowers from the tubercles; seeds compressed, thin, very
angular, 1/12'--1/6' in diameter.

A tree, with a more or less flexuous trunk occasionally 12 deg. in height
and sometimes a foot in diameter, a symmetric head of stout
wide-spreading branches and thick pendulous joints sometimes almost
hidden by the long conspicuous spines and beginning to develop their
woody skeletons during their second or occasionally during their third
season, the terminal or ultimate joints ovoid or ovoid-cylindric, tumid,
crowded at the end of the limbs, pale olive color, 3'--8' long, often 2'
in diameter, with broad ovoid-oblong tubercles, 1/2'--3/4' in length.
Areolae of pale straw-colored tomentum and short slender pale bristles,
each areola bearing at first 5--15 stout stellate-spreading light yellow
spines of nearly equal length, 3/4'-1' long and inclosed in loose
lustrous sheaths, additional spines developing in succeeding years at
the upper margin of the areolae, the tubercles of old branches being
sometimes furnished with from 40-60 spines persistent on the branches
for 4-6 years. Bark of the trunk and of the large limbs about 1/4'
thick, separating freely on the surface into large thin loosely attached
scales varying in color from brown to nearly black on the largest stems,
and unarmed, the spines mostly falling with the outer layers from
branches 3'--4' thick. Wood of old trunks light, hard, pale yellow, with
broad conspicuous medullary rays, well marked layers of annual growth,
and a thick pith.

Distribution. Plains of Arizona south of the Colorado plateau, and in
the adjacent region of Sonora; not rare; apparently most abundant and of
its largest size in the United States on the mesas near Tucson, Pima
County, at altitudes between 2000 deg. and 3000 deg.


                 2. Opuntia spinosior Toumey. Tassajo.

[Illustration: Fig. 684]

Leaves terete, tapering gradually to the setulose apex, about 1/4' long,
remaining on the branches from four to six weeks. Flowers opening in
April and May and remaining open for two or three days, 2'--2-1/2' in
diameter, with ovaries about 1' long, obovate sepals, broad-obovate dark
purple petals, sensitive red stamens, and a 6--9-parted stigma. Fruits
clustered at the end of the branches of the previous year, persistent
during the winter and occasionally during the following summer and then
sometimes proliferous, oval or rarely globose or hemispheric, frequently
2' long and 1-1/2' thick, with yellow acrid flesh and 20--30 tubercles
very prominent during the summer, nearly disappearing as the fruit
ripens and enlarges, leaving it marked only by the small oval areolae
covered with short bristles, and bearing numerous slender spines
deciduous in December as the fruit begins to turn yellow; seeds nearly
orbicular, slightly or not at all beaked, 1/6'--1/5' in diameter, and
marked by linear conspicuous commissures.

A tree, with an erect trunk occasionally 10 deg. high and 5'-10' in
diameter, numerous stout spreading limbs forming an open irregular head,
and branches with joints 4'--12' long and 3/4'--1' thick, covered with a
thick epidermis varying from green to purple, and usually developing
woody skeletons during their second season, their tubercles prominent,
compressed, ovoid, 1/3'--1/2' long. Areolae oval, clothed with pale
tomentum and short light brown bristles, their spines 5--15 on the
tubercles of young joints and 30--50 on those of older branches, and
slender, white to light reddish brown, closely invested in white
glistening sheaths, stellate-spreading, 1/2'--3/4' long, those in the
interior sometimes considerably longer than the radial spines. Bark of
the trunk and of the larger limbs about 1/4' thick, spineless, nearly
black, broken into elongated ridges, and finally much roughened by
numerous closely appressed scales. Wood light, soft, pale reddish brown,
and conspicuously reticulate, with conspicuous medullary rays and well
defined layers of annual growth; sometimes used in the manufacture of
light furniture, canes, picture-frames, and other small articles.

Distribution. Widely scattered over the mesas of southern Arizona south
of the Colorado plateau and of the adjacent regions of Sonora.


                      3. Opuntia versicolor Coult.

[Illustration: Fig. 685]

Leaves terete, abruptly narrowed to the spinescent apex, 1/3'--1/2'
long, persistent on the branches from four to six weeks. Flowers opening
in May, about 1-1/2' in diameter, with ovaries 5/8' long, broad-ovate
acute sepals, and narrow obovate petals rounded above and green tinged
with red or with yellow. Fruit usually clavate, 2'--2-1/2' long, nearly
1-1/2' in diameter, with areolae generally only above the middle and
usually furnished with 1--3 slender reflexed persistent spines about
1/2' long, or occasionally spineless, rarely nearly spherical and only
about 3/4' in diameter, ripening from December to February, and at
maturity the same color as the joint on which it grows, usually
withering, drying, and splitting open on the tree, or remaining fleshy
and persistent on the branches until the end of the following summer,
and sometimes through a second winter, or often becoming imbedded in the
end of a more or less elongated joint; seeds irregularly angled, with
narrow commissures.

A tree, with an erect trunk occasionally 6 deg.--8 deg. high and 8' in diameter,
numerous stout irregularly spreading or often upright branches, and
cylindric terminal joints generally 6'--12' but sometimes 2 deg. in length,
3/4'--1' in diameter, and covered with a thick dark green or purple
epidermis, marked by linear flattened tubercles, their woody skeletons
usually formed during their second season. Areolae large, oval, clothed
with gray wool, generally bearing a cluster of small bristles, and
slender stellate-spreading brown or reddish brown spines, with close
early deciduous straw-colored sheaths, 4--14 and on old tubercles 20--25
in number, the inner 1--4 in number, usually deflexed and unequal in
length, the longest about 1/3' long and longer than the radial spines.
Bark of the trunk and of the large branches smooth, light brown or
purple, usually unarmed, 1/2'--3/4' thick, finally separating into small
closely appressed black scales. Wood reticulate, hard, compact, light
reddish brown and rather lustrous, with thin conspicuous medullary rays,
well-defined layers of annual growth, and thick pale or nearly white
sapwood.

Distribution. Foothills and low mountain slopes of southern Arizona and
northern Sonora; very abundant.




                          XLVI. RHIZOPHORACEAE.


Glabrous trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, and usually opposite
coriaceous entire persistent leaves, with interpetiolar stipules.
Flowers in axillary clusters; calyx-lobes valvate in the bud,
persistent; petals inserted on the tube of the calyx and as many as its
lobes; stamens inserted at the base of a conspicuous disk; anthers
2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; pistil of 2--5 united
carpels; ovary 2--5-celled; ovules usually 2 in each cell, suspended
from its apex, collateral, anatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle
superior. Fruit usually indehiscent, 1-celled and 1-seeded.

The Mangrove family is tropical, with most of its seventeen genera
confined to the Old World.




                       1. RHIZOPHORA L. Mangrove.


Trees, with pithy branchlets, thick astringent bark, and adventitious
fleshy roots. Leaves ovate or elliptic, glabrous, petiolate; stipules
elongated, acuminate, infolding the bud, caducous. Flowers perfect,
yellow or creamy white, sessile or pedicellate, bibracteolate, the
bractlets united into an involucral cup, in pedunculate dichotomously or
trichotomously branched clusters, the base of their branches surrounded
by an involucre of 2 ovate 3-lobed persistent bracts, or 1-flowered;
calyx 4-lobed, the lobes acute, coriaceous, ribbed on the inner surface
and thickened on the margins, two or three times longer than the
turbinate globose tube, reflexed at maturity, persistent; petals 4,
induplicate in the bud, alternate with and longer than the calyx-lobes,
inserted on a fleshy disk-like ring in the mouth of the calyx-tube,
involute on the margins, coated on the inner surface with long pale
hairs, or flat and naked, caducous; stamens 8--12; filaments short or 0;
anthers attached at the base, introrse, elongated, connivent, areolate;
ovary partly inferior, conic, 2-celled, contracted into two subulate
spreading styles stigmatic at apex. Fruit a conic coriaceous berry
surrounded by the reflexed calyx-lobes and perforated at the apex by the
germinating embryo. Seed germinating in the fruit before falling, the
apex surrounded by a thin albuminous cup-like aril; seed-coat thick and
fleshy; embryo surrounded by a thin layer of albumen; cotyledons dark
purple; radicle elongated, clavate, and when fully grown separating from
the narrow exserted woody tube inclosing the plumule and developed from
the cotyledons after the ripening of the fruit.

Rhizophora with three species is widely and generally distributed on the
shores of tidal marshes in the tropical regions of the two hemispheres,
one specie reaching those of southern Florida. It possesses astringent
properties; the bark has been used in tanning leather, in dyeing, and as
a febrifuge. The wood is hard, durable, and dark-colored. By means of
the aerial germination of its seeds and in its power to develop roots
from trunks and branches, Rhizophora is especially adapted to maintain
itself on low tidal shores and is an important factor in protecting and
extending them into the ocean. Roots springing from the stems at a
considerable distance above the ground and arching outward descend into
the water and fix themselves in the mud beneath, while roots growing
down from the branches enter the ground and gradually thicken into
stems. The fully grown radicle ready to put forth roots and leaves, and
often 10'--12' long, is thicker and heavier at the root end than at the
other, and in detaching itself from the cotyledons and in falling the
heavy end sticks in the mud, while the plumule at the other end, held
above the shallow surface of the water, soon unfolds its leaves.

The generic name, from {rhiza} and {pherein}, was used by early authors
to designate various climbing plants with thickened roots.


                        1. Rhizophora Mangle L.

[Illustration: Fig. 686]

Leaves ovate or elliptic, rounded or acute at apex, gradually narrowed
at base, dark green and very lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the
lower surface, 3-1/2'--5' long and 1'--2' wide, with slightly thickened
margins, a broad midrib, and reticulate veinlets; persistent for one or
two years; petioles 1/2'--1-1/2' in length; stipules lanceolate, acute,
1-1/2' long, deciduous as the leaf unfolds. Flowers produced through the
year, 1' in diameter, pedicellate, in 2 or 3-flowered clusters on
peduncles 1-1/2' long from the axils of young leaves; petals pale
yellow, coated on the inner surface with long pale hairs; stamens 8 with
villose filaments. Fruit 1' long, rusty brown, slightly roughened by
minute bosses, the hard woody thick-walled tube developed from the
cotyledons protruding 1/2'--2/3' from its apex after the germination of
the seed, covering the plumule, and holding the dark brown radicle
marked with occasional orange-colored lenticels and when fully grown
10'--12' long and 1/4'--1/3' thick near the apex.

A round-topped bushy tree, with spreading branches usually 15 deg.--20 deg.
high, forming almost impenetrable thickets with its numerous aerial
roots, or occasionally 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk clear
of branches for more than half its length, a narrow head, and stout
glabrous dark red-brown branchlets, becoming lighter colored in their
second year and then conspicuously marked by large oval slightly
elevated leaf-scars. Bark of young stems and of the branches smooth,
light reddish brown, becoming on old trunks 1/3'--1/2' thick, and gray
faintly tinged with red, the surface irregularly fissured and broken
into thin appressed scales. Wood exceedingly heavy, hard, close-grained,
strong, dark reddish brown streaked with lighter brown, with pale
sapwood of 40--50 layers of annual growth; used for fuel and
wharf-piles.

Distribution. Shores of Florida from Mosquito Inlet on the east coast
and Cedar Keys on the west coast to the southern keys; most abundant
south of latitude 29 deg., following the coast with wide thickets and
ascending the rivers for many miles; on Cape Sable and the shores of Bay
Biscayne sometimes growing at a little distance from the coast on ground
not submerged by the tide, and here attaining its largest size, with
tall straight trunks and few aerial roots; on Bermuda, the Bahamas, the
Antilles, the west coast of Mexico, lower California, the Galapagos
Islands, and from Central America along the northeast coast of South
America to the limits of the tropics.




                          XLVII. COMBRETACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with astringent juice, naked buds, and alternate or
opposite simple entire coriaceous persistent leaves, without stipules.
Flowers regular, perfect, or polygamous; calyx 5-lobed, the lobes
valvate in the bud; petals 5, valvate in the bud, inserted at the base
of the calyx, or 0; disk epigynous; stamens 5--10, inserted on the limb
of the calyx; filaments slender, filiform, distinct, exserted; anthers
introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary 1-celled;
style slender, subulate; stigma minute, terminal, entire; ovules usually
2, suspended from the apex of the cell, collateral, anatropous; raphe
ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit drupaceous, often crowned with the
accrescent calyx. Seed solitary; albumen 0; embryo straight, with
convolute cotyledons; radicle minute, turned toward the hilum.

Of the fifteen genera of this family, widely distributed through the
tropics, three have arborescent representatives in southern Florida.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Corolla 0; leaves alternate.
    Calyx persistent; flowers in spikes; seeds without wings.
                                                              1. Bucida.
    Calyx deciduous; flowers in capitate heads; seeds winged.
                                                          2. Conocarpus.
  Corolla of 5 petals; calyx persistent; leaves opposite.
                                                        3. Laguncularia.




                              1. BUCIDA L.


A tree or shrub, with terete often spinescent branchlets. Leaves crowded
at the end of spur-like lateral branchlets much thickened and roughened
by the large elevated crowded leaf-scars, alternate, obovate to
oblong-lanceolate, rounded and slightly emarginate or minutely apiculate
at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, coriaceous, bluish
green on the upper surface and yellow-green on the lower surface,
pubescent while young, especially beneath, and glabrous at maturity with
the exception of rufous hairs on the under surface of the stout midrib,
and on the short stout petiole. Flowers perfect, greenish white, hairy
on the outer surface, sessile in the axils of minute bracts, in lax
elongated axillary clustered rufous-pubescent spikes; calyx-tube ovoid,
constricted above the ovary, the limb campanulate, 5-lobed, the lobes
valvate in the bud, persistent; petals 0; stamens 10, in two ranks,
inflexed in the bud, unequal, 5 longer than the others and inserted
opposite the calyx-lobes under the hairy 5-lobed disk, the others
shorter, alternate with them and inserted higher on the calyx-tube;
filaments incurved near the apex; anthers minute, sagittate; ovary
included in the tube of the calyx; style thickened and villose at the
base; ovules suspended on an elongated slender funiculus. Fruit ovoid,
conic, oblique, and more or less falcate, irregularly 5-angled,
coriaceous, light brown, puberulous on the outer surface, with thin
membranaceous flesh inseparable from the crustaceous stone porous toward
the interior. Seed ovoid, acute; seed-coat coriaceous, chestnut-brown;
cotyledons fleshy; radicle superior.

Bucida with a single species is confined to tropical America, where it
is distributed from southern Florida and the Bahama Islands through the
West Indies to Guiana and Central America.

The generic name is from {bous}, in allusion to the fancied resemblance
of the fruit to the horns of an ox.


                 1. Bucida Buceras L. Black Olive-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 687]

Leaves 2'--3' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, their petioles 1/3'--1/2' in
length. Flowers appearing in Florida in April, 1/8' long, on spikes
1-1/2'--3' in length. Fruit about 1/8' long.

A tree, with a single straight trunk, or often with a short prostrate
stem 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter, producing several straight upright secondary
stems 40 deg.--50 deg. high and 12'--18' in diameter, stout branches spreading
nearly at right angles with the trunk and forming a broad head, and
branchlets clothed when they first appear with short pale rufous
pubescence mostly persistent for two or three years, becoming light
reddish brown and covered with bark separating into thin narrow shreds.
Bark of the trunk and of the large branches thick, gray tinged with
orange-brown, and broken into short appressed scales. Wood exceedingly
heavy, hard, close-grained, light yellow-brown sometimes slightly
streaked with orange, with thick clear pale yellow sapwood of 30--40
layers of annual growth. The bark has been used in tanning leather.

Distribution. Florida, only on Elliott's Key; widely distributed in
brackish marshes through the West Indies to the shores of the Caribbean
Sea and the Bay of Panama.




                            2. CONOCARPUS L.


A tree or shrub, with angled branchlets. Leaves alternate,
short-petiolate, narrow-ovate or obovate, acute, gradually contracted
and biglandular at base, glabrous or sericeous. Flowers perfect, minute,
in dense capitate heads in narrow leafy terminal panicles, with acute
caducous bracts and bractlets coated with pale hairs, on stout
hoary-tomentose peduncles bibracteolate near the middle; calyx-tube
truncate, obliquely compressed at base, clothed with pale hairs, the
limb campanulate, parted to the middle, the lobes ovate, acute, erect,
pubescent on the outer and puberulous on the inner surface, deciduous;
petals 0; disk 5-lobed, hairy; stamens usually 5, inserted in 1 rank, or
rarely 7 or 8 in 2 ranks; anthers cordate, minute; style thickened and
villose at base. Fruits scale-like, broad-obovoid, pointed, recurved,
and covered at apex with short pale hairs, densely imbricated in ovoid
reddish heads; flesh coriaceous, corky, produced into broad lateral
wings; stone thin-walled, crustaceous, inseparable from the flesh. Seed
irregularly ovoid; seed-coat membranaceous, pale chestnut-brown.

The genus consists of a single species of tropical America and Africa.

The generic name, from {chonos} and {karpos}, is in allusion to the
cone-like shape of the heads of fruits.


                  1. Conocarpus erecta L. Buttonwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 688]

Leaves slightly puberulous on the lower surface when they first appear
or coated with pale silky persistent pubescence (var. _sericea_, DC.),
2'--4' long, 1/2'--1-1/2' wide, lustrous, dark green or pale on the
upper surface, paler on the lower surface, with a broad orange-colored
midrib, obscure primary veins, and reticulate veinlets; petioles stout,
broad, 1/2' in length. Flowers produced throughout the year, in heads
1/3' in diameter on peduncles 1/2'--1-1/2' in length, in panicles
6'--12' long. Cone of fruit about 1' in diameter.

A tree, 40 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 20'--30' in diameter, small branches
forming a narrow regular head, and slender branchlets conspicuously
winged, light red-brown, usually glabrous, or silky pubescent (var.
_sericea_, DC.), becoming terete and marked by large orbicular
leaf-scars in their second year; or sometimes a low shrub, with
semiprostrate stems. Bark of the trunk dark brown, divided by irregular
reticulating fissures into broad flat ridges broken on the surface into
small thin appressed scales. Wood very heavy, hard, strong,
close-grained, dark yellow-brown, with thin darker colored sapwood of
about 10 layers of annual growth; burning slowly like charcoal and
highly valued for fuel. The bark is bitter and astringent, and has been
used in tanning leather, and in medicine as an astringent and tonic.

Distribution. Low muddy tide-water shores of lagoons and bays; Florida,
Cape Canaveral and Cedar Keys to the southern keys; of its largest size
in Florida on Lost Man's River near Cape Sable; at its northern limits a
low shrub; common on the Bahama Islands, in the Antilles, on the shores
of Central America and tropical South America, on the Galapagos Islands,
and on the west coast of Africa.




                         3. LAGUNCULARIA Gaertn.


A tree, with scaly bark, terete pithy branchlets, and naked buds. Leaves
opposite, glabrous, thick and coriaceous, oblong or elliptic, obtuse or
emarginate at apex, marked toward the margin with minute tubercles;
their petioles conspicuously biglandular. Flowers usually perfect or
polygamo-monoecious, minute, flattened, greenish white, sessile, in
simple terminal axillary tomentose spikes generally collected in leafy
panicles, with ovate acute hoary-tomentose bracts and bractlets;
calyx-tube turbinate, with 5 prominent ridges opposite the lobes of the
limb and 5 intermediate lesser ridges, furnished near the middle with 2
minute appendages, and coated with dense pale tomentum, the limb
urceolate, 5-parted to the middle, the divisions triangular, obtuse or
acute, erect, persistent; disk epigynous, flat, 10-lobed, the 5 lobes
opposite the petals broader than those opposite the calyx-lobes, hairy;
petals 5, nearly orbicular, contracted into a short claw inserted on the
bottom of the calyx-limb, ciliate on the margins, caducous; stamens 10,
inserted in 2 ranks; anthers cordate, apiculate; ovary 1-celled; style
short, crowned with a slightly 2-lobed capitate stigma. Fruit 10-ribbed,
coriaceous, hoary-pubescent, elongated, obovoid, flattened, crowned with
the calyx-limb, unequally 10-ribbed, the 2 lateral ribs produced into
narrow wings, 1-seeded; flesh coriaceous, corky toward the interior,
inseparable from the thin-walled crustaceous stone dark red and lustrous
on the inner surface. Seed suspended, obovoid or oblong; seed-coat
membranaceous, dark red; radicle elongated, slightly longer and nearly
inclosed by the green cotyledons.

Laguncularia consists of a single species of tropical America and
Africa.

The generic name is from _laguncula_, in allusion to the supposed
resemblance of the fruit to a flask.


      1. Laguncularia racemosa Gaertn. Buttonwood. White Mangrove.

[Illustration: Fig. 689]

Leaves slightly tinged with red when they unfold, and at maturity dark
green on the upper and lighter green or pale on the lower surface,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles red, 1/2' in length.
Flowers 1/4' long, in hoary-tomentose spikes produced throughout the
year from the axils of young leaves and 1-1/2'--2' long. Fruit about
1/2' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--20' in diameter, stout
spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and slender
glabrous branchlets somewhat angled at first, often marked with minute
pale spots and dark red-brown, becoming in their second year terete,
light reddish brown or orange color, thickened at the nodes, and marked
by conspicuous ovate leaf-scars; or northward in Florida a low shrub.
Bark of the trunk 1/4' thick, brown slightly tinged with red, the
surface broken into long ridge-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong,
close-grained, dark yellow-brown, with lighter colored sapwood of 10--12
layers of annual growth. The bark contains a large amount of tannic acid
and is sometimes used in tanning leather, and is astringent and tonic.

Distribution. Muddy tidal shores of bays and lagoons; southern Florida
from Cape Canaveral and Cedar Keys to the southern keys; common and of
its largest size in Florida on the shores of Shark River, Monroe County;
common in Bermuda, the Bahamas, the Antilles, tropical Mexico and
Central America, tropical South America and western Africa.




                           XLVIII. MYRTACEAE.


Trees or shrubs abounding in pungent aromatic volatile oil, with minute
scaly buds. Leaves opposite, simple, mostly entire, pellucid-punctate,
penniveined, persistent, the slender obscure veins arcuate and united
within the thickened revolute margins; stipules 0. Flowers perfect,
regular; calyx 4--5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud, or lid-like
and deciduous; petals 2--5, imbricated in the bud, inserted on the
margin of the disk, or 0; stamens very numerous, inserted in many ranks
with the petals; filaments slender, inflexed in the bud, exserted;
anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary
2--4-celled; style simple, filiform, crowned with a minute stigma;
ovules numerous or 2 or 3 in each cell, attached on a central placenta,
anatropous or semianatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit
baccate, crowned with the persistent calyx-lobes, 1--4-seeded. Seeds
without albumen; seed-coat membranaceous.

The Myrtle family with seventy-four genera is chiefly tropical and
Australasian, with representatives in southern Europe, extratropical
Africa, and extratropical South America. Two genera are represented by
small trees in the flora of southern Florida. To this family, beside the
Myrtle, belong the Australian Eucalypti, large and important
timber-trees largely planted in California, and the Guava, cultivated in
Florida for its fruit.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Calyx closed in the bud by a lid-like deciduous limb; petals 0.
                                                       1. Calyptranthes.
  Calyx 4 or 5-lobed with persistent lobes; petals 4 or 5.
                                                             2. Eugenia.




                          1. CALYPTRANTHES Sw.


Aromatic trees or shrubs, with terete or angled branchlets. Leaves
complanate in the bud, penniveined, petiolate. Flowers minute, in
subterminal and axillary pedunculate many-flowered panicles, their
primary and secondary branches often racemose, the ultimate branches
cymose; calyx-tube turbinate, produced above the ovary, closed in the
bud by a slightly 4 or 5-lobed lid-like orbicular limb, opening in
anthesis by a circumscissile line, the limb at first attached laterally,
finally deciduous; disk lining the tube of the calyx; petals 2--5,
minute, or 0; ovary 2 or 3-celled; ovules 2 or 3 in each cell,
collateral, ascending, anatropous. Fruit 2--4-seeded. Seed subglobose or
short-oblong; seed-coat shining; cotyledons foliaceous, contortuplicate;
radicle elongated, incurved.

Calyptranthes with eighty species is confined to tropical America, with
two species reaching southern Florida.

The generic name is from {chalyptra} and {anthe}, in reference to the
peculiar lid-like limb which closes the calyx before the opening of the
flower.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves acuminate, pubescent below; petioles up to 1/2' in length;
        inflorescence and young branchlets covered with silky rufous
        tomentum.
                                                      1. C. pallens (D).
  Leaves abruptly pointed or obtuse at apex, glabrous; petioles not more
        than 1/6' in length; inflorescence and young branchlets
        glabrous.
                                                     2. C. Zuzygium (D).


                    1. Calyptranthes pallens Griseb.

                    _Chytraculia Chytraculia_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 690]

Leaves oblong or oblong-ovate, acuminate at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base, pellucid-punctate above, marked with dark glands below,
when they unfold pink or light red and covered with pale silky hairs,
and at maturity coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface, coated with pale pubescence on the lower surface, 2-1/2'--3'
long and 1/2'--3/4' wide, with a broad midrib orange-colored beneath;
petioles stout, 1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers sessile, 1/8' long, in
long-stalked many-flowered clusters 2-1/2'--3' long and wide, covered
like their bracts and the flower-buds with silky rufous pubescence, with
slender divaricate branches, the ultimate divisions 3-flowered; petals
0. Fruit short-oblong or nearly globose, dark reddish brown and
puberulous, with thin dry flesh; seeds short-oblong, rounded at the
ends.

A tree, in Florida 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 3'--4' in diameter, small
branches forming a narrow head, and slender branchlets at first
wing-angled between the nodes and coated with short rufous silky
tomentum, becoming in their second or third year terete, thickened at
the nodes, light gray tinged with red and covered with small thin
scales. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, with a generally smooth
light gray or almost white surface occasionally separating into
irregular plate-like scales. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, brown
tinged with red, with lighter colored sapwood of 30--40 layers of annual
growth.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Lake Worth, in the neighborhood of Bay
Biscayne, Dade County, and on Big Pine Key, Elliott's Key, Key Largo and
Key West; on the Bahama Islands, on many of the Antilles and in southern
Mexico.


                     2. Calyptranthes Zuzygium Sw.

[Illustration: Fig. 691]

Leaves elliptic, abruptly or gradually narrowed into a blunt point or
obtuse at apex, cuneate at base, entire, covered with minute pellucid
dots, glabrous, dark yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface,
paler on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2-1/4' long and 3/5'--1-1/4' wide,
with a broad low midrib and slender primary veins arcuate and connected
within the slightly revolute somewhat undulate margins; petioles deeply
grooved, 1/8'--1/6' in length. Flowers on slender pedicels 1/6'--1/5'
long, in axillary 1--3-branched few-flowered axillary cymes 3/4' long
and 1/2' wide, on slender peduncles 1'--1-1/4' in length, the ultimate
divisions of the inflorescence 1--3-flowered; petals wanting; style
rather longer than the stamens. Fruit about 1/3' in diameter.

A tree, in Florida sometimes 40 deg. high, with a tall trunk 4' or 5' in
diameter, covered with smooth pale gray bark, small branches and slender
terete ascending ashy gray branchlets.

Distribution. Florida, Paradise and Long Keys in the Everglades, Dade
County; on the Bahama Islands and in Cuba, Jamaica and Hayti.




                             2. EUGENIA L.


Trees or shrubs, with hard durable wood and scaly bark. Flowers often
large and conspicuous, on short bibracteolate pedicels, in axillary
racemes or fascicles or dichotomously branched cymes, with minute
caducous bracts and bractlets; calyx campanulate, scarcely produced
above the ovary, the limb 4 or rarely 5-lobed; petals usually 4, free
and spreading; ovary 2 or rarely 3-celled; ovules numerous in each cell,
semianatropous. Fruit 1--4-seeded. Seeds globose or flattened; seed-coat
membranaceous or cartilaginous; embryo thick and fleshy; cotyledons
thick, more or less conferruminate into a homogeneous mass; radicle very
short, turned toward the hilum.

Eugenia with some five hundred species is common in all tropical
regions, with eight species reaching the shores of southern Florida, of
these 6 are small trees. Several species are valued for their stimulant
and digestive properties; some produce useful timber or edible fruit,
and others are cultivated for the beauty of their flowers. Cloves are
the flower-buds of _Eugenia aromatica_ Baill., a native of the Molucca
Islands; and _Eugenia Jambos_ L., the Rose Apple, of southeastern Asia,
is cultivated in all tropical countries as a shade-tree and for its
delicately fragrant fruit.

The generic name commemorates the interest in botany and gardening taken
by Prince Eugene of Savoy, who built the Belvidere Palace near Vienna in
the beginning of the eighteenth century, and made a collection of rare
plants in its gardens.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers in axillary racemes or fascicles.
    Flowers in short solitary or clustered axillary racemes.
      Leaves ovate or obovate, rounded at apex, short-petiolate; fruit
            subglobose to short-oblong.
                                                 1. E. buxifolia (C, D).
      Leaves ovate, contracted at apex into a broad point, distinctly
            petiolate; fruit globose, black, 1/2' in diameter.
                                                 2. E. axillaris (C, D).
    Flowers in axillary fascicles.
      Leaves usually broad-ovate, narrowed at apex into a short point,
            subcoriaceous; fruit subglobose, rather broader than high,
            2/3'--1' in diameter, becoming black at maturity.
                                                      3. E. rhombea (D).
      Leaves oblong-ovate, narrowed at apex into a long point,
            coriaceous; fruit subglobose to obovoid, 1/4'--1/3' long,
            bright scarlet.
                                                      4. E. confusa (D).
  Flowers in dichotomously branched cymes. (_Anamomis._)
    Leaves ovate or obovate; cymes usually 3-flowered; flowers not more
          than 1/4' in diameter; fruit black.
                                                      5. E. dicrana (D).
    Leaves oblong or broad-elliptic; cymes 3--15-flowered; flowers up to
          1/2' in diameter; fruit red.
                                                    6. E. Simpsonii (D).


     1. Eugenia buxifolia Willd. Gurgeon Stopper. Spanish Stopper.

[Illustration: Fig. 692]

Leaves ovate or obovate, rounded at apex, sessile or narrowed into a
short thick petiole, occasionally slightly and remotely
crenulate-serrate above the middle, thick and coriaceous, dark green on
the upper surface, yellow-green and marked with minute black dots on the
lower surface, 1'--1-1/2' long and about 1' wide, with a narrow
conspicuous midrib; usually unfolding in November and remaining on the
branches until the end of their second winter, and often turning red or
partly red before falling. Flowers appearing in Florida from midsummer
until early autumn, 1/8' in diameter, on short thick pedicels, in short
rufous-pubescent racemes clustered in the axils of old or fallen leaves,
with minute lanceolate acute persistent bracts, and broad-ovate acute
bractlets immediately below the flowers; calyx glandular-punctate,
pubescent on the outer surface, with 4 ovate rounded lobes much shorter
than the 4 ovate white petals rounded at apex, ciliate on the margins,
and glandular-punctate. Fruit subglobose to short-oblong, black,
glandular-roughened, crowned with the large calyx-lobes, usually
1-seeded, and about 1/3' in diameter, with thin aromatic flesh; seeds
1/8' in diameter, with a thick pale brown lustrous cartilaginous coat
and a pale olive-green embryo.

A shrubby tree, in Florida rarely 20 deg. high, with a short trunk
occasionally a foot in diameter, small mostly erect branches, and terete
slender branchlets coated at first with rufous pubescence, becoming at
the end of a few months ashy gray or gray tinged with red, and often
more or less twisted or contorted. Bark of the trunk rarely more than
1/8' thick, light brown tinged with red, and broken into small thick
square scales. Wood very heavy, exceedingly hard, strong, close-grained,
dark brown shaded with red, with thick lighter colored sapwood of 15--20
layers of annual growth; sometimes used for fuel.

Distribution. Florida, Cape Canaveral to the southern keys, and on the
west coast from the banks of the Caloosahatchee River to Cape Sable; one
of the commonest plants on the keys, forming on coral rock a large part
of the shrubby second growth now occupying ground from which the
original forest has been removed; on the Bahama Islands and on several
of the Antilles.


          2. Eugenia axillaris Willd. Stopper. White Stopper.

[Illustration: Fig. 693]

Leaves ovate, gradually or abruptly narrowed at apex into a short wide
point, rounded at the narrowed base, thick and coriaceous, dark green on
the upper surface, paler and covered with minute black dots on the lower
surface, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and 1/2' wide, with a broad midrib deeply
impressed above; petioles stout, slightly winged, about 1/3' in length.
Flowers appearing at midsummer, about 1/8' in diameter, in short
axillary racemes, on stout pedicels 1/16'--1/2' long, covered with pale
white hairs, and furnished near the middle or toward the apex with 2
acute minute persistent bractlets; calyx glandular-punctate, covered on
the outer surface with pale hairs, 4-lobed, with ovate rounded lobes
shorter than the 4 ovate glandular white petals. Fruit ripening in
succession from November to April, globose, black, glandular-punctate,
usually 1-seeded, 1/2' in diameter, edible, rather juicy, with a sweet
agreeable flavor; seeds subglobose, 1/4' in diameter, with a pale brown
chartaceous coat, and light olive-green cotyledons.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally a foot in diameter,
small branches, and terete stout rigid ashy gray branchlets often
slightly tinged with red and covered with small wart-like excrescences;
or toward the northern limits of its range a low shrub. Bark of the
trunk about 1/8' thick and divided by irregular shallow fissures into
broad ridges finally separating on the surface into small thin light
brown scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, very close-grained, brown often
tinged with red, with thin darker colored sapwood of 5--6 layers of
annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, shores of the St. John's River to the southern
keys; nowhere common; on the Bahama Islands and on several of the
Antilles.


                 3. Eugenia rhombea Kr. & Urb. Stopper.

[Illustration: Fig. 694]

Leaves broad-ovate, narrowed into a broad point rounded at apex, and
abruptly or gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, when they unfold
thin and light red, and at maturity subcoriaceous, conspicuously marked
with black dots, olive-green on the upper surface and paler on the lower
surface, 2'--2-1/2' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a narrow midrib;
unfolding in Florida in May; petioles narrow-winged, 1/3'--1/2' in
length. Flowers 1/2' in diameter, appearing in Florida in April or May
on slender glandular pedicels 1/3'--2/3' long and furnished at apex with
2 lanceolate acute persistent bractlets ciliate on the margins, in
sessile axillary many-flowered clusters; calyx-tube much shorter than
the limb divided into 4 glandular narrow lobes rounded at apex and one
half the length of the broad-ovate rounded glandular white petals. Fruit
ripening in Florida from September to November, 2/3'--1' in diameter,
slightly glandular-roughened, orange color, with a bright red cheek when
fully grown, becoming black at maturity; flesh thin and dry; seeds
almost globose, nearly 1/2' in diameter, with a thick pale
chestnut-brown lustrous coat and olive-green cotyledons.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk usually a foot in diameter, small
branches, and slender terete branchlets at first light purple and
covered with a glaucous bloom, becoming ashy gray or almost white. Bark
of the trunk about 1/16' thick, with a smooth light gray surface
slightly tinged with red. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, light brown,
with hardly distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Key West and Umbrella Key; on the Bahama Islands
and on many of the Antilles.


                  4. Eugenia confusa DC. Red Stopper.

[Illustration: Fig. 695]

Leaves oblong-ovate, abruptly or gradually contracted into a long narrow
point rounded or acute at apex, cuneate or occasionally rounded at base,
thin and light red when they unfold, and at maturity dark green and very
lustrous on the upper surface, paler and marked with minute black dots
on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long and 1/3'--2/3' wide, with a thick
orange-colored midrib barely impressed above and prominent reticulate
veinlets; petioles stout, about 1/4' in length. Flowers barely 1/8' in
diameter, appearing in September on slender pedicels 1/4'--1/2' long and
furnished near the apex with 2 minute acute bractlets, in many-flowered
axillary clusters; calyx glandular-punctate, with 4 ovate acute lobes
much shorter than the 4 broad-ovate rounded white petals. Fruit ripening
in March and April, subglobose to obovoid, bright scarlet, 1/4'--1/3'
long, glandular-roughened, usually solitary and 1-seeded, with thin dry
flesh; seed nearly globose, about 1/8' in diameter, with a thin
crustaceous light brown lustrous coat and an olive-green embryo.

A tree, 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a straight trunk 18'--20' in diameter, stout
upright branches forming a narrow compact head, and slender terete ashy
gray branchlets. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, bright
cinnamon-red, separating freely into small thin scales. Wood very heavy,
exceedingly hard, strong, close-grained, bright red-brown, with thick
dark-colored sapwood of 50--60 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, rich hummocks near the shores of Bay Biscayne,
Dade County, and on Old Rhodes and Elliotts Keys; on the Bahama Islands
and on several of the Antilles.


                  5. Eugenia dicrana Berg. Naked Wood.

                       _Anamomis dichotoma_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 696]

Leaves ovate or obovate, acute or rounded and occasionally emarginate at
apex, cuneate at base, chartaceous when they unfold, becoming
subcoriaceous, glabrous, covered with minute black dots, 1'--1-1/4' long
and 1/2'--2/3' wide, with a stout midrib; petioles stout, enlarged at
base, coated at first with silky hairs, finally glabrous. Flowers
appearing in Florida in May, 1/4' in diameter, in cymes produced near
the end of the branches, in the axils of leaves of the year, on slender
peduncles coated with pale silky hairs, sometimes 1-flowered and not
longer than the leaves, more often longer than the leaves, dichotomously
branched and 3-flowered, with 1 flower at the end of the principal
division in the fork of its branches, or occasionally 5--7-flowered by
the development of peduncles from the axils of the bracts of the
secondary divisions of the inflorescence, each branch of the
inflorescence furnished immediately beneath the flower with 2 lanceolate
acute bractlets nearly as long as the calyx-tube; calyx hoary-tomentose,
the lobes ovate, rounded at apex and much shorter than the ovate acute
glandular-punctate white petals. Fruit ripening in Florida in August,
reddish brown, 1/4' long, obliquely oblong, obovate or subglobose,
roughened by minute glands; flesh thin, rather dry and aromatic; seeds
reniform, light brown, exceedingly fragrant.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, and slender
terete branchlets light red and coated with pale silky hairs when they
first appear, becoming glabrous in their second year and covered with
light or dark brown bark separating into small thin scales; or often a
shrub, with numerous slender stems. Bark of the trunk 1/16'--1/8' thick,
with a smooth light red or red-brown surface separating into minute thin
scales. Wood very heavy, hard, close-grained, light brown or red, with
thick yellow sapwood of 40--50 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, rocky woods, Mosquito Inlet to Cape Canaveral on
the east coast, and from the banks of the Caloosahatchee River to the
shores of Cape Romano on the west coast, on Key West, and in the
neighborhood of Bay Biscayne, Dade County; on the Bahama Islands and on
several of the Antilles.


                       6. Eugenia Simpsonii Sarg.

                      _Anamomis Simpsonii_ Small.

[Illustration: Fig. 697]

Leaves oblong, rounded and abruptly short-pointed or occasionally
emarginate at apex, cuneate at base, or broad-elliptic, silky pubescent
and ciliate on the margins when they unfold, soon glabrous, and at
maturity coriaceous, dark yellow-green and lustrous on the upper
surface, paler and dull on the lower surface, 1-1/2'--2' long and
1/2'--1' wide, with a prominent midrib impressed on the upper side and
obscure spreading primary veins united before reaching the thickened
revolute entire margins of the leaf; petioles covered at first with
snowy white tomentum, soon glabrous, slender, 1/8'--1/4' in length.
Flowers fragrant, about 1/2' in diameter, sessile in lateral
3--15-flowered cymes on slender finely appressed-pubescent peduncles
longer or shorter than the subtending leaves, their bractlets acuminate
and 1/3' long; calyx-tube short-obconic, thickly covered with silky
white hairs, the lobes rounded at apex, green, punctate, two of them
orbicular-reniform, the others orbicular-ovate, shorter than the white
concave, obovate to suborbicular erose ciliate sparingly punctate
petals. Fruit ellipsoid, red, mostly 1/3'--2/5' long; seed reniform,
usually solitary.

A tree, occasionally 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk 15'--16' in diameter,
small erect and spreading smooth gray-brown or reddish brown branches
forming a narrow round-topped head, and slender branchlets covered when
they first appear with snowy white tomentum, soon glabrous, and bright
or dull reddish brown, and marked in their second year with the nearly
orbicular elevated conspicuous scars of fallen leaves. Bark of the trunk
thin, smooth, reddish, marked by pale blotches.

Distribution. Florida, Arch Creek Hummock north of Little River, and on
Paradise and Long Keys in the Everglades, Dade County.




                          XLIX. MELASTOMACEAE.


Trees, shrubs, or herbs with watery juice. Leaves opposite, rarely
verticellate, 3--9-nerved, usually petiolate; stipules 0. Flowers
regular, perfect, usually showy, rarely fragrant, in terminal clusters;
calyx usually 4 or 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud; petals as
many as the lobes of the calyx, inserted on its throat, imbricated or
convolute in the bud; stamens as many or twice as many as the petals,
inserted in 1 series with them, often inclined or decimate; anthers
2-celled, attached at the base, opening by a terminal pore; ovary 2 or
many-celled; style terminal, simple, straight or declinate; stigma
capitate, simple or lobed; ovules numerous, minute, anatropous. Fruit
capsular or baccate, inclosed in the calyx-tube; seeds minute; testa
coriaceous or crustaceous; hilum lateral or basal; embryo without
albumen.

This family with 164 genera and a large number of species is chiefly
confined to the tropics, and is most abundant in those of South America.




                         1. TETRAZYGIA A. Rich.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets. Leaves opposite, petiolate,
oblong-ovate to ovate-lanceolate, entire or denticulate, 3--5-nerved,
persistent, scurfy, like the young branchlets, peduncles and calyx-tube.
Flowers perfect in many-flowered terminal panicles or corymbs;
calyx-tube urceolate or globose, adnate to the ovary, the limb
constricted above the ovary and dilated below the apex, the lobes short
or elongated; petals obovate, obtuse, convolute in the bud; stamens
twice as many as the petals; filaments subulate; anthers
linear-subulate, erect or slightly recurved, attached at base, 2-celled,
opening by a minute pore at apex, their connective not extended below
the cells; ovary 3--6-celled; style filiform, curved, exserted,
surrounded at base by a short sheath 8--10-toothed at apex; ovules
indefinite, minute, sessile on an axile placenta. Fruit a 3 or 4-celled
berry, crowned by the persistent tube of the calyx; seeds numerous,
minute, obpyramidal, thickened and incurved at apex; testa coriaceous,
slightly pitted; hilum basal; cotyledons thick; radicle short, turned
toward the hilum.

Tetrazygia with 14 species is confined to the West Indies and southern
Florida where one species has been discovered, the only tree of the
great family of the Melastomaceae found in the United States.

The generic name is from {tetra} and {zygon} in allusion to the often
4-parted flowers.


                      1. Tetrazygia bicolor Cogn.

[Illustration: Fig. 698]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, gradually narrowed and rounded at
base, 3-nerved, entire, undulate and slightly thickened on the revolute
margins, dark green on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface,
3'--4-1/2' long and 1'--1-3/4' wide; petioles stout, 3/4--1' in length.
Flowers appearing from March to May, 4/5' in diameter, short-stalked, in
open cymose panicles; calyx urceolate, 4 or 5-lobed, the lobes nearly
obsolete; petals 4 or 5, oblong-obovate, reflexed after anthesis, white;
ovary 3-celled, style surrounded at base by a short sheath 10-toothed at
apex. Fruit ripening in late autumn or early winter, oblong to ovoid,
conspicuously constricted at apex, 1/4'--1/3' in length and 1/6'--1/5'
in diameter.

In Florida a shrub, or in the dense woods of the keys of the Everglades
a slender tree, often 30 deg. high, with an erect trunk 3' or 4' in
diameter, covered with thin light gray-brown slightly fissured bark,
small spreading branches becoming erect toward their apex and gracefully
drooping leaves; or in the sandy soil of open Pine-woods often less than
3 deg. in height.

Distribution. Florida, on the Everglade Keys, Dade County; on the Bahama
Islands and in Cuba.




                             L. ARALIACEAE.


Trees, shrubs, or herbs, with watery juice and scaly buds. Leaves
alternate, compound or simple, petiolate, with stipules. Flowers in
racemose or panicled umbels; parts of the flower in 5's; disk epigynous;
ovule solitary, suspended from the apex of the cell, anatropous; raphe
ventral, the micropyle superior. Fruit baccate. Seeds, with albumen.

The Aralia family with fifty-four genera is chiefly tropical, with a few
genera extending beyond the tropics into the northern hemisphere,
especially into North America and eastern Asia. The widely distributed
and largely extratropical genus Aralia is represented by one arborescent
species in the flora of the United States. Hedera, the Ivy, of this
family, is commonly cultivated in the temperate parts of the United
States, and some species of Panax and Acanthopanax from eastern Asia are
found in gardens in the northeastern states.




                              1. ARALIA L.


Aromatic spiny trees and shrubs, with stout pithy branchlets, and thick
fleshy roots, or bristly or glabrous perennial herbs. Leaves digitate or
once or twice pinnate, the pinnae serrulate; stipules produced on the
expanded and clasping base of the petiole. Flowers perfect,
polygamo-monoecious or polygamo-dioecious, on slender jointed pedicels,
small, greenish white; calyx-tube coherent with the ovary, the limb
truncate, repand or minutely toothed, the teeth valvate in the bud;
petals imbricated in the bud, inserted by their broad base on the margin
of the disk, ovate, obtuse or acute and slightly inflexed at apex;
stamens inserted on the margin of the disk, alternate with the petals;
filaments filiform; anthers oblong or rarely ovoid, attached on the
back, introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary
2--5-celled; styles 2--5, in the fertile flower distinct and erect or
slightly united at base, spreading and incurved above the middle, or
incurved from the base and sometimes inflexed at apex, crowned with
large capitate stigmas, in the sterile flower short and united. Fruit
fleshy, laterally compressed or 3--5-angled, crowned with the remnants
of the style; nutlets 2--5, orbicular, ovoid or oblong, compressed,
crustaceous, light reddish brown, 1-seeded. Seed compressed; seed-coat
thin, light brown, adnate to the thin fleshy albumen; cotyledons
ovate-oblong, as long as the straight radicle.

Aralia with forty species is confined to North America and Asia.

The name is of obscure meaning.


                  1. Aralia spinosa L. Hercules' Club.

[Illustration: Fig. 699]

Leaves clustered at the end of the branches, twice pinnate, 3 deg.--4 deg. long
and 2-1/2 deg. wide, with a stout light brown petiole 18'--20' in length,
clasping the stem with an enlarged base and armed with slender prickles,
or occasionally unarmed; pinnae unequally pinnate, usually with 5 or 6
pairs of lateral leaflets and a long-stalked terminal leaflet, and often
furnished at base with a pinnate or simple leaflet; leaflets ovate,
acute, dentate or crenate, cuneate or more or less rounded at base,
short-petiolulate, when they unfold lustrous, bronze-green, and slightly
pilose on the midrib and primary veins, and at maturity thin, dark green
above, pale beneath, 2'--3' long and 1-1/2' wide, with a thin midrib
occasionally furnished with small prickles and slender primary veins
nearly parallel with their margins; in the autumn turning light yellow
before falling; stipules acute, about 1' long, at first puberulous on
the back and ciliate on the margins. Flowers 1/16' long, appearing at
midsummer on long slender pubescent straw-colored pedicels, in
many-flowered umbels arranged in compound panicles, with light brown
puberulous branches becoming purple in the autumn, forming a terminal
racemose cluster 3 deg.--4 deg. long, and rising solitary or 2 or 3 together
above the spreading leaves; bracts and bractlets lanceolate, acute,
scarious, persistent; petals white, acute, inflexed at apex; ovary often
abortive; styles connivent. Fruit ripening in autumn, black, 1/8' in
diameter, globose, 3--5-angled, crowned with the blackened styles, with
thin purple very juicy flesh; seeds oblong, rounded at the ends, about
1/10' long.

A tree, 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, stout
wide-spreading branches, and branchlets 1/2'--2/3' in diameter, armed
like the branches and young trunks with stout straight or slightly
incurved orange-colored scattered prickles, and nearly encircled by the
conspicuous narrow leaf-scars marked by a row of prominent
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, light orange-colored in their first season,
lustrous and marked irregularly with oblong pale lenticels, becoming
light brown in their second year, with bright green inner bark; more
often a shrub, with a cluster of unbranched stems 6 deg.--20 deg. tall.
Winter-buds: terminal conic, blunt at apex, 1/2'--3/4' long, with thin
chestnut-brown scales; axillary triangular, flattened, about 1/4' long
and broad. Bark of the trunk dark brown, about 1/8' thick, and divided
by broad shallow fissures into wide rounded ridges irregularly broken on
the surface. Wood close-grained, light, soft, brittle, brown streaked
with yellow, with lighter colored sapwood of 2 or 3 layers of annual
growth. The bark of the roots and the berries are stimulant and
diaphoretic, and are sometimes used in medicine and in domestic
practice.

Distribution. Deep moist soil in the neighborhood of streams; southern
Pennsylvania to southern Indiana, southeastern Iowa and southeastern
Missouri, and southward to northern Florida, western Louisiana, and
eastern Texas; probably of its largest size on the foothills of the Big
Smoky Mountains in Tennessee.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern states and
in western Europe; hardy in eastern Massachusetts.




                             LI. NYSSACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, scaly buds, alternate entire
dentate or serrate deciduous leaves, without stipules. Flowers
dioecious, polygamo-dioecious or perfect; staminate, calyx minute,
5-toothed or lobed; petals 5 or more, imbricated in the bud, or 0;
stamens as many, twice as many, or fewer than the petals, usually in 2
series; filaments sometimes of 2 lengths, elongated, filiform or
subulate; disk fleshy, depressed at apex; pistillate flowers, calyx-tube
adnate to the ovary; petals 5 or more, imbricated in the bud; ovary
1-celled or 6--10-celled; ovule solitary, pendulous from the apex of the
cell, anatropous; micropyle superior; disk epigynous, pulvinate, the
apex depressed or convex, or 0; style subulate, curved or spirally
involute at apex, or 2-parted, or conic and divided into as many
stigmatic lobes as the cells of the ovary. Fruit drupaceous or
subsamaroid, crowned with the remnants of the calyx, 1-celled and
1-seeded, or 3--5-celled, the cells thin, 4-seeded; seed pendent, testa
membranaceous or thin, albumen fleshy; cotyledons foliaceous or thin;
radicle cylindric.

Nyssaceae with 3 genera, Nyssa L., Camptotheca Decne. and Davidia Baill.
and 8 species is confined to eastern North America, western China,
Thibet, the Himalayas and the Malay Archipelago.




                              1. NYSSA L.


Trees, with leaves conduplicate in the bud, petiolate, sometimes
remotely angulate or toothed, mostly crowded at the end of the branches.
Flowers polygamo-dioecious, minute, greenish white; staminate on slender
pedicels from the axils of minute caducous bracts, in simple or compound
clusters on long axillary peduncles bibracteolate near the middle or at
the apex or sometimes without bractlets; calyx disciform or cup-shaped,
the limb 5-toothed; petals 5, imbricated in the bud, equal or unequal,
ovate or linear-oblong, thick, inserted on the margin of the conspicuous
pulvinate entire or lobed disk, erect; stamens 5--12, exserted;
filaments filiform; anthers oblong; ovary 0; pistillate flowers on
axillary peduncles, in 2 or few-flowered clusters, sessile or nearly so,
in the axils of conspicuous bracts and furnished with 1 or 2 small
lateral bractlets, or solitary and surrounded by 2--4 bractlets;
calyx-tube campanulate, sometimes slightly urceolate, the limb
5-toothed; petals small, thick, and spreading; stamens 5--10; filaments
short; anthers fertile or sterile; disk less developed than in the
staminate flower, depressed in the centre; ovary 1 or 2-celled; style
terete, elongated, recurved, stigmatic toward the apex or the inner
face; raphe ventral. Fruit drupaceous, short-oblong, fleshy, urceolate
at apex; flesh thin, oily, acidulous; stone thick-walled, bony, terete
or compressed, ribbed or winged, 1 or rarely 2-celled, usually 1-seeded.
Seed filling the cavity of the stone; seed-coat pale; embryo straight.

Nyssa with six species is confined to the eastern United States and to
southern and eastern Asia, where one species is distributed from the
eastern Himalayas to the island of Java and another occurs in central
and western China. The American species produce tough wood, with
intricately contorted and twisted grain.

_Nyssa_, the name of a nymph, was given to this genus from the fact that
one of the species grows in water.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Pistillate flowers in 2 or few-flowered clusters, their calyx
        disciform; fruit blue, not more than 2/3' long; stone with broad
        rounded ribs.
    Stone indistinctly ribbed; leaves linear-oblong to oval or obovate.
                                                 1. N. sylvatica (A, C).
    Stone prominently ribbed; leaves oblanceolate to oblong or elliptic.
                                                      2. N. biflora (C).
  Pistillate flowers solitary, their calyx cup-shaped; fruit 1' or more
        long.
    Fruit red; stone with prominent wings; leaves oblong-oval or
          obovate, usually obtuse at apex.
                                                       3. N. ogeche (C).
    Fruit purple; stone with acute ridges; leaves oval or oblong, acute
          or acuminate at apex.
                                                  4. N. aquatica (A, C).


        1. Nyssa sylvatica Marsh. Tupelo. Pepperidge. Sour Gum.

[Illustration: Fig. 700]

Leaves crowded at the end of lateral branchlets or remote on vigorous
shoots, linear-oblong, lanceolate, oval or obovate, acute or acuminate
or sometimes contracted into a short broad point at apex, cuneate or
occasionally rounded at base, entire, with slightly thickened margins,
or rarely coarsely dentate, coated when they unfold with rufous
tomentum, especially on the lower surface, or pubescent or sometimes
nearly glabrous, and at maturity thick and firm, dark green and lustrous
above, pale and often villose below, principally along the broad midrib
and on the primary veins, 2'--5' long and 1/2'--3' wide; turning early
in autumn bright scarlet on the upper surface only; petioles slender or
stout, terete or wing-margined, ciliate, 1/4'--1-1/2' in length, and
often bright red. Flowers appearing in early spring when the leaves are
about one third grown on slender pubescent or tomentose peduncles
1/2'--1-1/2' long, staminate in many-flowered dense or lax compound
heads, pistillate in 2 to several-flowered clusters, sessile in the
axils of conspicuous often foliaceous bracts, and furnished with 2
smaller acute hairy bractlets; calyx of the staminate flower disciform;
petals thick, ovate-oblong, acute, rounded at apex, erect or slightly
spreading, early deciduous; stamens exserted in the staminate flower,
shorter than the petals in the pistillate flower; stigma stout,
exserted, reflexed above the middle, 0 in the staminate flower. Fruit
ripening in October, 1--3 from each flower-cluster, ovoid, 1/3'--2/3'
long, dark blue, with thin acrid flesh; stone light brown, ovoid,
rounded at base, pointed at apex, terete or more or less flattened, and
10--12-ribbed, with narrow indistinct pale ribs rounded on the back.

A tree, with thick hard roots and few rootlets, often surrounded by
root-sprouts, occasionally 100 deg. or rarely 125 deg. high, with a trunk
sometimes 5 deg. in diameter, numerous slender pendulous tough flexible
branches forming a head sometimes short, cylindric and flat-topped,
sometimes low and broad, or on trees crowded in the forest narrow,
pyramidal or conic, and sometimes inversely conic and broad and flat at
the top, and branchlets when they first appear light green to orange
color, and in their first winter nearly glabrous or pale or
rufous-pubescent, light red-brown marked by minute scattered pale
lenticels and by small lunate leaf-scars displaying the ends of 3
conspicuous groups of fibro-vascular bundles, later becoming darker and
developing short stout spur-like lateral branchlets; generally in the
northern and extreme southern states much smaller, and rarely more than
50 deg.-60 deg. tall. Winter-buds obtuse, 1/4' long, with ovate acute apiculate
dark red puberulous imbricated scales, those of the inner ranks
accrescent, bright-colored at maturity, and marking the base of the
branchlet with obscure ring-like scars. Bark of the trunk 3/4'--1-1/2'
thick, light brown often tinged with red, and deeply fissured, the
surface of the ridges covered with small irregularly shaped scales. Wood
heavy, soft, strong, very tough, not durable, light yellow or nearly
white, with thick lighter colored sapwood of 80--100 layers of annual
growth; used for the hubs of wheels, rollers in glass factories,
ox-yokes, wharf-piles, and sometimes for the soles of shoes.

Distribution. Borders of swamps in wet imperfectly drained soil, and
often especially southward on high wooded mountain slopes; valley of the
Kennebec River, Maine, to southern Ontario, central Michigan,
southeastern Missouri and eastern Oklahoma, and southward to northern
Florida, and to the valley of the Brazos River, Texas; of its largest
size on the southern Appalachian Mountains.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental tree in the eastern states, but
difficult to transplant except when very young. The first tree in the
eastern states to assume autumn colors of the leaves.


                         2. Nyssa biflora Walt.

[Illustration: Fig. 701]

Leaves oblanceolate, oblong, elliptic or rarely ovate, acute or
acuminate or occasionally rounded at the narrow apex, cuneate or rounded
at the gradually narrowed base, and entire, when they unfold
silky-villose above and hoary-tomentose beneath, soon becoming glabrous,
dark yellow-green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler and sometimes
glaucous on the lower surface, 2'--4' long and 3/4'--1' wide, with a
prominent midrib and numerous slender veins; petioles stout, 1/4'--1/2'
in length. Flowers appearing when the leaves are nearly fully grown;
staminate on slender villose pedicels, in many-flowered loose clusters
on slender hairy peduncles 1'--1-1/2' in length; pistillate in pairs on
rather stouter peduncles usually about 1' long; calyx of the staminate
flower disciform; petals oblong-ovate, rounded at apex, white, erect or
slightly spreading, early deciduous. Fruit solitary or in pairs, on
peduncles 1'--1-1/2' in length, oval or ellipsoid, dark blue, lustrous,
about 1/3' long, with acrid pulp; stone oval, compressed, narrowed at
the ends, and prominently ribbed.

A tree, rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a slender trunk gradually
tapering upward from a swollen and much enlarged base, small spreading
branches forming a narrow pyramidal or round-topped head, branchlets
slightly villose when they first appear, soon glabrous, bright reddish
brown in their first winter, becoming darker the following year, and
numerous erect thick roots rising above the surface of the water.
Winter-buds acute, dark red-brown, puberulous, and about 1/8' long, the
inner scales hoary-tomentose. Bark about 1' thick, deeply furrowed, gray
to very dark reddish brown.

Distribution. Small Pine-barren ponds of the coastal plain from North
Carolina to central and eastern Florida, southern Alabama and
Mississippi, and western Louisiana (near Lake Charles, Calcasieu
Parish).


           3. Nyssa ogeche Marsh. Ogeechee Lime. Sour Tupelo.

[Illustration: Fig. 702]

Leaves oblong, oval or obovate, acute, rounded or rarely obtuse, and
apiculate at apex, gradually or abruptly cuneate or sometimes rounded at
base, and entire, covered on the lower surface when they unfold with
thick hoary tomentum and on the upper surface with short scattered pale
hairs, and at maturity thick and firm, dark green, lustrous and slightly
pilose above, pale below, 4'--6' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide, with a stout
midrib, 9 or 10 pairs of primary veins covered on the lower side with
rufous pubescence or often nearly glabrous, and obscure reticulate
veinlets; petioles stout, grooved, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers appearing
in March and April; staminate in capitate clusters on slender hairy
peduncles 1/2' long, bibracteolate near the middle, and developed from
the axils of the inner scales of the terminal bud, covered with long
pale hairs on the outer surface of the short obscurely 5-toothed
cup-shaped calyx and on the oblong petals rounded at apex; filaments
longer than the petals; anthers oval and conspicuously
tuberculate-roughened; pistillate solitary, 1/16' long, on short stout
woolly peduncles from the axils of bud-scales, and furnished at apex
with 2 acute hairy bractlets; calyx coated, like the minute rounded
spreading petals, with hoary tomentum; stamens included, with short
filaments, and small mostly fertile anthers; style stout, exserted,
reflexed from near the base. Fruit bright or dull red, on slender
tomentose stems enlarged at apex and 1/2'--2/3' long, ripening in July
and August, and sometimes persistent on the branches until after the
falling of the leaves, oblong or obovoid, 1'--1-1/2' in length, tipped
with the thickened and pointed remnants of the style; flesh thick,
juicy, very acid; stone oblong, compressed, narrowed at the ends,
rounded at base, acute at apex, with walls produced into 10 or 12 broad
thin papery white wings, about 1' long, and 1 or rarely 2-seeded.

A tree, rarely 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with 1 or several stems occasionally 2 deg. in
diameter, spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and
slender branchlets coated when they first appear with rufous tomentum,
light reddish brown or green tinged with red and puberulous during their
first summer, turning gray or reddish brown in their first winter, and
marked by large lunate or nearly triangular leaf-scars displaying the
ends of 3 groups of fibro-vascular bundles; often a shrub, with numerous
slender clustered diverging stems. Winter-buds obtuse, 1/8' long, with
ovate apiculate imbricated scales rounded on the back and clothed with
thick hoary tomentum, those of the inner ranks becoming at maturity
ovate-oblong or obovate, rounded at apex, bright red, and 1/2'--3/4'
long. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick, irregularly fissured, with a
dark brown surface broken into thick appressed persistent plate-like
scales. Wood light, soft, tough, not strong, white, with thin hardly
distinguishable sapwood of about 10 layers of annual growth. A preserve
with an agreeable subacid flavor, known as Ogeechee limes, is sometimes
made from the fruit in Georgia and South Carolina. The flowers abound in
nectar, and are much visited by bees.

Distribution. Deep often inundated river swamps or their borders; South
Carolina in the neighborhood of the coast, through the valley of the
lower Ogeechee River, Georgia; in northern and in western Florida to the
mouth of the Choctawhatchee River (_R. H. Harper_), and in the valley of
the lower Apalachicola River; rare and local.


            4. Nyssa aquatica Marsh. Cotton Gum. Tupelo Gum.

[Illustration: Fig. 703]

Leaves oblong-ovate, acute or acuminate and often long-pointed at apex,
cuneate, rounded, or subcordate at base, entire or remotely and
irregularly angulate-toothed, the teeth often tipped with a long slender
mucro, when they unfold light red and coated below and on the petioles
with pale tomentum and pubescent above, especially on the broad thick
midrib, and at maturity thick and firm, dark green and lustrous on the
upper surface, pale and more or less downy-pubescent on the lower
surface, 5'--7' long and 2'--4' wide, with 10--12 pairs of primary veins
forked near the margins and connected by conspicuous cross veins;
petioles stout, grooved, hairy, enlarged at base, 1-1/2'--2-1/2' in
length. Flowers appearing in March and April on a long slender hairy
peduncle from the axil of an inner scale of the terminal bud; staminate
in dense capitate clusters, their peduncle furnished near the middle and
occasionally at apex with long linear ciliate bractlets; calyx-tube
cup-shaped, obscurely 5-toothed, one third as long as the oblong erect
petals rounded at apex and much shorter than the stamens; pistillate
solitary, surrounded by 2--4 strap-shaped scarious ciliate bractlets
often 1/2' long and more or less united below into an involucral cup;
calyx-tube oblong and much longer than the ovate minute spreading
petals; stamens included, with small mostly fertile anthers; style
stout, tapering, reflexed above the middle, and revolute into a close
coil. Fruit ripening early in the autumn, on slender drooping stalks
3'--4' in length, oblong or slightly obovoid, crowned with the pointed
remnants of the style, dark purple, marked by conspicuous scattered pale
dots, and 1' long, with thick tough skin and thin acid flesh; stone
obovoid, rounded at the narrow apex, pointed at base, flattened, light
brown or nearly white, and about 10-ridged, the ridges acute and
wing-like, with thin separable margins, and sometimes united by short
intermediate ridges.

A tree, 80 deg.--100 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter above the
greatly enlarged tapering base, comparatively small spreading branches
forming a narrow oblong or pyramidal head, stout pithy branchlets dark
red and coated with pale tomentum when they first appear, soon becoming
glabrous or nearly so, and in their first winter light or bright
red-brown and marked by small scattered pale lenticels and by the
conspicuous elevated nearly orbicular leaf-scars displaying the ends of
3 large fibro-vascular bundles, and thick corky roots. Winter-buds:
terminal nearly globose, with broad ovate light chestnut-brown scales
keeled on the back and rounded and apiculate at apex, those of the inner
ranks accrescent and at maturity oblong-ovate or oblong-obovate, rounded
at apex, 1' or more long, and bright yellow; axillary minute, obtuse,
nearly imbedded in the bark. Bark of the trunk about 1/4' thick, dark
brown, longitudinally furrowed, and roughened on the surface by small
scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, close-grained, difficult to split,
light brown or often nearly white, with thick sapwood sometimes composed
of more than 100 layers of annual growth; used in the manufacture of
wooden-ware, broom-handles, and wooden shoes, and largely for fruit and
vegetable boxes. The wood of the roots is sometimes employed instead of
cork for the floats of nets.

Distribution. Deep swamps inundated during a part of every year; coast
region of the Atlantic states from southeastern Virginia to northern
Florida, through the Gulf states to the valley of the Nueces River,
Texas, and through Arkansas and southern and southeastern Missouri to
western Kentucky and Tennessee, and to the valley of the lower Wabash
River, Illinois; of its greatest size in the Cypress-swamps of western
Louisiana and eastern Texas.




                             LII. CORNACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, scaly buds, and alternate or
opposite deciduous leaves, without stipules. Flowers perfect or
polygamo-dioecious; calyx 4 or 5-toothed, petals 4 or 5; stamens
inserted on the margin of the epigynous disk; anthers oblong; introrse,
2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; ovary 1 or 2-celled; ovule
solitary, suspended from the interior angle of the apex of the cell,
anatropous; micropyle superior. Fruit drupaceous, 1 or 2-seeded. Seed
oblong-ovoid; seed-coat membranaceous; embryo in copious fleshy albumen;
cotyledons foliaceous; radicle terete, turned toward the hilum.

The widely distributed Cornel family with ten genera, more numerous in
temperate than in tropical regions, has arborescent representatives of
the genus Cornus in North America.




                         1. CORNUS L. Dogwood.


Trees and shrubs, with astringent bark, opposite or rarely alternate
deciduous leaves conduplicate or involute in the bud. Flowers small,
perfect, white, greenish white or yellow; calyx-tube minutely 4-toothed,
the teeth valvate in the bud; disk pulvinate, depressed in the centre,
or obsolete; petals 4, valvate in the bud, oblong-ovate, inserted on the
margin of the disk; stamens 4, alternate with the petals; filaments
slender, exserted; ovary 2-celled; style exserted, simple, columnar,
crowned with a single capitate or truncate stigma; raphe dorsal. Fruit
ovoid or oblong; flesh thin and succulent; nut bony or crustaceous,
2-celled, 2 or sometimes 1-seeded. Seed compressed; embryo straight or
slightly incurved.

Cornus with nearly fifty species is widely distributed through the three
continents of the northern hemisphere, and south of the equator is
represented in Peru by a single species. Of the sixteen or seventeen
species of the United States four are arborescent. Cornus is rich in
tannic acid, and the bark and occasionally the leaves and unripe fruit
are used as tonics, astringents, and febrifuges. Of exotic species,
_Cornus mas_, L., is often planted in the eastern states as an
ornamental tree, and its edible fruit is used in Europe in preserves and
cordials. The wood of Cornus is hard, close-grained, and durable, and is
used in turnery and for charcoal.

The generic name, from _cornu_, relates to the hardness of the wood
produced by plants of this genus.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers greenish, in a dense cymose head surrounded by a conspicuous
        corolla-like involucre of 4--6 white or rarely red scales, from
        terminal buds formed the previous summer; fruit ovoid, bright
        red, rarely yellow.
    Heads of flower-buds inclosed by the involucre during the winter;
          involucral scales 4, obcordate or notched at apex; leaves
          ovate to elliptic.
                                                   1. C. florida (A, C).
    Heads of flower-buds inclosed only at base by the involucre during
          the winter; involucral scales 4--6, oblong to obovate, usually
          acute at apex; leaves ovate or rarely obovate.
                                                 2. C. Nuttallii (B, G).
  Flowers cream color, in a flat cymose head, without involucral scales,
        terminal on shoots of the year; fruit subglobose, white or dark
        blue.
    Leaves opposite, scabrous above; fruit white.
                                               3. C. asperifolia (A, C).
    Leaves mostly alternate and clustered at the end of the branches,
          smooth above; fruit dark blue or rarely yellow.
                                              4. C. alternifolia (A, C).


                1. Cornus florida L. Flowering Dogwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 704]

Leaves ovate to elliptic or rarely slightly obovate, acute and often
contracted into a slender point at apex, gradually narrowed at base,
remotely and obscurely crenulate-toothed on the somewhat thickened
margins, and mostly clustered at the end of the branches, when they
unfold pale and pubescent below and puberulous above, and at maturity
thick and firm, bright green and covered with minute appressed hairs on
the upper surface, pale or sometimes almost white and more or less
pubescent on the lower surface, 3'--6' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a
prominent light-colored midrib deeply impressed above, and 5 or 6 pairs
of primary veins connected by obscure reticulate veinlets; in the autumn
turning bright scarlet on the upper surface, remaining pale on the lower
surface; petioles grooved, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers: head of
flower-buds appearing during the summer between the upper pair of
lateral leaf-buds, inclosed by 4 involucral scales remaining light brown
and more or less covered with pale hairs during the winter, and borne on
a stout club-shaped puberulous peduncle 1/4' long or less during the
winter and becoming 1'--1-1/2' in length; involucral scales beginning to
unfold, enlarge and grow white in early spring and when the flowers open
in March at the south to May at the north, when the leaves are nearly
fully grown, forming a flat corolla-like cup 3'--4' in diameter,
becoming at maturity obovoid, 1'--1-1/2' wide, gradually narrowed below
the middle and notched at the rounded apex, reticulate-veined, pure
white, pink, or rarely bright red, deciduous after the fading of the
flowers; flowers in dense many-flowered cymose heads, in the axils of
broad-ovate nearly triangular minutely apiculate glabrous light green
deciduous bracts, 1/8' in diameter; calyx terete, slightly urceolate,
puberulous, obtusely 4-lobed, light green; corolla-lobes strap-shaped,
rounded or acute at apex, slightly thickened on the margins, puberulous
on the outer surface, reflexed after anthesis, green tipped with yellow;
disk large and orange-colored; style crowned with a truncate stigma.
Fruit ripening in October, ovoid, crowned with the remnants of the
narrow persistent calyx and with the style, bright scarlet or rarely
yellow (f. _xanthocarpa_ Rehd.), lustrous, 1/2' long and 1/4' broad,
with thin mealy flesh, and a smooth thick-walled slightly grooved stone
acute at the ends, and 1 or 2-seeded; seeds oblong, pale brown.

A bushy tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with a short trunk 12'-18' in diameter,
slender spreading or upright branches, and divergent branchlets turning
upward near the end, pale green or green tinged with red when they first
appear, glabrous or slightly puberulous, bright red or yellow-green
during their first winter and nearly surrounded by the narrow ring-like
leaf-scars, later becoming light brown or gray tinged with red;
frequently toward the northern limits of its range a much-branched
shrub. Winter-buds formed in midsummer; the terminal covered by 2
opposite acute pointed scales rounded on the back and joined below for
half their length, and accompanied by 2 pairs of lateral buds, each
covered by a single scale, those of the lower pair shedding their scales
in the autumn and remaining undeveloped. Bark of the trunk 1/8'--1/4'
thick, with a dark red-brown surface divided into quadrangular or
many-sided plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, close-grained,
brown sometimes changing to shades of green and red, with lighter
colored sapwood of 30--40 layers of annual growth; largely used in
turnery, for the bearings of machinery, the hubs of small wheels,
barrel-hoops, the handles of tools, and occasionally for engravers'
blocks.

Distribution. Usually under the shade of taller trees in rich
well-drained soil; southern Maine to southern Ontario, southern
Michigan, southeastern Kansas and eastern Oklahoma, and southward to
central Florida and the valley of the Brazos River, Texas; on the
mountains of northern Mexico; comparatively rare at the north; one of
the commonest and most generally distributed inhabitants of the
deciduous-leaved forests of the middle and southern states, ranging from
the coast nearly to the summits of the high Alleghany Mountains. Trees
with rose-colored or with pink involucral scales occasionally occur
(var. _rubra_ Andre). A variety with pendulous branches is known in
gardens (var. _pendula_ Dipp.); the var. _xanthocarpa_ near Oyster Bay,
Nassau County, Long Island, New York, and at Saluda, Polk County, North
Carolina.

Often planted as an ornament of parks and gardens in the eastern states.


                   2. Cornus Nuttallii Aud. Dogwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 705]

Leaves ovate or slightly obovate, acute and often contracted into a
short point at the apex, cuneate at base, faintly crenulate-serrate, and
generally clustered toward the end of the branches, when they unfold
coated below with pale tomentum and puberulous above, and at maturity
thin, bright green and slightly puberulous, with short appressed hairs
on the upper surface, and woolly pubescent on the lower surface, 4'--5'
long and 1-1/2'--3' wide, with a prominent midrib impressed above, and
about 5 pairs of slender primary veins connected by remote reticulate
veinlets; in the autumn turning bright orange and scarlet before
falling; petioles stout, grooved, pubescent, 1/2'--2/3' in length, with
a large clasping base. Flowers: head of flower-buds appearing during the
summer between the upper pair of lateral leaf-buds, surrounded at base
but not inclosed by the involucral scales during the winter,
hemispheric, 1/2' in diameter, usually nodding on a stout hairy peduncle
3/4'--1' long; involucral scales becoming when the flowers open
1-1/2'--3' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, white or white tinged with pink,
oblong to obovate or nearly orbicular, and acute, acuminate, or obtuse,
entire and thickened at apex, puberulous on the outer surface, gradually
narrowed below the middle and conspicuously 8-ribbed, the spreading ribs
united by reticulate veinlets; flowers in dense cymose heads from the
axils of minute acuminate scarious deciduous bracts; calyx terete,
slightly urceolate, puberulous on the outer surface, yellow-green, or
light purple, with dark red-purple lobes; petals strap-shaped, rounded
at apex, spreading, somewhat puberulous on the outer surface, with
thickened slightly inflexed margins, yellow-green; style crowned with a
truncate stigma. Fruit ripening in October, in dense spherical heads of
30--40 drupes surrounded at base by a ring of abortive pendulous
ovaries, 1/2' long, ovoid, much flattened, crowned with the broad
persistent calyx, bright red or orange-colored, with thin mealy flesh,
and a thick-walled 1 or 2-seeded stone obtuse at the ends and scarcely
grooved; seeds oblong, compressed, with a very thin pale papery coat.

A tree, 40 deg.--60 deg., or exceptionally 100 deg. high, with a trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in
diameter, small spreading branches forming an oblong conic or ultimately
round-topped head, and slender light green branchlets coated while young
with pale hairs, becoming glabrous or puberulous, dark reddish purple or
sometimes green during their first winter and conspicuously marked by
the elevated lunate leaf-scars, ultimately becoming light brown or brown
tinged with red. Winter-buds formed in July; the terminal acute, 1/3'
long, covered by 2 narrow-ovate acute long-pointed puberulous light
green opposite scales, accompanied by 2 pairs of lateral buds, each
covered by a single scale, those of the lower pair shedding their scales
in the autumn and remaining undeveloped, those of the upper pair clothed
with pale hairs, especially toward the apex, their scales thickening,
turning dark purple, lengthening in the spring with the inclosed shoot,
finally becoming scarious and developing into small leaves, and in
falling marking the base of the branchlets with ring-like scars. Bark of
the trunk about 1/4' thick, brown tinged with red, and divided on the
surface into small thin appressed scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard,
strong, close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with lighter colored
sapwood of 30--40 layers of annual growth; used in cabinet-making, for
mauls and the handles of tools.

Distribution. Usually in moist well-drained soil under the shade of
coniferous forests; valley of the lower Fraser River and Vancouver
Island, British Columbia, southward through western Washington and
Oregon, on the coast ranges of California to the San Bernardino
Mountains, and on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada; southward up
to altitudes of 4000 deg.--5000 deg., of its largest size near the shores of
Puget Sound and in the Redwood-forests of northern California.


                 3. Cornus asperifolia Michx. Dogwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 706]

Leaves ovate or oblong, gradually or abruptly contracted at apex into a
long slender point, gradually narrowed or rounded and cuneate at base,
and slightly thickened on the undulate margins, coated with lustrous
silvery tomentum when they unfold, and nearly fully grown when the
flowers open from the middle of May in Texas to the middle of July at
the north, and then dark green and roughened above by short rigid white
hairs, and pale, often glaucous or rough-pubescent below, and at
maturity thin, scabrous on the upper surface, pubescent or puberulous on
the lower surface, 3'--4' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a thin midrib,
and 4--6 pairs of slender primary veins parallel with their sides;
petioles stout, grooved, pubescent, usually about 1/2' in length.
Flowers cream color, on slender pedicels, in loose broad or narrow often
panicled pubescent cymes, on peduncles frequently 1' in length; calyx
oblong, cup-shaped, obscurely toothed, covered with fine silky white
hairs; corolla-lobes narrow-oblong, acute, about 1/8' long, and reflexed
after the flowers open; style thickened at apex into a prominent stigma.
Fruit ripening from the end of August until the end of October, in loose
spreading red-stemmed clusters, subglobose, white, tipped with the
remnants of the style, about 1/4' in diameter, with thin dry, bitter
flesh, and a full and rounded stone broader than high, somewhat oblique,
slightly grooved on the edge, and 1 or 2-seeded; seeds nearly 1/4' long,
with a pale brown coat.

A tree, sometimes nearly 50 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in
diameter, thin erect wand-like branches forming a narrow irregular
rather open head, and slender branchlets marked by numerous small pale
lenticels, light green and puberulous when they first appear, pale red,
lustrous, and puberulous during their first winter, light reddish brown
in their second year, and ultimately light gray-brown or gray; usually
shrubby. Winter-buds acute, compressed, pubescent, sessile, or stalked,
about 1/8' long, with 2 pairs of opposite scales, the terminal bud
nearly twice as large as the compressed lateral buds. Bark of the trunk
about 1/8' thick, and divided by shallow fissures into narrow
interrupted ridges broken into small closely appressed dark red-brown
scales. Wood close-grained, hard, pale brown, with thick cream-colored
sapwood.

Distribution. Southwestern Ontario (Point Pelee and Pelee Island),
southward through Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee and Mississippi to western
Florida (Gadsden and Levy Counties) and westward to southeastern South
Dakota, southeastern Nebraska, central Kansas, northwestern Oklahoma
(near Alva, Woods County) and western Texas (Kerr, Menard and Brown
Counties); probably only arborescent on the rich bottom-lands of
southern Arkansas and eastern Texas.


                   4. Cornus alternifolia L. Dogwood.

[Illustration: Fig. 707]

Leaves mostly alternate, clustered at the end of the branches, rarely
opposite, oval or ovate, gradually contracted at apex into a long
slender point, cuneate or occasionally somewhat rounded at base,
obscurely crenulate-toothed on the slightly thickened and incurved
margins, coated when they unfold on the lower surface with dense silvery
white tomentum, and faintly tinged with red and pilose above, and at
maturity thin, bright yellow-green, glabrous or sparsely pubescent on
the upper surface, pale or sometimes nearly white and covered with
appressed hairs on the lower surface, 3'--5' long and 2-1/2'--3-1/2'
wide, with a broad orange-colored midrib slightly impressed above, and
about 6 pairs of primary veins parallel with their sides; in the autumn
turning yellow or yellow and scarlet; petioles slender, pubescent,
grooved, 1-1/2'--2' in length, with an enlarged clasping base. Flowers
cream color, opening from the beginning of May to the end of June on
slender jointed pedicels 1/8'--1/4' long, in terminal flat puberulous
many-flowered cymes 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide, mostly on lateral branchlets;
calyx cup-shaped, obscurely toothed; corolla-lobes narrow, oblong,
rounded at apex, 1/8' long, reflexed after anthesis; style enlarged into
a prominent stigma. Fruit in loose spreading red-stemmed clusters,
ripening in October, subglobose, dark blue-black, or rarely yellow (f.
_ochrocarpa_ Rehd.), 1/3' in diameter, tipped with the remnants of the
style rising from the bottom of a small depression, with thin and bitter
flesh; and an obovoid nutlet, pointed at base, gradually longitudinally
many-grooved, thick-walled, and 1 or 2-seeded; seeds lunate, 1/4' long,
with a thin membranaceous pale coat.

A flat-topped tree, rarely 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in
diameter, long slender alternate diverging horizontal branches, and
numerous short upright slender branchlets pale orange-green or reddish
brown when they first appear, mostly light green or sometimes brown
tinged with green during their first winter, later turning darker green
and marked by pale lunate leaf-scars and small scattered pale lenticels;
often a shrub, with numerous stems. Bark of the trunk about 1/8' thick,
dark reddish brown, and smooth or divided by shallow longitudinal
fissures into narrow ridges irregularly broken transversely. Wood heavy,
hard, close-grained, brown tinged with red, with thick lighter colored
sapwood of 20--30 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Rich woodlands, the margins of the forest, and the borders
of streams and swamps, in moist well-drained soil, New Brunswick and
Nova Scotia, westward along the valley of the St. Lawrence River to the
northern shores of Lake Superior and to Minnesota, and southward through
the northern states and along the Appalachian Mountains to North
Carolina, up to altitudes of 3500 deg.--4000 deg.; in northern Alabama,
southwestern Georgia, and western Florida (River Junction, Gadsden
County, _T. G. Harbison_).

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern states.

Section 2. Gamopetalae. Corolla of united petals (_divided in Elliottia
in Ericaceae 0 in some species of Fraxinus in Oleaceae_).

A. Ovary superior (_inferior in Vaccinium in Ericaceae, partly inferior
in Symplocaceae, partly superior in Styraceae_).




                            LIII. ERICACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly buds, and alternate simple leaves, without
stipules. Flowers perfect, regular; calyx 4--5-lobed; corolla
hypogynous, 5-lobed (_of 4 petals in Elliottia_), the lobes imbricated
in the bud; stamens hypogynous, mostly free from the corolla, as many,
or twice as many as its lobes; anthers introrse, 2-celled, opening by
terminal pores, often appendaged; ovary 4--10-celled (_inferior in
Vaccinium_); styles terminal, simple, stigma terminal; ovules numerous,
anatropous or amphitropous; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit
capsular, drupaceous, or baccate. Seeds with fleshy or horny albumen,
embryo small; cotyledons small and short.

The Heath family with seventy-one genera is widely distributed over the
temperate and tropical parts of the earth's surface. Of the twenty-one
genera found in the United States seven have arborescent
representatives.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Ovary superior.
    Corolla of 4 petals; flowers in erect racemose panicles; leaves
          deciduous.
                                                           1. Elliottia.
    Corolla gamopetalous, 5-lobed.
      Fruit capsular.
        Capsule septicidal, the valves in opening separating from the
              persistent placentiferous axis; calyx-lobes imbricated in
              the bud; leaves persistent (_sometimes deciduous_).
          Flowers in terminal clusters; corolla 5-lobed;
                inflorescence-buds conic, covered with closely
                imbricated scales; leaves revolute on the margins.
                                                        2. Rhododendron.
          Flowers in axillary clusters; corolla saucer-shaped, with a
                short narrow tube and 10 pouches below the short limb,
                the anthers in the pouches in the bud:
                inflorescence-buds elongated, covered with loosely
                imbricated scales; leaves flat.
                                                              3. Kalmia.
        Capsule loculicidal, the valves in opening bearing the
              partitions and separating from the persistent
              placentiferous axis; calyx-lobes valvate in the bud.
          Capsule ovoid-pyramidal; flowers in terminal panicles of
                secund racemes; anther-cells opening longitudinally from
                the apex to the middle; leaves deciduous.
                                                          4. Oxydendrum.
          Capsule oblong; flowers in axillary fascicles; anthers opening
                below the apex by 2 oblong pores; leaves persistent.
                                                              5. Lyonia.
      Fruit drupaceous; flowers in terminal panicles; anthers bearing a
            pair of reflexed awns on the back, each cell opening at apex
            anteriorally by a terminal pore; leaves persistent.
                                                             6. Arbutus.
  Ovary inferior; fruit baccate; flowers axillary, racemose or solitary;
        anther-cells terminating in tubular appendages and opening by
        terminal pores.
                                                           7. Vaccinium.




                           1. ELLIOTTIA Ell.


A glabrous tree or shrub, with slender terete branchlets, scaly buds,
and fibrous roots. Leaves petiolate, oblong or oblong-obovate, acute at
the ends or occasionally rounded at apex, entire, thin, dark green and
glabrous above, pale and villose below, particularly on the thin yellow
midrib and obscure forked veins; deciduous; petioles slender and
flattened, with an abruptly enlarged base nearly covering the small
axillary buds. Flowers perfect, on slender elongated pedicels, in erect
terminal elongated racemose panicles, with minute acute scarious
caducous bracts and bractlets; calyx short, tubular, puberulous, dark
red-brown, 4-toothed, the broad apiculate teeth erose on the margins and
imbricated in the bud; petals 4, imbricated in the bud,
spatulate-linear, sessile; stamens 8, hypogynous, shorter than the
petals, filaments broad, flattened; anthers oblong-ovoid, the cells
callous-mucronate, free at the apex of the spreading lobes, opening from
above downward; disk much thickened, fleshy; ovary sessile, subglobose,
4-lobed, 4-celled, concave at apex; style elongated, slender, gradually
enlarged and club-shaped above and incurved at apex; stigma 3--5-lobed,
smaller than the thickened end of the style; ovules numerous in each
cell, attached on the inner angle of a tumid placenta, ascending,
anatropous. Fruit unknown.

Elliottia with a single species is confined to the southern United
States.

The genus is named in honor of Stephen Elliott (1771--1830), the
distinguished botanist of South Carolina.


                       1. Elliottia racemosa Ell.

[Illustration: Fig. 708]

Leaves 3'--4' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide; petioles 1/3'--1/2' in length.
Flowers about 1/2' long, opening from the middle to the end of June, in
clusters 7'--10' in length.

A tree, 15 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--5' in diameter, short ascending
branches forming a pyramidal head, and erect branchlets light red-brown
and pilose when they first appear, bright orange-brown, lustrous, and
nearly glabrous during their first winter, and roughened by slightly
raised oblong-obovate leaf-scars with conspicuous central fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, becoming light brown slightly tinged with red during their
second season and dark gray-brown the following year; or more frequently
shrubby. Winter-buds: terminal broad-ovoid, acute, about 1/8' long, with
much thickened bright chestnut-brown shining scales conspicuously
white-pubescent near the margins toward the apex; lateral buds smaller,
ovoid, compressed, rounded or short-pointed at apex. Bark thin, smooth,
pale gray.

Distribution. Sandy woods in a few isolated stations in the valley of
the Savannah River, near Augusta, Richmond County, and in Burke and
Bullock Counties, Georgia.




                           2. RHODODENDRON L.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, terete branchlets, terminal buds
formed in summer, and fibrous roots. Leaves usually clustered at the end
of the branches, revolute and entire on the margin, persistent or
deciduous. Flowers in terminal umbellate corymbs from buds with numerous
caducous scales; calyx 5-parted or toothed, persistent under the fruit,
corolla 5--10-lobed, deciduous; stamens 5 or 10, rarely more, more or
less unequal, ultimately spreading; filaments subulate-filiform, pilose
at the base; disk thick and fleshy, crenately lobed; ovary 5--10-celled;
style slender, crowned with a capitate stigma and persistent on the
fruit; ovules numerous in each cell, attached in many series to an axile
2-lipped placenta projected from the inner angle of the cell,
anatropous. Fruit a woody many-seeded capsule. Seed scobiform; seed-coat
loose, reticulate, produced at the ends beyond the nucleus into a short
often laciniate appendage; embryo minute, cylindric, axile in fleshy
albumen; cotyledons oblong, shorter than the radicle turned toward the
hilum.

Rhododendron with some four or five hundred species occurs in eastern
Thibet, on the Himalayas, in southwestern China, the Malay peninsula and
Archipelago, New Guinea, northern China and Corea, Japan, the mountains
of central Europe, on the Caucasus, and in eastern and western North
America, the largest number of species being found in southwestern China
and on the Himalayas. Of the twenty-three or twenty-four North American
species one only is arborescent.

Rhododendron possesses astringent narcotic properties. It produces hard
close-grained compact wood sometimes used in turnery and for fuel. Many
of the species are cultivated in gardens for the beauty of their large
and conspicuous flowers.

The generic name is from {rhodon} and {dendron}, the Rose-tree.


           1. Rhododendron maximum L. Great Laurel. Rose Bay.

[Illustration: Fig. 709]

Leaves revolute in the bud, ovate-lanceolate or obovate-lanceolate,
acute or short-pointed at apex, and narrowed, cuneate or rounded at
base, when they unfold covered with a thick pale or ferrugineous
tomentum of gland-tipped hairs, and at maturity glabrous, thick and
coriaceous, dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, usually pale
or whitish on the lower surface, 4'--12' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide,
with a broad pale midrib and obscure reticulate veinlets; persistent for
two or three years; petioles stout, ridged above, rounded below,
1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers: inflorescence-buds surrounded at first by
several loose narrow leaf-like scales, and when fully grown in September
cone-shaped, 1-1/2' long and 1/2' broad, with many imbricated ovate
scales rounded and contracted at apex into a long slender point, opening
late in June after the shoots of the year from buds in the axils of
upper leaves have reached their full length; flowers on slender pink
pedicels covered with glandular white hairs and furnished at base with
two linear scarious bractlets, from the axils of the scales of the inner
ranks of the inflorescence-bud, in 16--24-flowered umbellate clusters
4'--5' in diameter, with accrescent scarious resinous puberulous bracts,
those of the outer ranks becoming 1' long and 1/3' wide, and shorter
than the lanceolate bracts of the inner ranks contracted into a long
slender point; calyx light green and puberulous, with rounded remote
lobes; corolla prominently 5-angled or ridged in the bud, campanulate,
gibbous on the posterior side, puberulous in the throat, light rose
color, purplish, or white, 1' long, cleft to the middle into 5 oval
rounded lobes, with conspicuous central veins, the upper lobe marked on
the inner face by a cluster of yellow-green spots, and furnished on the
outer surface at the bottom of each sinus with a conspicuous dark red
gland; stamens 8--12, white, inserted on the bright green disk;
filaments enlarged and flattened at base, slightly bent inward above the
middle, and bearded with stiff white hairs, the 4 or 5 short ones at the
back of the flower for more than half their length and the others only
near the base; ovary ovoid, green, coated with short glandular pale
hairs, crowned with a long slender glabrous white declining style
club-shaped and inflexed at apex, and terminating in a 5-rayed scarlet
stigma. Fruit dark red-brown, ovoid, 1/2' long, glandular-hispid,
ripening and shedding its seeds in the autumn, the clusters of open
capsules remaining on the branches until the following summer; seeds
oblong, flattened, the coat prolonged at the ends into scarious fringed
appendages.

A bushy tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short crooked often prostrate trunk
occasionally 10'--12' in diameter, stout contorted branches forming a
round head, and branchlets green tinged with red and covered with dark
red or slightly ferrugineous glandular-hispid hairs when they first
appear, dark green and glabrous in their first winter, gradually turning
bright red-brown in their second year, and ultimately gray tinged with
red, the thin bark separating on branches four or five years old into
persistent scales; more often a broad shrub, with many divergent twisted
stems 10 deg.--12 deg. high. Winter-buds: leaf-buds conic, dark green, axillary,
or terminal on barren shoots, with many closely imbricated scales, those
of the inner ranks accrescent, increasing in length from the outer to
the inner, and at maturity 1-1/2' long, 1/4' wide, gradually narrowed at
base, and terminating at apex in a long slender point, light green,
glabrous, closely held against the shoot by a resinous exudation from
the glandular hairs, and in falling marking the branchlet with numerous
conspicuous narrow remote scars persistent for three or four years. Bark
of the trunk about 1/16' thick, light red-brown, broken on the surface
into small thin appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, rather
brittle, close-grained, light clear brown, with thin lighter colored
sapwood; occasionally made into the handles of tools and used as a
substitute for boxwood in engraving. A decoction of the leaves is
occasionally employed in domestic practice in the treatment of
rheumatism.

Distribution. Nova Scotia, Mt. Chocorua, New Hampshire, and southward in
New England and eastern New York and along the Appalachian Mountains to
northern Georgia and westward to the northern shores of Lake Erie and to
southeastern Ohio (Hocking and Fairfield Counties); rare at the north
and an inhabitant of deep cold swamps in a few isolated stations; more
abundant on the mountains of western Pennsylvania, becoming exceedingly
common farther south and occupying the steep banks of streams up to
altitudes of 3000 deg.; of its largest size on the high mountains of eastern
Tennessee and the Carolinas, and here often forming thickets hundreds of
acres in extent.

Often cultivated as an ornament of parks and gardens in the United
States, and in Europe, and one of the parents of a number of distinct
and beautiful hybrids.




                              3. KALMIA L.


Trees or shrubs, with scaly bark, terete branchlets without a terminal
bud, minute axillary leaf-buds, elongated axillary inflorescence-buds
covered by imbricated scales, and fibrous roots. Leaves ovate-oblong or
linear, short-petiolate, with flat entire margins, coriaceous,
persistent or deciduous in one species. Flowers on slender pedicels
bibracteolate at the base, from the axils of foliaceous coriaceous ovate
or acute persistent bracts, in axillary umbels; calyx 5, rarely
6-parted, the divisions imbricated in the bud, persistent under the
fruit; corolla 5, rarely 6-lobed, rose-colored, purple, or white,
saucer-shaped, with a short tube and 10 pouches just below the 5 or
6-parted limb, the lobes ovate, acute, before anthesis prominently 10 or
12-ribbed from the pouches to the acute apex of the bud, the salient
keel of the ribs running to the point of the lobes and to the sinuses;
stamens 10, shorter than the corolla; filaments filiform; anthers
oblong, each cell opening by a short apical oblong longitudinal pore, at
first free in the bud, the filaments then erect, later received in the
pouches of the corolla, the filaments becoming bent back by its
enlargement and expansion, straightening elastically and incurving on
the release of the anthers, and in straightening discharging the
pollen-grains; disk prominently 10-lobed; ovary subglobose, 5-celled;
style filiform, exserted, crowned with a capitate stigma; ovules
numerous in each cell, inserted on a 2-lipped placenta, pendulous or
spreading from near the top of the thin columella, few-ranked,
anatropous. Fruit a woody many-seeded globose slightly 5-lobed 5-celled
capsule, tardily septicidally 5-valved, the valves crustaceous,
ultimately opening down the middle by a narrow slit and separating from
the persistent placenta-bearing axis. Seeds oblong or subglobose,
minute; seed-coat crustaceous or membranaceous; embryo in fleshy
albumen, terete, near the hilum; radicle erect, rather shorter than the
oblong cotyledons.

Kalmia with six species is North American and Cuban, one species
occasionally becoming under favorable conditions a small tree.

The generic name is in honor of the Swedish traveler and botanist, Peter
Kalm (1715--1779).


            1. Kalmia latifolia L. Laurel. Mountain Laurel.

[Illustration: Fig. 710]

Leaves sometimes in pairs or in 3's, conduplicate in the bud, each leaf
in the bud inclosed by the one immediately below it, oblong or
elliptic-lanceolate, acute or rounded and tipped at apex with a callous
point, and gradually narrowed at base, rarely oval to oblong-obovate and
rounded at ends (f. _obtusata_ Rehd.), when they unfold slightly tinged
with pink and covered with glandular white hairs, and at maturity thick
and rigid, dark rather dull green above, light yellow-green below,
3'--4' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad yellow midrib and obscure
immersed veins; beginning to fall during their second summer; petioles
stout, terete or slightly flattened, about 2/3' in length. Flowers
opening from early in April in southern Mississippi to the 20th of June
at the north; inflorescence-buds appearing in the autumn from the axils
of upper leaves, beginning to lengthen with the first warm days of
spring and usually developing 2 or several lateral branches, the whole
forming a compound many-flowered corymb of numerous crowded fascicles
more or less covered with dark scurfy scales, 4'--5' in diameter, and
overtopped at the flowering time by the leafy branches of the year;
flowers nearly 1' in diameter, on long slender red or green pedicels
covered with glandular hairs, and furnished at base with 2 minute acute
bractlets, developed from the axils of acute persistent bracts sometimes
1/3' long; calyx divided nearly to the base into narrow acute thin green
lobes; corolla white (f. _alba_ Rehd.), rose-color, or deep pink (f.
_rubra_ Rehd.) viscid-pubescent, marked on the inner surface with a
waving dark rose-colored line and with delicate purple penciling above
the sacs, rarely with a broad purple or chocolate-colored band (f.
_fuscata_ Rehd.). Fruit ripening in September, crowned with the
persistent style, 3/16' in diameter, and covered with viscid hairs,
remaining on the branches until the following year; seeds oblong, light
brown, scattered by the opening of the valves.

A tree, rarely 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a short crooked and contorted trunk
sometimes 18'--20' in diameter, stout forked divergent branches forming
a round-topped compact head, and slender branchlets light green tinged
with red and covered with soft white glandular-viscid hairs when they
first appear, soon becoming glabrous, and in their first winter green
tinged with red and very lustrous, turning bright red-brown during their
second year and paler the following season, the bark then separating
into large thin papery scales exposing the cinnamon-red inner bark, and
marked with large deeply impressed leaf-scars showing near the centre a
crowded cluster of fibro-vascular bundle-scars; more often a dense broad
shrub 6 deg.--10 deg. high, with numerous crooked stems. Winter-buds formed
before midsummer in the axils of the leaves just below those producing
the inflorescence-buds, their inner scales accrescent, and at maturity
often 1' long and 1/2' wide, ovate, acute, light green, covered with
glandular white hairs, and in falling marking the base of the shoots
with conspicuous broad scars. Bark of the trunk hardly more than 1/16'
thick, dark brown tinged with red, and divided by longitudinal furrows
into narrow ridges separating into long narrow scales. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, rather brittle, close-grained, brown tinged with red, with
slightly lighter colored sapwood; used for the handles of tools, in
turnery, and for fuel.

Distribution. New Brunswick to the northern shores of Lake Erie and
southward in the Atlantic coast region to Virginia and to southern Ohio,
Martin and Crawford Counties, Indiana and central Tennessee, along the
Appalachian Mountains and their foothills to Georgia, and from western
Florida through Alabama to eastern and southern Mississippi and the
valley of the Bogue Lusa River, Washington Parish, Louisiana; often
growing in low moist ground near the margins of swamps or on dry slopes
under the shade of deciduous-leaved trees, or on rich rocky hillsides;
most abundant and often forming dense impenetrable thickets on the
southern Appalachian Mountains up to altitudes of 3000 deg.--4000 deg.; usually
shrubby, and only arborescent in a few secluded valleys between the Blue
Ridge and the Alleghany Mountains of North and South Carolina; abundant
and of large size along small streams in Liberty County, western
Florida. The var. _myrtifolia_ K. Koch with small lance-oblong leaves,
and small compact clusters of small flowers, a compact dwarf shrub, and
an old inhabitant of European gardens, is occasionally wild in
Massachusetts; in an abnormal form (f. _polypetala_ Rehd.) found in
western Massachusetts the corolla is divided into 5 narrow petals.

Often cultivated as an ornament of parks and gardens in the eastern
states, and in Europe.




                           4. OXYDENDRUM DC.


A tree, with thick deeply furrowed bark, slender terete glabrous light
red or brown branchlets, without a terminal bud, marked by elevated
nearly triangular leaf-scars displaying a lunate row of crowded
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and numerous elevated oblong dark
lenticels, acid foliage, and fibrous roots. Winter-buds axillary,
minute, partly immersed in the bark, obtuse, covered with opposite
broad-ovate dark red scales rounded at apex, those of the inner ranks
accrescent. Leaves alternate, revolute in the bud, oblong or lanceolate,
acute, gradually contracted at base into a long slender petiole, serrate
with minute incurved callous teeth, penniveined, with a conspicuous
bright yellow midrib and reticulate veinlets, thin and firm, dark green
and lustrous on the upper surface, pale and glaucous on the lower
surface, glabrous or at first slightly puberulous, deciduous. Flowers on
erect clavate pedicels coated with hoary pubescence and bibracteolate
above the middle, with linear acute caducous bractlets, in puberulous
panicles of secund racemes appearing in summer and terminal on axillary
leading shoots of the year, the lower racemes in the axils of upper
leaves; calyx free, divided nearly to the base, the divisions valvate in
the bud, ovate-lanceolate, acute, pubescent or puberulous on the outer
surface, persistent under the fruit; corolla hypogynous, cylindric to
ovate-cylindric, white, puberulous, 5-lobed, the lobes minute, ovate,
acute, reflexed; stamens 10, included; filaments subulate, broad,
pilose, inserted on the very base of the corolla; anthers linear-oblong,
narrower than the filaments, the cells opening from the apex to the
middle; disk thin, obscurely 10-lobed; ovary broad-ovoid, pubescent,
5-celled; style columnar, thick, exserted, crowned with a simple stigma;
ovules attached to an axile placenta rising from the base of the cell,
ascending, amphitropous. Fruit a 5-celled ovoid-pyramidal many-seeded
capsule crowned with the remnants of the persistent style, 5-lobed,
puberulous, loculicidally 5-valved, the valves woody, separating from
the central persistent placentiferous axis, many-seeded. Seeds
ascending, elongated; seed-coat membranaceous, loose, reticulated,
produced at the ends into long slender points; embryo minute, axile in
fleshy albumen, cylindric; radicle terete, next the hilum.

The genus consists of a single species.

The generic name is from {oxys} and {dendron}, in allusion to the acid
foliage.


           1. Oxydendrum arboreum DC. Sorrel-tree. Sour Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 711]

Leaves when they unfold bronze-green, very lustrous and glabrous with
the exception of a slight pubescence on the upper side of the midrib and
a few scattered hairs on the under side of the midrib and on the
petioles, and at maturity 5'--7' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; turning
bright scarlet in the autumn; petioles 2/3' in length. Flowers opening
late in July or early in August, 1/3' long, in panicles 7'--8' in
length. Fruit 1/3'--1/2' long, hanging in drooping clusters sometimes a
foot in length, ripening in September, the empty capsules often
persistent on the branches until late in the autumn; seeds about 1/8'
long, pale brown.

A tree, occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 12'--20'
in diameter, slender spreading branches forming a narrow oblong
round-topped head, and glabrous branchlets yellow-green and marked by
orange-colored lenticels when they first appear, becoming in their first
winter orange-colored to reddish brown. Winter-buds about 1/16' long,
their inner scales at maturity 1' in length, 1/8' wide, spatulate, acute
at apex, and slightly puberulous on the inner surface and on the
margins. Bark of the trunk 2/3'--1' thick, gray tinged with red and
divided by longitudinal furrows into broad rounded ridges covered with
small thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained,
brown tinged with red, with lighter colored sapwood of 80--90 layers of
annual growth; sometimes used locally for the handles of tools and the
bearings of machinery. The leaves have a pleasant acidulous taste, and
are reputed to be tonic, refrigerant, and diuretic, and are occasionally
used in domestic practice in the treatment of fevers.

Distribution. Well-drained gravelly soil on ridges rising above the
banks of streams; coast of Virginia (Norfolk County) to that of North
Carolina (near Newbern, Craven County), southwestern Pennsylvania to
southern Ohio and Indiana (Perry County), and to western Kentucky and
Tennessee, along the Appalachian Mountains and their foothills, and
southward to western Florida, the shores of Mobile Bay, the coast region
of Mississippi, and West Feliciana Parish, Louisiana; up to altitudes of
3500 deg. on the southern mountains; of its largest size on the western
slopes of the Big Smoky Mountains, Tennessee.

Often cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern states and hardy
as far north as eastern Massachusetts, and occasionally in western and
central Europe.




                            5. LYONIA Nutt.


Trees or shrubs, with slender terete branchlets, and fibrous roots.
Leaves petiolate, thin or coriaceous. Flowers on slender pedicels from
the axils of ovate acute bracts, in axillary and terminal umbellate
fascicles or panicled racemes; calyx persistent, 4--5-toothed or parted,
the divisions valvate in the bud; corolla globular, 4 or 5-toothed or
lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud; stamens 8--10, included;
filaments flat, incurved, usually slightly adnate to the base of the
corolla, dilated and bearded at base, geniculate; anthers oblong, the
cells opening below the apex by large oblong pores; disk 10-lobed; ovary
5-celled, depressed in the centre; style columnar, stigmatic at apex;
ovules attached to a placenta borne near the summit of the axis,
anatropous. Fruit ovoid, many-seeded, loculicidally 5-valved, the valves
septiferous and separating from the placentiferous axis, 5-ribbed by the
thickening of the valves at the dorsal sutures, the ribs more or less
separable in dehiscence. Seeds minute, pendulous, narrow-oblong;
seed-coat loose, thin, reticulate, produced at the ends beyond the
nucleus into short fringe-like wings; embryo axile in fleshy albumen,
cylindric elongated; cotyledons much shorter than the terete radicle
turned toward the hilum.

Lyonia with about twenty species is confined to North America, the West
Indies, and Mexico. Of the four or five species which occur in the
United States one is occasionally a small tree.

The genus is named in honor of John Lyon, an English gardener who made
important collections of plants in the United States early in the
nineteenth century.


                       1. Lyonia ferruginea Nutt.

                       _Xolisma ferruginea_ Hell.

[Illustration: Fig. 712]

Leaves cuneate-obovate, rhombic-obovate or cuneate-oblong, acute or
rounded at apex, usually tipped with a cartilaginous mucro, gradually
narrowed at base, and entire, with thickened revolute margins, scurfy
when they unfold, and at maturity thick and firm, pale green, smooth and
shining or sometimes obscurely lepidote above, covered below with
ferrugineous or pale scales, 1'--3' long and 1/4'--1-1/2' wide, with a
prominent midrib and primary veins; appearing in early spring and
persistent until the summer or autumn of their second year; petioles
short, thick, much enlarged at base. Flowers 1/8' in diameter, chiefly
produced on branches of the year or occasionally on those of the
previous year, opening from February until April when the leaves are
fully grown, on slender recurved pedicels much shorter than the leaves,
in crowded axillary short-stemmed or sessile ferrugineous-lepidote
fascicles, with minute acute deciduous bracts and bractlets; calyx
5-lobed, with acute lobes, covered on the outer surface with
ferrugineous scales, and about one third as long as the white pubescent
corolla, with short reflexed acute teeth slightly thickened and ciliate
on the margins; filaments shortened by a conspicuous geniculate fold in
the middle; ovary coated with thick white tomentum; style stout, as long
or a little longer than the corolla. Fruit on a stout erect stem,
oblong, 5-angled, 1/4' long; seed pale brown.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a slender crooked or often
prostrate trunk sometimes 10' in diameter, thin rigid divergent branches
forming a tall oblong irregular head, and slender branchlets coated when
they first appear with minute ferrugineous scales and covered in their
second year with glabrous or pubescent light or dark red-brown bark
smooth or exfoliating in small thin scales. Winter-buds minute, acute,
and covered with ferrugineous scales. Bark of the trunk 1/8'--1/4'
thick, divided into long narrow ridges by shallow longitudinal furrows,
reddish brown and separating into short thick scales. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained although not strong, light brown tinged with red, with
thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Hummocks and sandy woods; coast region of South Carolina
and Georgia, northern Florida to the centre of the peninsula, the shores
of Tampa Bay, and to the neighborhood of Apalachicola (Franklin County);
in the United States arborescent in the rich soil of the woody hummocks
rising in the sandy Pine-covered coast plain, and as a low shrub in the
dry sandy sterile soil of Pine-barrens; in the West Indies and Mexico.




                             6. ARBUTUS L.


Trees or shrubs, with astringent bark exfoliating from young stems in
large thin scales, smooth terete red branches, and thick hard roots.
Leaves petiolate, entire or dentate, obscurely penniveined, persistent.
Flowers on clavate pedicels bibracteolate at base from the axils of
ovate bracts, in simple terminal compound racemes or panicles, with
scarious scaly persistent bracts and bractlets; calyx free from the
ovary, 5-parted nearly to the base, the divisions imbricated in the bud,
ovate, acute, scarious, persistent; corolla ovoid-urceolate, white,
5-toothed, the teeth obtuse and recurved; stamens 10, shorter than the
corolla; filaments subulate, dilated and pilose at base, free, inserted
in the bottom of the corolla; anthers short, compressed laterally,
dorsally 2-awned, the cells opening at the top internally by a terminal
pore; ovary glandular-roughened, glabrous or tomentose, sessile or
slightly immersed in the glandular 10-lobed disk, 5 or rarely 4-celled;
style columnar, simple, exserted; stigma obscurely 5-lobed; ovules
attached to a central placenta developed from the inner angle of each
cell, amphitropous. Fruit drupaceous, globose, smooth or
glandular-coated, 5-celled, many-seeded; flesh dry and mealy; stone
cartilaginous, often incompletely developed. Seeds small, compressed or
angled, narrowed and often apiculate at apex; seed-coat coriaceous, dark
red-brown, slightly pilose; embryo axile in copious horny albumen,
clavate; radicle terete, erect, turned toward the hilum.

Arbutus with ten or twelve species inhabits southern and western North
America, Central America, western, southern and eastern Europe, Asia
Minor, northern Africa, and the Canary Islands. Three species occur
within the territory of the United States. Arbutus produces hard
close-grained valuable wood often made into charcoal, used in the
manufacture of gunpowder. The fruit possesses narcotic properties, and
the bark and leaves are astringent.

_Arbutus_ is the classical name of the species of southern Europe.


            CONSPECTUS OF THE SPECIES Of THE UNITED STATES.

  Bark of old trunks dark red-brown.
    Ovary glabrous; leaves oval or oblong.
                                                 1. A. Menziesii (B, G).
    Ovary pubescent; leaves oval, ovate, or lanceolate.
                                                       2. A. texana (C).
  Bark of old trunks ashy gray; ovary glabrous, conspicuously porulose;
        leaves lanceolate or rarely narrow-oblong.
                                                    3. A. arizonica (H).


                  1. Arbutus Menziesii Pursh. Madrona.

[Illustration: Fig. 713]

Leaves oval or oblong, rounded or contracted into a short point at apex,
and rounded, subcordate or cuneate at base, with slightly thickened
revolute entire or occasionally on young plants sharply serrate margins,
when they unfold light green or often pink, especially on the lower
surface, and glabrous or slightly puberulous, and at maturity thick and
coriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, pale or often nearly white
below, 3'--5' long and 1-1/2'--3' wide, with a thick pale midrib and
conspicuously reticulated veinlets; persistent until the early summer of
their second year and then turning orange and scarlet and falling
gradually and irregularly; petioles stout, grooved, 1/2'--1' in length,
often slightly wing-margined toward the apex; often producing late in
summer a second crop of smaller leaves. Flowers about 1/3' long, with a
glabrous ovary, appearing from March to May on short slender puberulous
pedicels from the axils of acute scarious bracts ciliate on the margins,
in spicate pubescent racemes forming a cluster 5'--6' long and broad.
Fruit ripening in the autumn, subglobose or occasionally obovoid or
oval, 1/2' long, bright orange-red, with thin glandular flesh and a
5-celled more or less perfectly developed thin-walled cartilaginous
stone; seeds several in each cell, tightly pressed together and angled,
dark brown and pilose.

A tree, 80 deg.--125 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 4 deg.--5 deg. in diameter,
stout upright or spreading branches forming a narrow oblong or broad
round-topped head, and slender branchlets light red, pea-green, or
orange-colored and glabrous when they first appear, or on vigorous young
plants sometimes covered with pale scattered deciduous hairs, becoming
in their first winter bright reddish brown. Winter-buds obtuse, 1/3'
long, with numerous imbricated broadly-ovate bright brown scales keeled
on the back, apiculate at apex, and slightly ciliate. Bark of young
stems and of the branches smooth, bright red, separating into large thin
scales, becoming on old trunks 1/3'--1/2' thick, dark reddish brown, and
covered with small thick plate-like scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong,
close-grained, light brown shaded with red, with thin lighter colored
sapwood of 8--12 layers of annual growth; used for furniture and largely
for charcoal. The bark is sometimes employed in tanning leather.

Distribution. High well-drained slopes usually in rich soil or
occasionally in gravelly valleys; islands at Seymore Narrows, and
southward through the coast region of British Columbia, Washington and
Oregon; over the coast ranges of northern California, extending east to
Mt. Shasta and south along the western slope of the Sierra Nevada from
altitudes of 2500 deg.--4000 deg. to Placer County; on many of the coast ranges
south of San Francisco Bay to the mountains of southern California;
common and of its largest size in the Redwood-forests of northwestern
California; much smaller north of California; rare on the Sierra Nevada
and southward except on the Santa Cruz Mountains, and often shrubby in
habit.

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of western and southern Europe.


                   2. Arbutus texana Buckl. Madrona.

              _Arbutus xalapensis_ S. Watson, not H. B. K.

[Illustration: Fig. 714]

Leaves oval, ovate, or lanceolate, rounded, acute and often apiculate at
apex, and rounded or cuneate at base, with slightly thickened usually
entire or remotely crenulate-toothed or coarsely serrate margins, often
tinged with red when they unfold and pubescent below, and at maturity
thick and coriaceous, dark green and glabrous on the upper surface, pale
and usually slightly pubescent on the lower surface, 1'--3' long and
2/3'--1-1/2' wide, with a thick midrib often villose-pubescent below;
petioles stout, pubescent, sometimes becoming nearly glabrous,
1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers 1/4' long, with ciliate calyx-lobes and a
pubescent ovary, appearing in March on stout recurved hoary-tomentose
club-shaped pedicels from the axils of ovate acute hoary-tomentose often
persistent bracts, in compact conic hoary-tomentose panicles 2-1/2'
long. Fruit pubescent until half grown, becoming glabrous, usually
produced very sparingly, ripening in summer, dark red, 1/3' in diameter,
with thin granular flesh and a rather thick more or less completely
formed stone; seeds numerous in each cell, compressed, puberulous.

A tree, in Texas rarely more than 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short often
crooked trunk 8'--10' in diameter, separating a foot or two above the
ground into several stout spreading branches, and branchlets light red
and thickly coated with pubescence when they first appear, becoming dark
red-brown and covered with small plate-like scales; often a broad
irregularly shaped bush, with numerous contorted stems. Winter-buds
about 1/8' long, with hoary tomentose scales, the outer ovate, acute,
the inner obovate and rounded at apex. Bark of young stems and of the
branches thin, tinged with red, separating into large papery scales
exposing the light red or flesh-colored inner bark, becoming at the base
of old trunks sometimes 1/4' thick, deeply furrowed, dark reddish brown,
and broken into thick square plates. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained,
brown tinged with red, with a lighter colored sapwood of 10--12 layers
of annual growth; sometimes used in Texas for the handles of small tools
and in the manufacture of mathematical instruments.

Distribution. Texas, dry limestone hills, Travis, Comal, Blanco, Kendall
and Bandera Counties, on the Guadaloupe and Eagle Mountains, Culberson
and El Paso Counties; southeastern New Mexico (Eddy County); on the
mountains of Nuevo Leon in the neighborhood of Monterey.


                  3. Arbutus arizonica Sarg. Madrona.

[Illustration: Fig. 715]

Leaves lanceolate to rarely oblong, acute or rounded and apiculate at
apex, and cuneate or occasionally rounded at base, with thickened entire
or rarely denticulate margins, when they unfold, tinged with red, and
slightly puberulous, especially on the petiole and margins, and at
maturity thin, firm and rigid, light green on the upper surface, pale on
the lower surface, 1-1/2'--3' long and 1/2'--1' wide, with a slender
yellow midrib and obscure reticulate veinlets; appearing in May and
after the summer rains in September, and persistent for at least a year;
petioles slender, often 1' in length. Flowers 1/4' long, with a corolla
much contracted in the middle, and a glabrous porulose ovary, opening in
May on short stout hairy pedicels from the axils of conspicuous ovate
rounded scarious bracts, in rather loose clusters 2'--2-1/2' long and
broad, their lower branches from the axils of upper leaves. Fruit
ripening in October and November, globose or short-oblong, dark
orange-red, granulate, 1/3' in diameter, with thin sweetish flesh, and a
papery usually incompletely developed stone; seeds compressed,
puberulous.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 18'--24' in diameter,
stout spreading branches forming a rather compact round-topped head, and
thick tortuous divergent branchlets reddish brown and more or less
pubescent or light purple, pilose, and covered with a glaucous bloom
when they first appear, becoming bright red at the end of their first
season, their bark thin, separating freely into thin more or less
persistent scales. Winter-buds 1/3' long, red, the two outer scales
linear, acuminate a third longer than those of the next, rank, acute and
apiculate and ridged on the back. Bark of young stems and of the
branches thin, smooth, dark red, exfoliating in large thin scales,
becoming on old trunks 1/3'--1/2' thick, irregularly broken by
longitudinal furrows and divided into square appressed plate-like light
gray or nearly white scales faintly tinged with red on the surface. Wood
heavy, close-grained, soft and brittle, light brown tinged with red,
with lighter colored sapwood of 30--40 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry gravelly benches at altitude of 6000 deg.--8000 deg. on the
Santa Catalina and Santa Rita Mountains, southern Arizona, and on the
San Luis and Animas Mountains of southwestern New Mexico (Grant County);
on the Sierra Nevada of Chihuahua.




                            7. VACCINIUM L.


Shrubs or rarely small trees, with slender branchlets, and fibrous
roots. Leaves thin or coriaceous, deciduous or persistent. Flowers
small, on bibracteolate pedicels, in many-branched axillary racemes, or
solitary, their bracts small or foliaceous; calyx-tube adnate to the
ovary, 4--5-lobed, the lobes valvate in the bud, persistent; corolla
epigynous, 4 or 5-toothed, the teeth imbricated in the bud,
urceolate-campanulate; stamens 8--10, inserted on the base of the
corolla under the thick obscurely lobed epigynous disk; filaments
filiform, free, usually hirsute; anthers awned on the back, the cells
produced upward into erect spreading tubes dehiscent by a terminal pore;
ovary inferior, 4 or 5-celled, the cells sometimes imperfectly divided
by the development from the back of a false partition; style filiform,
erect; stigma minute; ovules attached to the interior angle of the cell
by a 2-lipped placenta, anatropous. Fruit a berry crowned with the
calyx-limb, 4 or 5 or imperfectly 8 or 10-celled, the cells many-seeded.
Seed minute, compressed, ovoid or reniform; seed-coat crustaceous;
embryo clavate, minute, surrounded by fleshy albumen, axile, erect;
cotyledons ovate; radicle terete, turned toward the hilum.

Vaccinium with about one hundred species is distributed through the
boreal and temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, and occurs
within the tropics at high altitudes north and south of the equator. Of
the twenty-five or thirty species which occur in North America one is
small trees. The fruits of many of the species are edible, the most
valuable being the North American _Vaccinium macrocarpum_ L., the
Cranberry.

_Vaccinium_ is the classical name of one of the Old World species.


        1. Vaccinium arboreum Marsh. Farkleberry. Sparkleberry.

[Illustration: Fig. 716]

Leaves obovate, oblong-oval or occasionally orbicular, acute, or rounded
and apiculate at apex, gradually or abruptly cuneate at base, obscurely
glandular-dentate or entire, with thickened slightly revolute margins,
light red and more or less pilose or puberulous when they unfold, and at
maturity coriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, paler below,
glabrous or often puberulous on the midrib and veins,
reticulate-venulose, 1/2'--2-1/2' long, 1/4'--1' wide, and sessile or
short-petiolate; southward persistent for a year, northward deciduous
during the winter. Flowers appearing from March to May on slender
drooping pedicels 1/2' long, bibracteolate near the middle, with 2
minute acute scarious caducous bractlets, solitary in the axils of
leaves of the year or arranged in terminal puberulous racemes 2'--3'
long from the axils of leafy or minute acute scarious bracts; corolla
white, open-campanulate, slightly 5-lobed, with acute reflexed lobes,
longer than the 10 stamens; filaments hirsute; anther-cells opening by
oblique elongated pores. Fruit ripening in October, sometimes persistent
on the branches until the end of winter, globose, 1/4' in diameter,
black and lustrous, with dry glandular slightly astringent flesh of a
pleasant flavor.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short often crooked trunk occasionally
8'--10' in diameter, slender more or less contorted branches forming an
irregular round-topped head, and slender branchlets light red and
covered with pale pubescence when they first appear, glabrous or
puberulous and bright red-brown in their first winter, later becoming
dark red and marked by minute elevated nearly orbicular leaf-scars; or
northward generally reduced to a low shrub, with numerous divergent
stems. Winter-buds obtuse, nearly 1/16' long, with imbricated ovate
acute chestnut-brown scales often persistent on the base of the
branchlet throughout the season. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained,
light brown tinged with red, with thick hardly distinguishable sapwood;
sometimes used for the handles of tools and in the manufacture of other
small articles. Decoctions of the astringent bark of the root and of the
leaves are sometimes employed domestically in the treatment of
diarrhoea. The bark has been used by tanners.

Distribution. Usually in moist sandy soil along the banks of ponds and
streams; southeastern Virginia and North Carolina, from the coast to the
valleys of the high Appalachian Mountains, southward to the valley of
the Caloosahatchie River, Florida, through the Gulf states to the shores
of Matagorda Bay, Texas, and through eastern Oklahoma, Arkansas, and
Missouri to southern Illinois, and the bluffs of White River, near
Shoals, Martin County, and near Elizabeth, Harrison County, Indiana;
common in the maritime Pinebelt of the south Atlantic and Gulf states,
and of its largest size near the coast of eastern Texas; in the interior
less abundant and usually of small size. Passing into


               Vaccinium arboreum var. glaucescens Sarg.

                    _Batodendron glaucescens_ Greene

[Illustration: Fig. 717]

Differing in its glaucescent, pubescent or glabrous leaves, in its
usually larger leaf-like bracts of the inflorescence and often in its
globose-campanulate corolla.

A tree, 10 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short often crooked trunk, pubescent or
glabrous gray branchlets, and winter-buds and bark like those of
_Vaccinium arboreum_ with which it often grows.

Distribution. Tunnel Hill, Johnson County, Illinois, southern Missouri
to eastern Oklahoma (Sapulpa, Creek County) and through Arkansas to
western Louisiana (near Shreveport, Rapides Parish) and eastern Texas to
Milam County.




                          LIV. THEOPHRASTACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, and entire coriaceous persistent
leaves. Flowers perfect, regular; calyx campanulate, with 5 sepals
imbricated in the bud; corolla 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud,
with 5 staminodia attached below the sinuses; stamens 5, attached to the
base of the corolla-tube, opposite the lobes; ovary 1-celled, with a
simple style and a slightly 5-lobed stigma; ovules peltate, numerous,
attached to a central fleshy placenta, amphitropous. Fruit baccate,
many-seeded. Seeds immersed in the thickened placenta filling the cavity
of the fruit; seed-coat membranaceous; embryo surrounded by thick
cartilaginous albumen.

A tropical American family of four genera with one species reaching the
shores of southern Florida.




                           1. JACQUINIA Jacq.


Trees or shrubs, with terete or slightly many-angled branchlets, without
a terminal bud, and fibrous roots. Leaves often punctate with pellucid
dark glands. Flowers on slender ebracteolate pedicels from the axils of
minute ovate acute persistent bracts, in terminal or axillary clusters;
calyx slightly ciliate on the margins, rounded at apex, persistent under
the fruit; corolla hypogynous, the lobes obtuse and spreading, furnished
with 5 petal-like ovate obtuse spreading staminodia; stamens inserted on
the corolla opposite its lobes near the base of the short tube;
filaments flattened, broad at base; anthers oblong or ovoid, attached on
the back above the base, extrorse, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; ovary ovoid. Fruit ovoid or subglobose, crowned by the
remnants of the persistent style, with a thin crustaceous outer coat,
inclosing the thick enlarged mucilaginous placenta. Seeds oblong;
seed-coat punctate; embryo eccentric; cotyledons ovate, shorter than the
elongated inferior radicle turned toward the broad ventral hilum.

Jacquinia with five or six species is confined to tropical America, with
one species reaching southern Florida.

The generic name is in honor of Nicholas Joseph Jacquin (1728--1818),
the distinguished Austrian botanist.


           1. Jacquinia keyensis Metz. Joe Wood. Sea Myrtle.

[Illustration: Fig. 718]

Leaves subverticillate, alternate or sometimes opposite, crowded near
the end of the branches, cuneate-spatulate or oblong-obovate, rounded or
emarginate or often apiculate at apex, gradually narrowed below, entire,
with thickened slightly revolute margins, thick and coriaceous,
yellow-green, nearly veinless, with a very obscure midrib, covered on
the lower surface with pale dots, 1'--3' long and 1/4'--1' wide;
persistent on the branches until the appearance of the new leaves the
following year; petioles short, stout, abruptly enlarged at base.
Flowers appearing in Florida from November until June, 1/3' in diameter,
pale yellow, fragrant, on slender club-shaped pedicels 1/2' long from
the axils of minute ovate coriaceous, reddish bracts slightly ciliate on
the margins, in terminal and axillary many-flowered glabrous racemes
2'--3' long; sepals ovate-orbicular, obtuse; corolla salverform, 2/5'
broad, the lobes longer than the tube; stamens shorter than the
staminodia. Fruit ripening in the autumn, 1/3' in diameter, orange-red
when fully ripe; seeds light brown.

A tree, 12 deg.--15 deg. high, with a straight trunk 6'--7' in diameter, stout
rigid spreading branches forming a compact regular round-topped head,
and slightly many-angled branchlets yellow-green or light orange-colored
and coated with short soft pale ferrugineous pubescence when they first
appear, terete, darker and sometimes reddish brown and marked in their
second year by orbicular depressed conspicuous leaf-scars and by many
scattered pale lenticels, becoming glabrous and red-brown or ashy gray
the following season. Winter-buds axillary, minute, nearly globose,
immersed in the bark. Bark of the trunk thin, smooth, blue-gray, and
usually more or less marked by pale or nearly white blotches. Wood
heavy, hard, very close-grained, rich brown, beautifully marked by
darker medullary rays.

Distribution. Florida, dry coral soil in the immediate neighborhood of
the shore, Gasparilla Island, on the west coast to the southern keys,
and to the borders of the Everglades; rare but most abundant and of its
largest size in Florida on the Marquesas Keys; on the Bahama Islands and
in Cuba and Jamaica.




                            LV. MYRSINACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, alternate entire coriaceous punctate
leaves, without stipules. Flowers regular, perfect or dimorphous; calyx
persistent under the fruit; corolla, without staminodia,
glandular-punctate; stamens inserted on the corolla, as many as and
opposite its lobes; ovary 1-celled, with an undivided style and a minute
terminal stigma; ovules peltate, immersed in the fleshy central
placenta, amphitropous. Fruit a drupe. Seed solitary, globose, with
copious cartilaginous or corneous albumen; seed-coat membranaceous.

A tropical family of thirty genera, with two arborescent species
reaching the shores of southern Florida.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers perfect in terminal panicles; anthers on short broad
        filaments; style elongated.
                                                             1. Ardisia.
  Flowers dimorphous in small axillary clusters; anthers sessile; stigma
        sessile or in one form of the staminate flower terminal on a
        slender style.
                                                             2. Rapanea.




                             1. ARDISIA Sw.


Glabrous trees or shrubs, with leaves punctate below with immersed
resinous dots. Flowers resinous-punctate, pedicellate, the pedicels
bibracteolate at base or ebracteolate, in terminal or rarely axillary
branched panicles, with minute scarious deciduous or caducous bracts and
bractlets; calyx free, 5 or rarely 4-lobed or parted, the divisions
contorted or imbricated in the bud; corolla 5 or rarely 4--6-parted, the
divisions extrorsely or sinistrorsely contorted in the bud, short or
elongated, white or rose color; stamens exserted; filaments short or
nearly obsolete, free, inserted on the throat of the corolla; anthers
usually sagittate-lanceolate, attached on the back just above the base,
introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally sometimes nearly to
the base; ovary globose; ovules numerous, immersed in the globose
resinous-punctate placenta. Fruit globose, with thin usually dry flesh
and a 1-seeded stone with a usually crustaceous or bony shell. Seed
concave or more or less lobed at base, resinous-punctate; hilum basilar,
concave, conspicuous; embryo cylindric, transverse; cotyledons flat on
the inner face, rounded on the back, shorter than the slender radicle.

Ardisia with about two hundred species inhabits tropical and subtropical
regions of the two hemispheres. The genus has few useful properties, but
a number of species are cultivated for the beauty of their handsome
evergreen foliage and bright-colored fruits.

The generic name is from {ardis}, in reference to the pointed anthers.


             1. Ardisia paniculata Nutt. Marlberry. Cherry.

                      _Icacorea paniculata_ Sudw.

[Illustration: Fig. 719]

Leaves ovate to oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate-obovate, acute or
rounded at the narrow apex, cuneate and gradually contracted at base,
entire, with thickened and slightly revolute margins, thick and
coriaceous, glabrous, marked by minute scattered dark dots, dark
yellow-green on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, 3'--6'
long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad midrib yellow and conspicuous on
the under side, slender primary veins and reticulate veinlets; appearing
in the summer or early autumn and falling before the appearance of the
flowers the following year; petioles stout, grooved, 1/4'--1/2' in
length. Flowers fragrant, usually opening in November or occasionally as
early as July, 1/4' in diameter, on slender elongated pedicels without
bractlets, from the axils of linear acute caducous bracts, in terminal
rusty brown puberulous panicles 3'--4' long and broad, their lower
branches often from the axils of upper leaves; calyx ovoid, divided
nearly to the base into 5 ovate acute lobes scarious and ciliate on the
margins and marked on the back with dark lines; corolla 5-parted, with
oblong rounded divisions sinistrorsely overlapping, or with 1 lobe
wholly outside and 1 inside in the bud, conspicuously marked with red
spots on the inner surface near the base, becoming reflexed; stamens,
with short broad filaments, contracted by a geniculate fold in the
middle, and large orange-colored anthers longer than the filaments,
their cells opening almost to the base; ovary globose, glandular,
gradually contracted into a long slender style ending in a simple
stigma. Fruit ripening in early spring, globose, 1/4' in diameter,
tipped with the remnants of the style, and roughened by resinous glands,
dark brown at first when fully grown, ultimately becoming black and
lustrous; stone brown, thin-walled, crustaceous; seed conspicuously
lobed at base, bright red-brown, about 1/8' in diameter.

A slender tree, in Florida rarely more than 20 deg. high, with a short trunk
4'--5' in diameter, numerous thin upright branches forming a narrow
head, and stout terete often contorted branchlets, rusty brown or dark
orange-colored and slightly puberulous when they first appear, becoming
in their second year dark brown or ashy gray, and marked by many minute
circular lenticels and by thin nearly orbicular flat leaf-scars
displaying in the centre a group of fibro-vascular bundle-scars.
Winter-buds rusty brown; terminal slender, acuminate, 1/8'--1/4' long;
axillary globose, minute, nearly immersed in the bark. Bark of the trunk
about 1/8' thick, light gray or nearly white, roughened by minute
lenticels, and separating into large thin papery plates. Wood heavy,
hard, very close-grained, rich brown beautifully marked by darker
medullary rays, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, from Mosquito Inlet to the southern keys on the
east coast, and from the shores of the Caloosahatchee River to Cape
Romano on the west coast; usually a shrub, occasionally arborescent on
the shores of Bay Biscayne and on some of the southern keys; on the
Bahama Islands, in Cuba, and southern Mexico.




                            2. RAPANEA Aubl.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juices and terete branchlets. Leaves
alternate, entire or rarely dentate, usually distinctly lepidote,
persistent, without stipules. Flowers perfect or unisexual by abortion,
minute, 4 or 5, or rarely 6 or 7-merous, sessile or pedicellate, in
small axillary sessile or pedunculate fascicles, their bracts deciduous;
calyx free, persistent, the sepals imbricate-valvate in the bud,
ciliate, usually glandular-punctate; corolla hypogynous, the lobes more
or less connate at base, ovate or elliptic, spreading or recurved,
glandular-punctate, papillate on the margins, imbricate or rarely
convolute in the bud; stamens inserted on the base of the corolla
opposite its lobes; filaments 0; anthers short, connate to the corolla,
acuminate and papillate at apex, introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; ovary globose or ellipsoidal, 1-celled; stigma capitate,
irregularly lobed; ovules few, peltate, immersed in one series near the
middle of the free fleshy globose placenta. Fruit dry or fleshy, seed
filling the cavity of the fruit, globose, intruded at base; testa thin;
albumen copious, corneous, rarely slightly ruminate; embryo cylindric,
elongated, transverse, usually curved; cotyledons small, radicle
elongated.

Rapanea, with nearly one hundred and fifty species, is widely
distributed through the tropical and subtropical regions of the two
hemispheres, one species reaching southern Florida.

The generic name is formed from the native name of _Rapanea guianensis_
in British Guiana.


                      1. Rapanea guianensis Aubl.

[Illustration: Fig. 720]

Leaves crowded at the end of the branches, oblong-obovate, obtuse or
retuse at apex, gradually narrowed and contracted at base, coriaceous,
bright green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, 2-3/4'--3-1/2' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with thickened
revolute margins, a thick midrib and obscure veins; petioles stout,
narrowly wing-margined, 1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers in November,
minute, short-pedicellate in short pedunculate clusters usually 5,
rarely 4-merous, white more or less marked with purple, about 1/6' in
diameter; calyx divided to the middle, the lobes broad-ovate, acute or
rounded at apex, slightly ciliate, persistent under the fruit; corolla 2
or 3 times longer than the calyx, the lobes spreading, narrowed and
rounded at apex, slightly ciliate on the margins; staminate flowers
dimorphous; anthers sagittate-apiculate, inserted below the middle of
the petals; ovary in one form crowned by a minute discoid sessile stigma
and probably abortive, in the other form gradually narrowed into a
slender style, terminating in an oblique stigma and fertile; pistillate
flowers, anthers smaller and rudimentary; ovary crowned by a large
nearly sessile irregularly lobed papillate stigma deciduous from the
fruit. Fruit in clusters crowded on the elongated somewhat thickened
spur-like peduncle of the flower-cluster covered with imbricated
persistent bracts, dark blue or nearly black, tipped with the persistent
style, 1/6'--1/5' in diameter; exocarp thin and fleshy; endocarp
crustaceous, white.

A tree, in Florida occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a tall usually more
or less crooked trunk 2'--3' in diameter, small ascending branches
forming an open irregular head, and slender gray or light red-brown
branchlets roughened for a year or two by the persistent spur-like
peduncles of the fallen fruit and later marked by circular scars in the
axils of the small transverse leaf-scars; more often a shrub. Bark of
the trunk thin, close, pale gray.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Indian River on the east coast and
Palmetto, Manatee County, on the west coast, southward to the southern
keys; common; on the Bahama Islands, Cuba, Porto Rico, Jamaica and
Trinidad, to southern Brazil, and to Mexico and Bolivia.




                            LVI. SAPOTACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with milky juice. Leaves alternate, simple, entire,
pinnately veined, mostly coriaceous, petiolate, without stipules.
Flowers perfect, regular, small, in axillary clusters; calyx of 5-8
sepals imbricated in the bud, persistent under the fruit; corolla
hypogynous, 5--8-cleft, the divisions imbricated in the bud, often with
as many or twice as many internal appendages borne on its throat; disk
0; fertile stamens as many as and opposite the divisions of the corolla
and inserted on its short tube, often with sterile filaments
(_staminodia_) alternate with them; anthers generally extrorse,
2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; pistil of united carpels;
ovary sessile, usually 5-celled; style simple; ovules solitary in each
cell, attached to an axile placenta, ascending, anatropous; raphe
ventral; micropyle inferior. Fruit baccate, bearing at apex the remnant
of the style, usually 1-celled and 1-seeded. Seed with or without
albumen; embryo large; radicle terete, inferior.

This family with fifty genera is chiefly tropical and subtropical, with
only Bumelia extending in North America into temperate regions. Some of
the species produce valuable timber or edible and agreeable fruits. From
_Palaquium gutta_ Burkh., of the Malay Peninsula, gutta-percha is
obtained. Five genera are represented by trees in the flora of the
United States.


             CONSPECTUS OF THE GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Calyx of 5 sepals in a single series.
    Staminodia 1 in each sinus of the corolla.
      Appendages of the corolla 0; staminodia slender, scale-like.
                                                         1. Sideroxylum.
      Appendages of the corolla present; staminodia petaloid.
        Staminodia linear, fimbriate; seeds, with copious albumen.
                                                            2. Dipholis.
        Staminodia petaloid, entire or denticulate; seeds, without
              albumen.
                                                             3. Bumelia.
    Staminodia and appendages of the corolla 0; leaves covered below
          with lustrous copper-colored or golden pubescence.
                                                       4. Chrysophyllum.
  Calyx of 6--8 sepals in 2 series; corolla 6--8-lobed, with 2
        appendages in each sinus inside of a scale-like or petaloid
        staminodia.
                                                            5. Mimusops.




                           1. SIDEROXYLUM L.


Trees, with terete branchlets, naked buds, and long-petiolate persistent
leaves, the veins remote and connected by reticulate veinlets. Flowers
minute, on ebracteolate pedicels from the axils of minute deciduous
bracts, in crowded many-flowered axillary fascicles; calyx 5-parted, the
divisions in one series, nearly equal, corolla furnished with 5 or 6
staminodia, and 5 or rarely 6-lobed; filaments slender, elongated, bent
outward at the apex; anthers oblong, the cells at first extrorse,
sometimes becoming sublateral; staminodia linear, scale-like; ovary
contracted into a subulate style tipped with a minute slightly 5-lobed
stigma. Fruit dry, 1-seeded, oblong, with thin coriaceous flesh. Seed
obovoid or oblong; seed-coat lustrous, light brown, folded on the inner
face into 2 obscure lobes rounded at apex; hilum elevated, subbasilar or
lateral, oblong or linear; embryo erect in thick fleshy albumen; radicle
much shorter than the oblong fleshy cotyledons.

Sideroxylum with a hundred species is widely distributed through the
tropics of the two hemispheres, and occurs also with a few species in
Australia, Madeira, southern Africa, New Zealand, and Norfolk Island, a
single species reaching the shores of southern Florida. Some of the
species are large and valuable timber-trees, producing hard handsome
durable wood.

The generic name, from {sideros} and {xylon}, is in reference to the
hardness of the wood.


               1. Sideroxylum foetidissimum Jacq. Mastic.

                  _Sideroxylum Mastichodendron_ Jacq.

[Illustration: Fig. 721]

Leaves mostly clustered near the end of the branches, appearing
irregularly from early spring until autumn, oval, acute or rounded and
slightly emarginate at apex, and gradually narrowed at base, with
thickened cartilaginous slightly involute margins, silky-canescent
beneath when they unfold, and at maturity thin and firm, glabrous,
bright green and lustrous above, lustrous and yellow-green below, 3'--5'
long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a broad pale conspicuous midrib deeply
impressed on the upper side and inconspicuous primary veins arcuate near
the margins; petioles slender, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers usually
appearing in Florida in the autumn and also in early spring and during
the summer on stout orange-colored puberulous pedicels from the axils of
minute acute scarious bracts usually deciduous before the opening of the
flower-buds, from the axils of young leaves or on the branches of the
previous year from leafless nodes; calyx yellow-green, puberulous on the
outer surface and deeply divided into broad-ovate rounded lobes rather
shorter than the oblong-ovate rounded divisions of the light yellow
corolla; staminodia lanceolate, nearly entire, tipped with a subulate
point and much shorter than the stamens; ovary oblong-ovoid, glabrous,
gradually contracted into an elongated style stigmatic at apex. Fruit
ripening in March and April on a much thickened woody stem erect or
nearly at right angles to the branch, 1' long, separating from the calyx
in falling, with tough yellow skin, and thick juicy flesh of a pleasant
subacid flavor; seed obovoid, rounded above, narrowed at base, 1/2' long
and 1/3' wide.

A tree, in Florida 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a massive straight trunk 3 deg.--4 deg.
in diameter, stout upright branches forming a dense irregular head, and
thick terete branchlets orange-colored and slightly puberulous when they
first appear, becoming glabrous, brown more or less tinged with red, and
marked by the conspicuous nearly orbicular leaf-scars displaying 3 large
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and conspicuously roughened by the
thickened persistent bases of the fruit stalks. Bark of the trunk
1/3'--1/2' thick, dark gray to light brown tinged with red and broken
into thick plate-like scales separating into thin layers. Wood heavy,
hard, strong, bright orange-colored, with thick yellow sapwood of 40--50
layers of annual growth; in Florida used in boat-building.

Distribution. Florida, Cape Canaveral and Cape Romano to the southern
keys; on the Bahama Islands and many of the Antilles.




                           2. DIPHOLIS A. DC.


Trees or shrubs, with naked buds, and persistent leaves, the slender
veins arcuate and united near the margins. Flowers minute, on clavate
ebracteolate pedicels from the axils of minute deciduous bracts, in the
axils of existing leaves or from the leafless nodes of previous years;
calyx ovoid, deeply 5-lobed, the lobes nearly equal, ovate, rounded at
apex; corolla campanulate, white, 5-lobed, the spreading lobes furnished
on each side at the base with a linear or subulate appendage; stamens
exserted; filaments filiform; anthers oblong-sagittate, extrorse;
staminodia 5, petaloid, ovate, acute, fimbriately cut on the margins,
oblique, keeled on the back, inserted in the same rank and alternate
with the stamens; ovary oblong or narrow-ovoid, gradually contracted
into a slender style shorter than the corolla and stigmatic at the
apiculate apex. Fruit oblong-ovoid, with thin dry flesh. Seed ovoid;
seed-coat thick, coriaceous and lustrous; hilum oblong, basilar or
slightly lateral; embryo erect in thick fleshy albumen; cotyledons
ovate, flat, much longer than the short radicle turned toward the hilum.

Dipholis with three species is confined to the West Indies and southern
Florida.

The generic name, from {dis} and {pholis}, relates to the appendages of
the corolla.


            1. Dipholis salicifolia A. DC. Bustic. Cassada.

[Illustration: Fig. 722]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate or narrow-obovate, acute, acuminate, or rounded
at apex, gradually contracted at base, with slightly thickened
cartilaginous wavy margins, thickly coated when they unfold with
lustrous rufous pubescence, and at maturity thin and firm, dark green
and lustrous above, pale yellow-green below, 3'--5' long, 1/2'--1-1/2'
wide, and glabrous, or slightly puberulous on the lower side of the
narrow pale midrib, with inconspicuous veins and reticulate veinlets;
appearing in Florida in the spring and remaining on the branches between
one and two years; petioles slender, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers opening
during March and April, 1/8' long, on thick pedicels 1/4' in length from
the axils of minute ovate acute scarious bracts, and coated with rufous
pubescence, in dense many-flowered fascicles crowded on branchlets of
the year or of the previous year for a distance of 8'--12'; calyx half
the length of the corolla, coated on the outer surface with rusty silky
pubescence; appendages of the corolla as long as the oval acute
irregularly toothed staminodia; ovary narrow-ovoid, glabrous, gradually
contracted into a slender style shorter than the corolla and stigmatic
at apex. Fruit solitary or rarely clustered, ripening in the autumn,
short-oblong to subglobose, black, 1/4' in length; seed pale brown,
about 3/16' in length.

A tree, in Florida sometimes 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a straight trunk
18'--20' in diameter, small upright branches forming a narrow graceful
head, and slender branchlets coated with rufous pubescence when they
first appear, becoming ashy gray or light brown tinged with red and
marked by numerous circular pale lenticels and by small elevated
orbicular leaf-scars displaying near the centre a compact cluster of
fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Bark of the trunk about 1/3' thick and
broken into thick square plate-like brown scales tinged with red. Wood
very heavy, exceedingly hard, strong, close-grained, dark brown or red,
with thin sapwood of 4 or 5 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, rich hummock soil, shores of Bay Biscayne and on
the Everglade Keys, Dade County, and on several of the southern keys; on
the Bahama Islands and on many of the Antilles.




                             3. BUMELIA Sw.


Small trees or shrubs, with terete usually spinescent branchlets, scaly
buds, and fibrous roots. Leaves often fascicled on spur-like lateral
branchlets, conduplicate in the bud, coriaceous or thin,
short-petiolate, obovate and obtuse or elliptic, silky-pubescent or
tomentose below, or nearly glabrous, with rather inconspicuous veins
arcuate near the entire margins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets,
deciduous or persistent. Flowers minute, on slender clavate ebracteolate
pedicels from the axils of lanceolate acute scarious deciduous bracts,
in many-flowered crowded fascicles in the axils of existing leaves or
from the leafless nodes of previous years; calyx ovoid to
subcampanulate, 5-lobed, the lobes in one series, imbricated in the bud,
ovate or oblong, rounded at apex, nearly equal; corolla campanulate,
white, with 5 spreading broad-ovate lobes rounded at apex and furnished
on each side at base with a minute acute ovate or lanceolate appendage;
stamens 5; filaments filiform; anthers ovoid-sagittate, attached on the
back below the middle, the cells opening by subextrorse slits;
staminodia petal-like, ovate or ovate-lanceolate, entire or obscurely
denticulate, flattened or keeled on the back, sometimes furnished at
base with a pair of minute scales; ovary hirsute, ovoid to ovoid-conic,
gradually or abruptly contracted into a slender short or elongated
simple style stigmatic at the acute apex. Fruit oblong-obovoid or
globose, black, solitary or in 2 or 3-fruited clusters; flesh thin and
dry or succulent. Seed ovoid or oblong, apiculate or rounded at apex,
without albumen; seed-coat thick, crustaceous, light brown, smooth and
shining, folded more or less conspicuously on the back into 2 lobes
rounded at apex; embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons thick
and fleshy, hemispheric, usually consolidated; radicle short, turned
toward the basilar or subbasilar orbicular or elliptic hilum.

Bumelia, with about twenty-five species is confined to the New World,
where it is distributed from the southern United States through the West
Indies to Mexico, Central America, and Brazil. Of the twelve species in
the United States which have been distinguished five are small trees.

Bumelia produces hard heavy strong wood, that of the North American
species containing bands of numerous large open ducts defining the
layers of annual growth and connected by conspicuous branched groups of
similar ducts, presenting in cross-section a reticulate appearance.

The generic name is from {boumelia}, a classical name of the Ash-tree.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Lower surface of the leaves pubescent or lanuginose.
    Leaves short-obovate to oblanceolate or elliptic, covered below with
          pale or ferrugineous silky pubescence.
                                                        1. B. tenax (C).
    Leaves oblong-obovate, lanuginose below with ferrugineous or silvery
          white hairs.
                                             2. B. lanuginosa (A, C, H).
  Leaves glabrous or nearly so.
    Leaves deciduous.
      Leaves oblong-obovate, thick.
                                                        3. B. monticola.
      Leaves elliptic to oblanceolate, usually acute or acuminate, thin.
                                                 4. B. lycioides (A, C).
    Leaves persistent, obovate; fruit oblong.
                                              5. B. angustifolia (C, D).


              1. Bumelia tenax Willd. Ironwood. Black Haw.

[Illustration: Fig. 723]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oblanceolate or elliptic, rarely oval or ovate
on leading shoots, rounded or acute at apex, cuneate at base, thin, dark
dull green, and finally reticulate-venulose on the upper surface,
thickly covered below with soft silky pale or gold-colored pubescence,
usually becoming dark rusty brown by midsummer, 1'--3' long and
1-1/8'--1-1/2' wide, with slightly thickened and revolute margins and a
prominent midrib; turning yellow and falling irregularly during the
winter; petioles slender, hairy, grooved, 1/4'--1' in length. Flowers
appearing from May in Florida to July in South Carolina, 1/8' long, on
pedicels 1/2'--1' in length and coated like the calyx with rufous silky
pubescence, in many-flowered crowded fascicles; calyx ovoid, with oblong
lobes; appendages of the corolla large, ovate, acute, crenate, shorter
than the ovate staminodia about as long as the lobes of the corolla;
ovary narrow-ovoid, gradually contracted into an elongated style. Fruit
ripening and falling in the autumn, short-oblong to ellipsoid,
1/3'--1/2' in length; flesh sweet and edible; seed oblong, short-pointed
at apex, 1/4'--1/3' long.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 5'--6' in diameter,
straight spreading flexible tough branches unarmed or armed with
straight stout rigid spines sometimes 1' in length, and slender
branchlets coated when they first appear with silky pale pubescence
often tinged with red and soon rusty brown, becoming glabrous before
winter, and then dark red and slightly roughened by occasional minute
dark lenticels; or often a shrub only a few feet high. Winter-buds
minute, subglobose, with imbricated ovate scales rounded at apex and
clothed with rusty brown tomentum. Bark of the trunk thick, brown tinged
with red, and divided irregularly by deep fissures into narrow flat
reticulate ridges covered with minute appressed scales. Wood heavy,
hard, close-grained, light brown streaked with white, with lighter
colored sapwood.

Distribution. Dry sandy soil; South Carolina (Saint Helena Island and
Bluffton, Beaufort County), southward in the coast region of Georgia and
east Florida to Cape Canaveral and through the interior of the
peninsular to Cedar Keys on the west coast; near Bainbridge, Decatur
County, southwestern Georgia.


         2. Bumelia lanuginosa Pers. Gum Elastic. Chittam Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 724]

Leaves oblong-obovate, rounded and often apiculate at apex and gradually
narrowed at base, coated when they unfold with pale ferrugineous
tomentum dense on the lower and loose on the upper surface, and at
maturity thin and firm, dark green and lustrous above, more or less
lanuginose below with rusty brown or silvery white (var. _albicans_
Sarg.) hairs, 1'--2-1/2' long and 1/3'--3/4' wide; falling irregularly
during the winter; petioles slender, rusty brown or pale pubescent,
1/8'--3/4' in length. Flowers opening in summer on hairy pedicels 1/8'
in length, in 16--18-flowered fascicles; calyx ovoid, with ovate rounded
lobes coated on the outer surface with ferrugineous or pale tomentum and
rather shorter than the tube of the corolla; appendages of the corolla
small, ovate and acute; staminodia ovate, acute, remotely and slightly
denticulate, as long as the corolla-lobes; ovary abruptly contracted
into a slender elongated style. Fruit on a slender drooping stalk
ripening and falling in the autumn, oblong or slightly obovoid, 1/2'
long, with thick flesh; seed short-oblong, rounded at apex, about 1/4'
in length.

A tree, often 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk 1 deg.--2 deg. in
diameter, short thick rigid branches forming a narrow-oblong
round-topped head, unarmed, or armed with stout rigid straight or
slightly curved spines frequently developing into spinescent leafy
lateral branchlets, and slender often somewhat zigzag branchlets coated
with thick rufous or pale tomentum when they first appear, becoming in
their first winter red-brown to ashy gray and glabrous or nearly so, and
marked by occasional minute lenticels and by small semiorbicular
leaf-scars displaying 2 clusters of fibro-vascular bundle-scars; of its
largest size in the Texas coast region; much smaller east of the
Mississippi River, and there rarely more than 20 deg. tall. Winter-buds
obtuse, 1/8' long, covered with broad-obovate rusty-tomentose scales.
Bark of the trunk 1/2' thick, dark gray-brown and usually divided into
narrow ridges broken into thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, rather
soft, not strong, close-grained, light brown or yellow, with thick
lighter colored sapwood; producing in Texas considerable quantities of
clear viscid gum from the freshly cut wood.

Distribution. Southern and southeastern Georgia, western Florida
southward to the neighborhood of Lake City, Columbia County and to Cedar
Key, coast of Alabama and inland to Dallas County, southern Mississippi,
Louisiana, and Texas to the valley of the San Antonio River and over the
Edwards Plateau (Kendall, Kerr and Brown Counties) to the valley of the
upper Brazos River (Palo Pinto County), and northward through western
Louisiana and western Arkansas to western Oklahoma (Seiling, Dewey
County), and to southeastern Kansas (Cherokee County) and southern
Missouri as far north as the valley of the Meramec River (near Allenton,
St. Louis County), and southern Illinois (near Mound City, Pulaski
County); at Calcasieu Pass, on the sandy beaches of the Louisiana coast
forming thickets of plants 6 deg.--8 deg. high, and uninjured by salt spray; the
var. _albicans_ in eastern Texas from the valley of the lower Brazos to
that of the San Antonio River and in the neighborhood of Monterey, Nuevo
Leon; most distinct and of its largest size on the bottoms of the
Guadalupe River, near Victoria, Victoria County, and here occasionally
70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg. in diameter.

Passing into the var. _rigida_ A. Gray, with smaller rather narrower
leaves and often more spinescent branches. Brown and Uvalde Counties,
Texas; in Coahua and Nuevo Leon, and in the canyons of the mountains of
southern Arizona up to altitudes of at least 4000 deg.--5000 deg.; in Texas
shrubby in habit; in Arizona forming dense thickets of slender stems
often 20 deg.--25 deg. tall and only 2'--3' in diameter.


                      3. Bumelia monticola Buckl.

[Illustration: Fig. 725]

Leaves oblong-obovate, narrowed and acute or rounded and rarely slightly
emarginate at apex, cuneate at base, entire, covered above with matted
pale hairs and densely below with snow white pubescence when they
unfold, and at maturity coriaceous, dark yellow-green, lustrous and
glabrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, 1-1/4'--3'
long and 1/3'--1-1/4' wide, with slightly revolute margins, a slender
yellow midrib glabrous or slightly pubescent below toward the base and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets, deciduous; petioles slender pubescent
early in the season, becoming glabrous. Flowers opening from the middle
of June to the middle of July, on villose pedicels, becoming sometimes
nearly glabrous in the autumn, 1/8'--1/4' in length; calyx pale green,
villose-pubescent, its lobes ovate, ciliate on the margins, shorter than
the lobes of the corolla, their appendages lanceolate; staminodia
rounded at apex, longer than the corolla-lobes. Fruit ripening in
September, subglobose to oblong-obovoid, 1/4'--1/3' long and 1/4'--1/3'
in diameter; seed oblong, rounded at the ends, about 2/5' long.

A tree, in favorable positions 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with spinose branches
forming an irregular open head, and slender often zigzag red-brown
lustrous branchlets, the lateral branchlets often ending in stout
spines; more often an irregularly branched shrub 10 deg.--15 deg. high,
spreading on the banks of streams into great thickets. Bark of the trunk
thick, pale and dark gray, rough and scaly, exfoliating in large scales.

Distribution. Texas, dry limestone cliffs and canyon bottoms and by
streams dry during a large part of the year, valley of the upper
Guadalupe River (Comal, Kendall and Kerr Counties) to the valley of the
Rio Grande (Uvalde County), and northward to the valley of the upper
Brazos River (Palo Pinto County); in Cohahuila (near Saltillo).


          4. Bumelia lycioides Gaertn. f. Ironwood. Buckthorn.

[Illustration: Fig. 726]

Leaves elliptic to oblanceolate, acute, acuminate, or rarely rounded at
apex, gradually narrowed at base, covered when they unfold especially
below with silky villose pubescence, soon glabrous, and at maturity
bright green and glabrous on the upper surface, light green and
sometimes coated on the lower surface with pale pubescence, thin and
rather firm, finely reticulate-venulose, 3'--6' long and 1/2'--2' wide,
with a pale thin conspicuous midrib sometimes slightly pubescent below
near the base, deciduous in the autumn; petioles slender, slightly
grooved, mostly pubescent early in the season, usually becoming
glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers appearing at midsummer on slender
glabrous pedicels 1/2' long, in crowded many-flowered fascicles; calyx
glabrous, ovoid-campanulate, with rounded lobes rather shorter than the
corolla; staminodia broad-ovate, denticulate, nearly as long as the
narrow appendages; ovary ovoid, slightly hairy toward the base only,
gradually contracted into a short thick style. Fruit ripening and
falling in the autumn, ovoid or obovoid, about 2/3' in length; flesh
thick; seed short-oblong to subglobose, rounded at apex, nearly 1/4'
long, with a pale conspicuous hilum.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely more than 6' in
diameter, stout flexible branches usually unarmed or furnished with
short stout slightly curved spines occasionally developing into leafy
spinescent branches, and short thick spur-like lateral branchlets
slightly puberulous when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous,
light red-brown, rather lustrous, and marked by numerous pale lenticels,
and in their second year dark or light brown tinged with red or ashy
gray. Winter-buds minute, obtuse, nearly immersed in the bark, with pale
dark brown glabrous scales. Bark of the trunk thin, light red-brown, the
generally smooth surface broken into small thin persistent scales. Wood
heavy, hard, not strong, close-grained, light brown or yellow, with
thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Usually in low moist soil on the borders of swamps and
streams; rocky bluffs of the Ohio River near Cannelton, Perry County,
southern Indiana, southern Illinois (Hardin, Pope and Pulaski Counties),
to southeastern Missouri (Butler County) and to western Kentucky,
western and central Tennessee, central Mississippi and northern
Louisiana (West Feliciana Parish); and through western Arkansas to the
coast region of eastern Texas (Beaumont, Jefferson County, and Columbia,
Brazoria County); central Alabama; Florida southward to St. Mark's,
Wakulla County, and to Taylor, Alachua and Volusia Counties, and to
northwestern Georgia (Catoosa County), and the valley of the Savannah
River in Georgia and South Carolina, and northward through eastern North
Carolina to southeastern Virginia (Norfolk County).


        5. Bumelia angustifolia Nutt. Ants' Wood. Downward Plum.

[Illustration: Fig. 727]

Leaves obovate, rounded at apex, and gradually narrowed and cuneate at
base, with slightly thickened revolute margins, glabrous, thick and
coriaceous, pale blue-green on the upper surface, paler on the lower
surface, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/4'--1-1/4' wide, with a pale slender
midrib, and very obscure veins and veinlets; usually persistent on the
branches until the end of their second winter; petioles stout, grooved,
rarely 1/4' in length. Flowers generally appearing in October and
November, on slender glabrous pedicels seldom more than 1/2' in length,
in few or many-flowered crowded fascicles; calyx glabrous, divided
nearly to the base into narrow-ovate lobes rounded at apex and half as
long as the divisions of the corolla furnished with linear-lanceolate
appendages as long as the ovate acute denticulate staminodia; ovary
narrow-ovoid, slightly hairy at base only, gradually contracted into an
elongated style. Fruit ripening in the spring, on slender drooping
stems, usually 1 fruit only being developed from a fascicle of flowers,
oblong or slightly obovoid, rounded at the ends, 1/2'--3/4' long and
1/4' in diameter, with thick sweet flesh; seed oblong, rounded at apex,
1/2' long.

A tree, sometimes 20 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely exceeding 6'--8'
in diameter, graceful pendulous branches forming a compact round head,
and rigid spinescent divergent lateral branchlets often armed with acute
slender spines sometimes 1' in length, and when they first appear
thickly coated with loose pale or dark brown deciduous tomentum,
becoming light brown tinged with red or ashy gray. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, and covered with rufous tomentum. Bark of the trunk 1/3'--1/2'
thick, gray tinged with red, and deeply divided by longitudinal and
cross fissures into oblong or nearly square plates. Wood heavy, hard,
although not strong, very close-grained, light brown or orange-colored,
with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Indian River to the southern keys, and
on the west coast from Cedar Keys to East Cape, and here less abundant
and usually on rocky shores and in the interior of low barren islands;
on the Bahama Islands and in Cuba.




                          4. CHRYSOPHYLLUM L.


Trees, with terete branchlets usually coated while young with dense
tomentum, and naked buds. Leaves short-petiolate, bright green and
glabrous on the upper surface and coated on the lower surface with
brilliant silky pubescence or tomentum, persistent. Flowers on pedicels
from the axils of minute acute bracts, in dense many-flowered fascicles;
calyx usually 5-parted, the divisions nearly equal, obtuse; corolla 5 or
rarely 6 or 7-lobed, tubular, campanulate or subrotate, white or
greenish white; filaments short, subulate or filiform, enlarged into
broad connectives; anthers ovoid or triangular, extrorse or rarely
partly introrse, the cells spreading below; ovary usually 5-celled,
style crowned by a 5-lobed stigma. Fruit short-oblong, ovoid or globose.
Seed ovoid; seed-coat coriaceous, dull or lustrous; hilum subbasilar,
elongated, conspicuous; embryo erect, surrounded by more or less pungent
fleshy albumen; cotyledons oblong, foliaceous.

Chrysophyllum is tropical, with fifty or sixty species most abundant in
the New World, with a small number of species in western and southern
tropical Africa, southern Asia, Australia, and the Hawaiian Islands, and
with one species in southern Florida. The most valuable species,
_Chrysophyllum Cainito_ L., a native of the West Indies and now
cultivated in all tropical countries and naturalized in many parts of
Central and South America, produces the so-called star-apple, a
succulent edible blue or purple and green fruit the size and shape of a
small apple.

The generic name, from {chrysos} and {phyllon}, is in allusion to the
golden covering of the under surface of the leaves.


              1. Chrysophyllum oliviforme Lam. Satin-leaf.

[Illustration: Fig. 728]

Leaves revolute in the bud, oval, acute or contracted into a short broad
point or sometimes rounded at apex, abruptly cuneate at base, thick and
coriaceous, bright blue-green on the upper surface and covered on the
lower surface and on the petiole with brilliant copper-colored
pubescence, 2'--3' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, with a broad prominent
midrib deeply impressed on the upper side and numerous straight veins
arcuate hear the margins; petioles stout, 1/2'--2/3' in length. Flowers
appearing in Florida irregularly throughout the year and often found on
a branch with ripe or half-grown fruits, on stout pedicels shorter than
the petioles, covered like the calyx with rufous tomentum, in few or
many-flowered fascicles in the axils of leaves or at the base of lateral
branchlets in those of earlier years; calyx divided nearly to the base
into broad rounded lobes rather shorter than the tube of the subrotate
white corolla with short spreading rounded lobes; ovary 5-celled,
pubescent, gradually contracted into a short style crowned by a broad
5-lobed stigma. Fruit usually 1-seeded by abortion, on stems 1' long,
usually only a single fruit being produced from a flower-cluster, ovoid
or sometimes nearly globose, dark purple, roughened by occasional
excrescences, with a thick tough skin inclosing the juicy sweet mawkish
flesh light purple on the exterior, lighter toward the interior, and
quite white in the centre; seed narrowed at the ends, 1/2' long, covered
with a thin light brown coat closely invested with a white glutinous
aril-like pulpy mass.

A tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk sometimes a foot in
diameter, upright branches forming a compact oblong head, and slender
slightly zigzag branchlets coated when they first appear with
ferrugineous tomentum, becoming in their second year light red-brown or
ashy gray and covered with small pale elevated circular lenticels; in
sandy soil under the shade of Pine-trees in the Everglade Keys a shrub
6 deg. high or less. Bark of the trunk 1/4' thick, light brown slightly
tinged with red, and broken by shallow fissures into large irregularly
shaped plates separating on the surface into small thin scales. Wood
very heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, light brown shaded with red,
with thin lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, rich hummocks, from Mosquito Inlet on the east
coast to the Everglade Keys, Dade County and to the southern keys, and
on the west coast from the shores of the Caloosahatchie River to the
neighborhood of Cape Sable; local and nowhere common; on the Bahama
Islands, and in Cuba, Porto Rico and Jamaica.




                             5. MIMUSOPS L.


Trees or rarely shrubs, with stout terete branchlets, small naked buds,
and sweet juice. Leaves usually clustered at the end of the branches,
with slender inconspicuous transverse veins and minute reticulate
veinlets, persistent. Flowers on clavate pedicels from the axils of
minute deciduous bracts; calyx 6--8-parted, the divisions in 2 series,
those of the exterior series almost valvate in the bud; corolla white,
barely longer than the calyx, subrotate, usually dilated at the throat,
6--8-lobed, the lobes furnished at base with a pair of petal-like
appendages; stamens as many as the lobes of the corolla; filaments
short, dilated; anthers lanceolate, their connectives excurrent, acute,
or sometimes aristate at apex; staminodia as many as the lobes of the
corolla, scale-like or petaloid, entire, 2-lobed or laciniate; ovary
ovoid, hirsute or puberulous, gradually narrowed into a slender style
stigmatic at apex. Fruit globose, 1 or 2-seeded, tipped with the much
thickened elongated style; skin crustaceous, indurate; flesh thick and
dry. Seed oblong-ovoid, slightly compressed; seed-coat crustaceous,
chestnut-brown and lustrous; hilum elongated, lateral or minute,
basilar; embryo surrounded by thick fleshy albumen; cotyledons flat,
thick and fleshy, much longer than the short erect radicle.

Mimusops with thirty or forty species is widely distributed through the
tropics of the two hemispheres, a single species reaching the shores of
southern Florida. Several species produce hard heavy timber, edible
fruits, or valuable milky juices.

The significance of the generic name, from {mimo} and {opsis} in
allusion to the shape of the corolla, is not apparent.


               1. Mimusops emarginata Britt. Wild Dilly.

                  _Mimusops Sieberi_ Chap., not A. DC.

[Illustration: Fig. 729]

Leaves clustered at the end of the branches, involute in the bud
oblong-elliptic, or occasionally slightly obovate, rounded or retuse at
apex, rounded or cuneate at base, with slightly thickened revolute
margins, bright red when they unfold, and slightly puberulous on the
under surface of the midrib, and at maturity thick and coriaceous,
bright green and lustrous, covered on the upper surface with a slight
glaucous bloom, conspicuously reticulate-venulose, 3'--4' long and
1'--1-1/2' wide, with a stout midrib glabrous, or puberulous with rusty
hairs below, and deeply impressed above; appearing in Florida in April
and May and deciduous during their second year; petioles slender,
grooved, rusty-pubescent, especially while young, 1/2'--1' in length.
Flowers opening in the spring on slender pedicels near the end of the
branches, coated with rusty tomentum and 1' or more long, from the axils
of leaves of the year or from those of fallen leaves of the previous
year; calyx narrow-ovoid, divided nearly to the base into 6 lobes, those
of the outer row lanceolate, acute, covered on the outer surface with
rusty brown tomentum and on the inner surface with pale pubescence,
thickened and usually marked at the base on the outer surface by black
spots, those of the inner row ovate, acute, keeled toward the base,
light greenish yellow and pale-pubescent; corolla light yellow tinged
with green, 2/3' in diameter, with 6 spreading lanceolate acute
divisions entire or erosely toothed toward the apex, their appendage
slender, acute and from one half to two thirds their length; staminodia
minute, nearly triangular, entire; ovary narrow-ovoid, dark red,
puberulous toward the base with pale hairs, and gradually narrowed into
an elongated exserted style stigmatic at apex. Fruit ripening at the end
of a year, in the spring or in early autumn, on a stout erect stem about
1' long, and persistent until after the tree flowers the following year,
subglobose to slightly obovoid, flattened and compressed at apex,
1'--1-1/2' in diameter, usually 1-seeded by abortion, with a thick dry
outer coat roughened by minute rusty brown scales, and thick spongy
flesh filled with milky juice; seed 1/2' long, with an elongated lateral
hilum.

A tree, in Florida rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a short gnarled trunk
12'--15' in diameter and usually hollow and defective, thick branches
forming a compact round head, and stout branchlets clustered at the end
of the branches of the previous year, coated when they first appear with
dark rufous pubescence, becoming glabrous and light orange-brown at the
end of a few weeks, and in their second year covered with thick ashy
gray or light red-brown scaly bark and marked by elevated obcordate
leaf-scars displaying 3 large dark conspicuous fibro-vascular
bundle-scars. Winter-buds ovoid, acute, rusty-tomentose. Bark of the
trunk about 1/4' thick and irregularly divided by deep fissures into
ridges rounded on the back and broken into small nearly square plates.
Wood very heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, rich very dark brown, with
light-colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, only on the southern keys; not common; on the
Bahama Islands and in Cuba.




                            LVII. EBENACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, and alternate simple entire leaves,
without stipules. Flowers dioecious or polygamous, regular, axillary,
articulate with the bibracteolate pedicels; calyx persistent; corolla
hypogynous, regular; disk 0; stamens more numerous than the lobes of the
corolla, inserted on its base, fewer and rudimentary or 0 in the
pistillate flower; filaments short; anthers introrse, 2-celled; ovary
several-celled; ovules 2 in each cell, suspended from its apex,
anatropous; raphe dorsal; micropyle superior. Fruit a 1 or
several-seeded berry. Seeds with copious albumen; embryo axile.

The Ebony family with seven genera and a large number of species is
widely distributed in tropical and temperate regions, with two
representatives of its most important genus, Diospyros, in the flora of
the United States.




                            1. DIOSPYROS L.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, without a terminal bud, scaly
axillary buds, coriaceous leaves revolute in the bud, and fibrous roots.
Flowers mostly dioecious, from the axils of leaves of the year or of the
previous year; staminate smaller than the pistillate and usually in
short few-flowered bracted cymes; pistillate generally solitary; calyx
4-lobed, the lobes valvate in the bud, accrescent under the fruit;
corolla 4-lobed, the lobes sinistrorsely contorted in the bud, more or
less contracted in the throat, the lobes spreading or recurved; stamens
usually 16, inserted on the bottom of the corolla in two rows and in
pairs, those of the outer row rather longer than and opposite those of
the inner row; filaments free, slender; anthers oblong, apiculate, the
cells opening laterally by longitudinal slits; stamens rudimentary or 0
in the pistillate flower; ovary usually 4-celled, each cell more or less
completely divided by the development of a false longitudinal partition
from its anterior face, rudimentary or 0 in the staminate flower; styles
4, spreading, 2-lobed at apex; stigmas 2-parted or lobed; ovule solitary
in each of the divisions of the cells. Fruit globose, oblong or conic,
1--10-seeded, surrounded at base by the enlarged persistent calyx. Seeds
pendulous, oblong, compressed; seed-coat thick and bony, dark, more or
less lustrous; embryo axile, straight or somewhat curved; cotyledons
foliaceous, ovate or lanceolate; radicle superior, cylindric, turned
toward the small hilum.

Diospyros, which is chiefly tropical, is widely distributed with more
than two hundred species in the two hemispheres, with a few species
extending beyond the tropics into eastern North America, eastern Asia,
southwestern Asia, and the Mediterranean region.

Diospyros produces hard close-grained valuable wood, with dark or black
heartwood and thick soft yellow sapwood. The ebony of commerce is partly
produced by different tropical species. The fruit is often edible, and
some of the species are important fruit-trees in China and Japan.

The generic name, from {Dios} and {pyros}, is in allusion to the
life-giving properties of the fruit.


            CONSPECTUS OF THE SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers on branchlets of the year; anthers opening longitudinally
        nearly throughout their entire length; filaments pubescent;
        pistillate flowers with 8 rudimentary stamens; ovary nearly
        glabrous; leaves oval; fruit green, yellow, orange color or
        rarely black.
                                                1. D. virginiana (A, C).
  Flowers on branchlets of the previous year; anthers opening only near
        the apex; filaments glabrous; pistillate flowers without
        rudimentary stamens; ovary pubescent; leaves cuneate-oblong or
        obovate; fruit black.
                                                       2. D. texana (C).


                 1. Diospyros virginiana L. Persimmon.

[Illustration: Fig. 730]

Leaves ovate-oblong to oval or elliptic, acuminate or abruptly acuminate
at apex, narrowed and cuneate or rounded or rarely broad and rounded at
base, coriaceous, glabrous, dark green and lustrous on the upper
surface, pale on the lower surface, 4'--6' long and 2'--3' wide, with a
broad flat midrib, about six pairs of conspicuous primary veins arcuate
near the margins and reticulate veinlets; falling in the autumn usually
without much change of color; petioles stout, glabrous or slightly
villose-pubescent, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers appearing when the leaves
are more than half grown on branchlets of the year, from March in the
extreme south to June in the north; the staminate in 2--3-flowered
pubescent pedunculate cymes, on pedicels from the axils of minute
lanceolate acute caducous bracts and furnished near the middle with two
minute-caducous bractlets; the pistillate solitary, on short recurved
pedicels, bibracteolate with conspicuous acute bractlets ciliate on the
margins and often 1/4' in length; corolla of the staminate flower
tubular, 1/2' long, slightly contracted below the short acute reflexed
lobes forming before expansion a pointed 4-angled bud rather longer than
the broad-ovate acute foliaceous ciliate calyx-lobes inflexed on the
margins; stamens with short slightly hairy filaments and
linear-lanceolate anthers opening throughout their length; pistillate
flower 3/4' long, with a greenish yellow or creamy white corolla nearly
1/2' broad; stamens 8, inserted in one row below the middle of the
corolla, with short filaments and sagittate abortive or sometimes
fertile anthers; ovary conic, pilose toward the apex, ultimately
8-celled, and gradually narrowed into the four slender styles hairy at
the base. Fruit on a short thick stem, ripening at the north late in
autumn or earlier southward, often persistent on the branches during the
winter, depressed-globose to ovoid or slightly obovoid, rounded or
pointed at apex, 3/4'--2' in diameter, yellow or pale orange color,
often with a bright cheek, and covered with a glaucous bloom, turning
yellowish brown when partly decayed by freezing, surrounded at base by
the spreading calyx 1'--1-1/2' in diameter, with broad ovate pointed
lobes recurved on the margins; flesh austere while green, yellowish
brown, sweet and luscious when fully ripened by the action of frost, or
in some forms remaining hard and green during the winter; seeds oblong,
rounded on the dorsal edge, nearly straight on the ventral edge, rounded
at the ends, much flattened, 1/2' long and 1/3' wide, with a thick hard
pale brown rugose testa, a narrow pale hilum and a slender raphe.

A tree, occasionally 50 deg.--60 deg. high, with a short trunk 16'--20' in
diameter, spreading often pendulous branches forming a broad or narrow
round-topped head, and slender slightly zigzag glabrous or rarely
puberulous branchlets with a thick pith-cavity, light brown when they
first appear, becoming during their first winter light brown or ashy
gray and marked by occasional small orange-colored lenticels and by
elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars, with deep horizontal lunate
depressions; or in the primeval forest, under the most favorable
conditions, sometimes 100 deg.--130 deg. high, with a long slender trunk free of
branches for 70 deg.--80 deg. and rarely exceeding 2 deg. in diameter; frequently
not more than 15 deg. or 20 deg. high and sometimes shrubby in habit.
Winter-buds: axillary, broad-ovoid, acute, 1/8' long, with thick
imbricated dark red-brown or purple lustrous scales often persistent at
the base of young branchlets during the season. Bark of the trunk
3/4'--1' thick, dark brown tinged with red, or dark gray, and deeply
divided into thick square plates broken into thin persistent scales,
with heavy strong dark brown sometimes nearly black heartwood often
undeveloped until the tree is over one hundred years old; used in
turnery, for shoe-lasts, plane-stocks, and preferred for shuttles to
other American woods. The fruit contains tannin, to which it owes its
astringent qualities, and is eaten in great quantities in the southern
states. The inner bark is astringent and bitter.

Distribution. Light sandy well drained soil, or in the Mississippi basin
sometimes on the deep rich bottom-lands of river valleys; Lighthouse
Point, New Haven, New Haven County, Connecticut, and Long Island, New
York, through southern Pennsylvania, southern Ohio, southern Indiana and
Illinois, to southeastern Iowa, eastern Kansas, central Oklahoma, and
southward to De Soto County, Florida, southern Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, and Texas to the valley of the Colorado River (Burnet
County); very common in the south Atlantic and Gulf states, often
covering with shrubby growth by means of the stoloniferous roots
abandoned fields and springing up by the side of roads and fences;
ascending on the Appalachian Mountains to altitudes of 3500 deg.; rare
toward the western limits of its range in Texas. In Missouri and
Arkansas passing into the var. _platycarpa_ Sarg. with larger
broad-ovate leaves rounded or cordate at base or rarely elliptic, more
or less densely pubescent on the lower surface, especially on the midrib
and petiole, often 2-1/2'--4' long and 2'--2-1/2' wide, and at the end
of vigorous shoots up to 6' in length, and depressed-globose, yellow,
rarely nearly black (f. _atra_ Sarg.), fruit much depressed at top and
bottom, 1-3/4'--3' wide and about 1' high, with sweet succulent flesh,
ripening in September or early October, and seeds conspicuously rounded
on the dorsal edge, much compressed, dark chestnut-brown and lustrous,
only slightly rugose, 3/4' long and 1/2' wide. A tree usually not more
than 12 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 16'--30' in diameter and rather stouter
branchlets densely villose-pubescent sometimes for two or three years,
or becoming glabrate at the end of their first season. Hills near
Allenton, St. Louis County, and on the western slopes of the Ozark
Mountains and the adjacent prairies of southeastern Missouri and
prairies of northwestern Arkansas, eastern Kansas and Oklahoma. In Dade
County, Florida, _Diospyros virginiana_ is replaced by the var.
_Mosieri_ Sarg. with smaller staminate flowers, nearly globose fruit
with rather less compressed dark chestnut-brown lustrous only slightly
rugose seeds. A small tree with slightly fissured light gray bark.

Several named varieties of _Diospyros virginiana_ are distinguished and
cultivated by pomologists.


         2. Diospyros texana Scheele. Black Persimmon. Chapote.

[Illustration: Fig. 731]

Leaves oblong-cuneate to obovate, rounded and often retuse at apex and
cuneate at base, covered below when they unfold with thick pale tomentum
and above with scattered long white hairs, and at maturity thick and
coriaceous, dark green and lustrous, glabrous or puberulous on the upper
surface, paler and pubescent on the lower surface, 3/4'--1-1/2' long and
nearly 1' wide, with a broad midrib and about 4 pairs of arcuate primary
veins and reticulate veinlets; unfolding in February and March, and
falling during the following winter without change of color; petioles
short, thick, and hairy. Flowers appearing in early spring when the
leaves are about one third grown, on branches of the previous year;
staminate on slender drooping pedicels furnished near the middle with
minute caducous bractlets, in 1--3-flowered crowded pubescent fascicles;
pistillate on stouter club-shaped pedicels, solitary or rarely in pairs;
calyx of the staminate flower 1/8' long and deeply divided into 5 ovate
or lanceolate silky-tomentose lobes recurved after the opening of the
flower, and much shorter than the corolla 1/8' long, creamy white, and
slightly contracted below the 5 short spreading rounded lobes ciliate on
the margins; stamens, with glabrous filaments shorter than the corolla,
and linear-lanceolate anthers opening at apex only by short slits;
pistillate flowers without rudimentary stamens, 1/3' long, with oblong
acute silky-tomentose calyx-lobes half the length of the pubescent
corolla nearly 1/2' across the short spreading lobes; ovary ovoid,
pubescent like the young fruit, ultimately 8-celled. Fruit ripening in
August, subglobose, 1/2'--1' in diameter, and 3--8-seeded, surrounded at
base by the large thickened leathery calyx sometimes 1' in diameter,
with oblong pubescent reflexed lobes, the thick tough black skin
inclosing thin sweet insipid juicy dark flesh; seeds triangular, rounded
on the back, narrowed and flattened at the pointed apex, 1/3' long,
about 1/8' thick, with a bony lustrous light red pitted coat.

An intricately branched tree, occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk
18'--20' in diameter, dividing at some distance above the ground into a
number of stout upright branches forming a narrow round-topped head, and
slender terete slightly zigzag branchlets, coated at first with pale or
rufous tomentum, ashy gray, glabrous or puberulous during their first
winter, later becoming brown and marked by minute pale lenticels and by
small elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars displaying a lunate row of
fibro-vascular bundle-scars; often much smaller, and toward the northern
and western limits of its range a low many-stemmed shrub. Winter-buds
obtuse, barely more than 1/16' long, with broad-ovate scales rounded on
the back and coated with rufous tomentum. Bark of the trunk smooth,
light gray slightly tinged with red, the outer layer falling away in
large irregularly shaped patches displaying the smooth gray inner bark.
Wood heavy, with black heartwood often streaked with yellow and clear
bright yellow sapwood; used in turnery and for the handles of tools. The
fruit, which is exceedingly austere until it is fully ripe, stains
black, and is sometimes used by Mexicans in the valley of the Rio Grande
to dye sheepskins.

Distribution. Southwestern Texas, Matagorda County (neighborhood of
Matagorda and Bay City) to the lower Rio Grande, and northward to San
Saba, Lampasas and Bexar Counties; in Coahuila, Nuevo Leon, and
Tamaulipas; possibly in southern Lower California; abundant in western
and southern Texas: in the neighborhood of the coast on the borders of
prairies in rich moist soil; westward on dry rocky mesas and in isolated
canyons; very common and of its largest size in the region between the
Sierra Madre and the coast of the Gulf of Mexico in Nuevo Leon and
Tamaulipas.




                            LVIII. STYRACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with stellate pubescence or lepidote, watery juice, and
scaly buds. Leaves alternate, simple, penniveined, without stipules.
Flowers regular, perfect; calyx more or less adnate to the tube of the
corolla; disk 0; anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; ovary superior or partly superior, crowned with a simple
style; ovules anatropous. Fruit drupaceous, with thin dry flesh, and a
thick-walled 1-seeded bony stone. Seeds, with albumen.

The Storax family is confined to North and South America, the
Mediterranean region, eastern Asia and the Malay Archipelago. Of the six
genera of this family two are represented in the flora of North America.


             CONSPECTUS OF THE GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Calyx adherent to the whole surface of the ovary; corolla 4-lobed.
        Fruit oblong-obovoid, 2 or 4-celled and 2 or 4-winged.
                                                             1. Halesia.
  Calyx adherent to the base only of the ovary; corolla usually
        5-parted. Fruit subglobose, 1-celled.
                                                              2. Styrax.




                    1. HALESIA L. SILVER BELL TREE.


Trees or shrubs, with stellate pubescence, slender terete pithy
branchlets, without a terminal bud, axillary buds with imbricated
accrescent scales, and fibrous roots. Leaves involute in the bud, thin,
elliptic, oblong-ovate or oblong-ovoid, denticulate, deciduous. Flowers
opening in early spring, on slender elongated drooping ebracteolate
pedicels from the axils of foliaceous acuminate or acute caducous
bracts, in fascicles or short racemes from the axils of leaves of the
previous year; calyx-tube obconic, adherent to the whole surface of the
ovary, the limb short, 4-toothed, with minute triangular teeth, open in
the bud; corolla epigynous, campanulate, 4-lobed, or divided nearly to
the base, the lobes convolute or imbricated in the bud, thin and white
or rarely tinged with rose; stamens 8--16; filaments elongated, shorter
than the corolla, slightly attached at base, or sometimes free,
flattened below; anthers oblong, adnate or free at the very base; ovary
2 or 4-celled, gradually contracted into an elongate glabrous or
tomentose style stigmatic at apex; ovules 4 in each cell, attached by
elongated funiculi at the middle of the axis, the 2 upper ascending, the
2 lower pendulous; raphe dorsal; micropyle inferior and superior. Fruit
ripening in the autumn, elongated, oblong or obovoid and gradually
narrowed at base; skin tough, separable, light green and lustrous,
turning reddish brown late in the autumn; exocarp indehiscent, thick,
becoming dry and corky at maturity, produced into 2 or 4 broad thin
wings cuneate at base and rounded at apex; stone bony, cylindric,
obovoid or ellipsoid, gradually narrowed at base into a slender stipe
inclosed in the wings, narrowed above and terminating in the enlarged
style protruding above the wings, usually obscurely and irregularly
8-angled or sulcate, 1--4-celled. Seed solitary in each cell, elongated,
cylindric; seed-coat thin, light brown, lustrous, adherent to the walls
of the stone, the delicate inner coat attached to the copious fleshy
albumen; embryo terete, axile, erect; cotyledons oblong, as long as the
elongated radicle turned toward the minute hilum.

Halesia is confined to the southeastern United States.

The generic name is in honor of Stephen Hales (1677--1761), an English
clergyman, author of "Vegetable Staticks."


            CONSPECTUS OF THE SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit 4-winged; flowers fascicled; corolla slightly lobed.
    Fruit oblong to slightly obovoid.
      Flowers hardly more than 1/2' long; fruit 1-1/2' in length.
                                                  1. H. carolina (A, C).
      Flowers 2' long; fruit up to 2' in length.
                                                    2. H. monticola (A).
    Fruit clavate; flowers usually not more than 1/4' long.
                                                   3. H. parviflora (C).
  Fruit 2-winged; flowers often racemose; corolla divided nearly to the
        base.
                                                      4. H. diptera (C).


                         1. Halesia carolina L.

                    _Mohrodendron carolinum_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 732]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-obovate, abruptly acuminate and long-pointed
at apex, gradually narrowed and rounded or cuneate at base, and dentate
with small remote callous teeth, slightly pubescent or covered below
when they unfold with thick hoary tomentum and densely
stellate-pubescent above (var. _mollis_ Perkins), and at maturity dark
yellow-green and glabrous on the upper surface, pale and glabrous or
slightly villose below on the slender yellow midrib and primary veins,
3'--4' long and 1-1/2'--2' wide, and on leading shoots up to 6'--7' in
length; turning yellow in the autumn before falling; petioles slender,
glabrous, pubescent or tomentose, early in the season, becoming nearly
glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers about 1/2' long, on glabrous or
densely or slightly villose pedicels 1/2'--3/4' in length, from the
axils of ovate caducous serrate glabrous or pubescent bracts rounded at
apex, in crowded fascicles; calyx obconic, glabrous, slightly pubescent
or hoary-tomentose (var. _mollis_ Lange), the lobes ciliate; corolla
narrowed below into a short tube, 3/4' across, sometimes faintly tinged
with rose, rarely divided nearly to the base (var. _dialypetala_ Schn.);
stamens 10--16; filaments villose with occasional white hairs; ovary
4-celled. Fruit oblong to oblong-obovate, 4-winged, 1-1/2' long,
1/2'--3/4' in diameter; stone ellipsoid to slightly obovoid, narrowed
below into a short stipe and above into the slender apex terminating in
the elongated persistent style, slightly angled, 1/2'--5/8' long,
usually 1-seeded by abortion; seed rounded at the narrow ends,
1/4'--1/3' long.

A round-headed tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with a short trunk often divided
near the ground into several spreading stems, and 12'--18' in diameter,
small branches, and slender branchlets glabrous or densely pubescent
early in the season, becoming slightly pubescent or nearly glabrous and
orange-brown, and marked by large obcordate leaf-scars during their
first winter and dark red-brown the following year; more often a shrub
with wide-spreading stems. Winter-buds ellipsoid to ovoid, 1/8' long,
with thick broad-ovate dark red acute puberulous scales rounded on the
back, those of the inner rows becoming strap-shaped, bright yellow and
sometimes 1/2' long. Bark of the trunk 1/2' thick, slightly ridged,
reddish brown, separating into thin closely appressed scales. Wood
light, soft, close-grained, light brown with thick lighter-colored
sapwood.

Distribution. Wooded slopes and the banks of streams, southern West
Virginia (Fayette and Summers Counties); Piedmont region of North and
South Carolina, ascending to altitudes of 2000 deg., through central Georgia
to western Florida, and through Alabama south to Dallas and Mount Vernon
Counties; the var. _mollis_ with the type and the more common form in
western Florida southward to Suwanee County. A seedling shrubby Halesia
(var. _Meehanii_ Perkins) with thicker smaller darker green rugose
leaves, smaller cup-shaped flowers on shorter pedicels, appeared many
years ago in the Meehan Nurseries at Germantown, Pennsylvania, and is
possibly a hybrid but of obscure origin.

Often cultivated in the eastern United States, in California and in
western and central Europe; hardy as far north as eastern Massachusetts.


                       2. Halesia monticola Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 733]

Leaves elliptic to oblong-obovate, abruptly acuminate at apex, cuneate
or occasionally rounded at base, remotely dentate with minute blunt
teeth, covered above when they unfold with short white hairs and below
with thick hoary tomentum, half-grown and pubescent on the midrib below
when the flowers open at the end of May, and at maturity thin, dark dull
green on the upper surface, pale on the lower surface, glabrous with the
exception of a few hairs on the lower side of the slender midrib and
primary veins, 8'--11' long and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide; turning yellow in
the autumn before falling; petioles slender, villose-pubescent when they
first appear, soon glabrous, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers 2' long on
pedicels 1/2'--1' in length, from the axils of obovate or elliptic acute
pubescent bracts 1/2'--3/4' long and 1/4' wide; calyx obconic, glabrous
or slightly villose-pubescent; corolla 1' in diameter, contracted below
into a short limb; stamens 10--16; filaments slightly villose toward the
base, ovary 4-celled. Fruit oblong-obovoid, cuneate at base, 4-winged,
1-3/4'--2' long, 1' in diameter; stone ovoid-ellipsoid, abruptly
narrowed below into a short stipe, gradually narrowed above into the
long apex, prominently angled about 1-1/4'--1-1/3' in length.

A tree, often 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a trunk 3 deg. in diameter and free of
branches for 50 deg.--60 deg., comparatively small spreading and erect branches
forming a round-topped head and slender branchlets covered when they
first appear with pale hairs, soon glabrous, lustrous, light red-brown
or orange-brown during their first winter and dark red-brown in their
second year. Winter-buds ovoid to ellipsoid, acuminate, much compressed,
gibbous on the back, the outer scales thick, slightly keeled on the
back, lustrous, bright red, 1/3' long. Bark of the trunk thick,
separating freely into long broad loosely attached red-brown plates
1/2'--3/4' thick.

Distribution. Mountain slopes at altitudes from 3000 deg.--4000 deg., western
North Carolina, eastern Tennessee and western Georgia; passing into the
var. _vestita_ Sarg., with leaves often rounded at base, coated below
and on the petioles when they unfold with snow-white tomentum, and at
maturity pubescent over the lower surface, especially on the midrib and
veins, and occasionally pale rose-colored flowers (f. _rosea_ Sarg.);
banks of streams, near Marion, McDowell County, North Carolina; Heber
Springs, Carroll County, Arkansas; occasionally cultivated with the var.
_vestita_ and hardy in the Arnold Arboretum and in Rochester, New York.

_Halesia monticola_ in cultivation grows rapidly with a single trunk;
and is hardy in eastern Massachusetts.


                      3. Halesia parviflora Michx.

[Illustration: Fig. 734]

Leaves oblong-ovate to slightly obovate or elliptic, abruptly
long-pointed or acuminate at apex, narrowed and cuneate or rounded at
base, finely serrate with minute glandular teeth, densely covered when
they unfold with hoary tomentum, becoming pubescent or glabrous,
2-1/2'--3-1/4' long and 1'--1-1/4' wide, with a slender midrib and
primary veins villose-pubescent below; petioles hoary-tomentose when
they first appear, becoming glabrous, 1/4'--1/3' in length. Flowers
opening the end of March or early in April, 1/4'--1/3' long, on pedicels
more or less densely villose-pubescent with white hairs, becoming nearly
glabrous, 1/3'--2/5' in length; calyx densely hoary-tomentose or rarely
villose-pubescent; corolla 1/3'--1/2' in diameter; stamens 10--16,
filaments slightly villose. Fruit ripening in August and September,
clavate, gradually narrowed into the long stipitate base, 3/4'--1-1/2'
long, 4-winged, the wings narrow, of equal width or occasionally with
the alternate wings narrower than the others; stone ovoid, abruptly
narrowed below into a short stipe, gradually narrowed to the apex,
obscurely angled, 3/4'--1-1/4' long.

A slender tree, 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a long trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
small light brown slightly ridged branches and slender branchlets
hoary-tomentose when they first appear, becoming pubescent or nearly
glabrous by the end of their first season and light gray-brown in their
second year; or a shrub only a few feet tall. Winter-buds ovoid, acute,
slightly compressed, villose, about 1/8' long. Bark of the trunk thick,
dark brown or nearly black, and divided by deep longitudinal furrows
into narrow rounded rough ridges.

Distribution. Northern Florida, in sandy uplands (St. John, Clay,
Jackson, Gadsden and Lafayette Counties); not common; Alabama (Lee
County); eastern Mississippi (Laurel, Jones County), and eastern
Oklahoma (near Page, Le Flore County).


                       4. Halesia diptera Ellis.

                     _Mohrodendron dipterum_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 735]

Leaves ovate to obovate, oval or elliptic, abruptly long-pointed or
rarely rounded at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate or rounded at
base, undulate-serrate with remote minute callous teeth, coated below
with pale tomentum and pubescent above when they unfold, and at maturity
thin, light green and glabrous or pubescent on the slender midrib on the
upper surface and paler and soft-pubescent on the lower surface, 3'--4'
long and 2'--2-1/2' wide, and at the end of vigorous branches up to 8'
long and 3' wide, with pale conspicuous arcuate veins and reticulate
veinlets; petioles slender, pubescent, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers
opening from the middle of March to the end of April, usually nearly 1'
long, on slender tomentose pedicels 1-1/2'--2' in length, from the axils
of obovate puberulous bracts rounded or acute at apex and 1/2'--3/4'
long, in few-flowered fascicles or in 4--6-flowered racemes; calyx
thickly covered with hoary tomentum, the short lobes nearly glabrous on
the inner surface; corolla puberulous on the outer surface, divided
nearly to the base into slightly obovate or oval spreading lobes;
stamens 8--16, usually 8, nearly as long as the corolla; filaments
covered with pale hairs, and sometimes free from the corolla; ovary
usually 2, rarely 4-celled and covered, like the style, with pale
pubescence. Fruit oblong to slightly obovoid, compressed, 1-1/2'--2'
long, often nearly 1' wide, with two broad wings and often with 2 or
rarely 3 narrow wings between them; stone ellipsoid, 1-1/2'--1-3/4'
long, conspicuously ridged, gradually narrowed below into the short
slender stipe and above into the thickened pubescent style; seed
acuminate at the ends, about 3/4' in length.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg. high, with a short or rarely a tall trunk
8'--10' in diameter, spreading branches forming a wide head and slender
branchlets light green and more or less thickly covered with pale
pubescence when they first appear, usually becoming glabrous, orange
color, or reddish brown, lustrous and marked by the large elevated
obcordate leaf-scars during their first winter, dark red-brown in their
second season and dividing the following year into irregular pale
longitudinal fissures; more often a shrub, with numerous stout spreading
stems. Winter-buds ovoid, obtuse, 1/16' long, with broad-ovate acute
light red pubescent scales, those of the inner ranks becoming
strap-shaped, scarious and 1/4' long. Bark of the trunk 1/3'--1/2'
thick, brown tinged with red, and divided by irregular longitudinal
often broad fissures, and separating into small thin closely appressed
scales. Wood light, soft, strong, close-grained, light brown with thick
lighter-colored sapwood.

Distribution. Low wet woods and the borders of swamps and streams; near
Savannah (_Elliott_) and in southwestern Georgia, western Florida (Leon
and Gadsden Counties), southern Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana to
the valley of the lower Neches River, Texas, and to southwestern
Arkansas (Miller County).

Occasionally cultivated in the gardens of the eastern United States and
western Europe. Doubtfully hardy in Massachusetts and western New York.




                              2. STYRAX L.


Trees or shrubs, lepidote or stellate-tomentose except on the upper
surface of the leaves, with slender terete slightly zigzag branchlets,
without a terminal bud, axillary buds, with imbricated scales, and
fibrous roots. Leaves involute in the bud, entire or slightly serrate.
Flowers usually white on short ebracteolate drooping pedicels from the
axils of small bracts, in simple or branched usually drooping axillary
racemes; calyx cup-shaped, adnate to the base of the ovary or nearly
free, the margin truncate, obscurely or conspicuously 5-toothed or
rarely 2 or 5-parted; corolla epigynous, campanulate, 5 or rarely 6 or
7-parted, with a short tube usually longer than the lanceolate oblong or
spatulate erect and spreading or revolute lobes valvate or imbricated in
the bud, stamens 8--13, usually 10, longer than the corolla slightly
united below into a ring or short tube; filaments flattened above; cells
of the anthers linear parallel, erect; ovary broad-conic, subglobose or
depressed, densely villose or rarely glabrous, at first 3-celled,
becoming 1-celled or nearly 1-celled after anthesis, crowned by a
subulate or thickened style terminating in a small indistinctly 3-lobed
or capitate stigma; ovules few or rarely solitary, ascending; raphe
dorsal, micropyle inferior. Fruit globose or slightly obovoid,
drupaceous; pericarp hard and indehiscent or irregularly 3-valved or
fleshy and irregularly dehiscent; endocarp glabrous, crustaceous or
indurate; seed 1 by abortion or very rarely 2, filling the cavity of the
stone, erect; testa membranaceous, mostly adherent to the walls of the
stone; albumen fleshy or rarely horny; cotyledons usually broad, the
elongated terete radicle turned toward the broad basal hilum.

Styrax is widely distributed in warm and tropical countries except in
tropical and south Africa and in Australasia, extending northward into
the southeastern United States and to California, southern Europe,
central and western China and central Japan. Of nearly one hundred
species which are now distinguished five are found within the territory
of the United States; one of these occasionally becomes a small tree.

Storax and benzoin, aromatic resinous balsams, are obtained from _Styrax
officinale_ L. of southern Europe and Asia Minor, and from _Styrax
Benzoin_ Dryand. of Malaysia.

The generic name is that of the Greek name of _Styrax officinale_.


                       1. Styrax grandiflora Ait.

[Illustration: Fig. 736]

Leaves thin, deciduous, obovate, rounded and abruptly pointed or acute
or acuminate or rarely rounded at apex, cuneate or rounded at the narrow
base, entire or remotely serrate with small apiculate teeth, when they
unfold ciliate on the margins, slightly stellate-pubescent on the midrib
and veins above, and coated below with hoary tomentum, and at maturity
pale green and glabrous or nearly glabrous above, pale tomentose and
villose on the midrib and veins below, 2-1/2'--5' long and 1'--3' wide;
petioles 1/4' in length, hoary-tomentose early in the season, becoming
pubescent. Flowers opening in early spring after the leaves are more
than half grown, 3/4'--1' long, on slender pubescent or tomentose
pedicels 1/4' in length, in tomentose leafy erect or spreading axillary
racemes 5' or 6' long, their bracts and bractlets linear, minute,
tomentose, caducous; calyx more or less coarsely 5-toothed,
membranaceous, tomentose on the outer surface; corolla 5-parted, the
lobes longer than the tube, imbricated in the bud, membranaceous,
oblong-obovate, rounded or acute at apex, stellate-pubescent on the
outer surface; stamens 10, about as long as the corolla,
villose-pubescent below the middle, united below into a short ring;
ovary slightly inferior, obovoid, tomentose, 3-celled; style filiform,
glabrous, exserted; ovules 3 or 4 in each cell. Fruit hoary-tomentose,
slightly obovoid, rounded and tipped at apex with the remnants of the
style, gradually narrowed and surrounded below by the calyx, 1/3' long,
and 1/4' in diameter, the outer coat crustaceous, indehiscent; seed
obovoid, dark orange-brown, filling the cavity of the fruit.

A tree, rarely 40 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk sometimes 8' in
diameter, short spreading branches forming a narrow round-topped head,
and slender branchlets thickly coated when they first appear with hoary
stellate pubescence more or less persistent during three seasons,
ultimately glabrous and light or dark chestnut-brown; more often a broad
shrub 6 deg.--20 deg. high. Bark of the trunk 1/3'--1/2' thick, close, smooth
and dark red-brown. Winter-buds: axillary, often 3, superposed, acute,
covered with hoary ultimately rusty tomentum, about 1/8' long.

Distribution. Low wet woods and the borders of swamps; southeastern
Virginia, southward usually near the coast to the valley of the
Apalachicola River, Florida, and through the Gulf states to western
Louisiana, ranging inland to northern Georgia, northeastern Mississippi,
and to the valley of the Red River at Natchitoches, Louisiana; of its
largest size and perhaps only arborescent near Laurel Hill, West
Feliciana Parish, Louisiana.




                           LIX. SYMPLOCACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with simple pubescence, watery juice, scaly buds, and
fibrous roots. Leaves simple, alternate, coriaceous or thin, pinnately
veined, usually becoming yellow in drying, without stipules. Flowers
regular, perfect, or polygamo-dioecious, on ebracteolate pedicels, in
dense or lax axillary spikes or racemes, with small caducous bracts;
calyx campanulate, 5-lobed, open in the bud, the tube adnate to the
ovary, enlarged after anthesis; corolla divided nearly to the base into
3--11 usually 5 lobes imbricated in the bud; disk 0; stamens usually
numerous, inserted in many series on the base of the corolla or rarely 4
in one series; filaments filiform or flattened, more or less united
below into clusters; anthers ovoid-globose, introrse, 2-celled, the
cells lateral, opening longitudinally; ovary inferior or partly
inferior, 2--5-celled, contracted into a simple style, with an entire or
slightly lobed terminal stigma; ovules 2 or rarely 4 in each cell,
suspended from its inner angle, anatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle
superior. Fruit a drupe (in the North American species), crowned with
the persistent lobes of the calyx, with thin dry flesh and a bony
1-seeded stone. Seed oblong, suspended; seed-coat membranaceous; embryo
terete, erect in copious fleshy albumen; cotyledons much shorter than
the long slender radicle turned toward the broad conspicuous hilum.

The family consists of the genus Symplocos.




                          1. SYMPLOCOS L'Her.


Characters of the family.

Symplocos with nearly three hundred species inhabits chiefly the warmer
parts of America, Asia, and Australia, one species occurring in the
southern United States.

Symplocos contains a yellow coloring matter, and the bark and leaves of
some species have medical properties.

The generic name, from {Symplokos}, relates to the union of the
filaments of some of the species.


         1. Symplocos tinctoria L'Her. Sweet Leaf. Horse Sugar.

[Illustration: Fig. 737]

Leaves revolute in the bud, oblong, acute or acuminate at apex,
gradually narrowed at base, obscurely crenulate-serrate with remote
teeth, or sometimes nearly entire, coated below when they unfold with
pale tomentum, glabrous or tomentose above, and furnished on the margins
with minute dark caducous glands, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark
green and lustrous on the upper surface, paler and pubescent on the
lower surface, 5'--6' long and 1'--2' wide, with a broad midrib rounded
and sometimes puberulous on the upper side, inconspicuous arcuate veins
and reticulate veinlets; northward and at high altitudes falling in the
autumn, and southward remaining on the branches until after the opening
of the flowers the following spring; petioles stout, slightly winged,
1/3'--1/2' in length. Flowers: flower-clusters inclosed in the bud by
ovate acute orange-colored scales brown and ciliate on the margins, each
of the flower-buds surrounded by 3 imbricated oblong bracts rounded or
pointed at apex and ciliate on the margins, the longest as long as the
calyx and one third longer than the 2 lateral bracts; flowers fragrant,
opening from the 1st of March at the south to the middle of May on the
southern Appalachian Mountains, on short pedicels enlarged into thick
hemispheric receptacles covered with long white hairs, in nearly sessile
many-flowered clusters in the axils of leaves of the previous year;
calyx oblong, cup-shaped, dark green and puberulous, with minute ovate
scarious lobes rounded at apex; corolla creamy white, 1/4' long, with
rounded lobes; stamens exserted, with slender filaments united at base
into 5 clusters, and orange-colored anthers; ovary 3-celled, furnished
on the top with 5 dark nectariferous glands placed opposite the lobes of
the calyx, and abruptly contracted into a slender style gradually
thickened toward the apex and longer than the corolla. Fruit ripening in
the summer or early autumn, ovoid, 1/4' long, dark orange-colored or
brown; seed ovoid, pointed, with a thin papery chestnut-brown coat.

A tree, occasionally 30 deg.--35 deg. high, with a short trunk barely exceeding
6'-8' in diameter, slender upright branches forming an open head, and
stout terete pithy branchlets light green and coated with pale or rufous
tomentum when they first appear, or sometimes glabrous, and covered with
scattered white hairs, reddish brown to ashy gray, tinged with red and
usually more or less pubescent or often covered with a glaucous bloom
during their first and second years, later growing darker, roughened by
occasional small elevated lenticels and marked by the low horizontal
obcordate leaf-scars displaying a central cluster of large
fibro-vascular bundle-scars; or more often a shrub. Winter-buds ovoid,
acute, covered with broad-ovate nearly triangular acute scales, those of
the inner rows accrescent on the young branchlets, and at maturity
oblong-obovate, rounded and often apiculate at apex, light green,
glabrous or pilose, ciliate on the margins, and often 1/2' in length.
Bark of the trunk 1/3'--1/2' thick, ashy gray slightly tinged with red,
divided by occasional narrow fissures and roughened by wart-like
excrescences. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light red or brown, with
thick lighter colored often nearly white sapwood of 18--20 layers of
annual growth. The leaves are sweet to the taste and are devoured in the
autumn by cattle and horses, and, like the bark, yield a yellow dye
occasionally used domestically. The bitter aromatic roots have been used
as a tonic.

Distribution. Moist rich soil, often in the shade of dense forests;
peninsula of Delaware to northern Florida and from the coast to
altitudes of nearly 4000 deg. on the Blue Ridge in North and South Carolina,
and to eastern Texas and southern Arkansas; in the Gulf states usually
along the borders of Cypress-swamps.




                              LX. OLEACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, scaly buds, their inner scales
accrescent, opposite leaves, without stipules, and fibrous roots.
Flowers perfect, dioecious or polygamous, regular; calyx 4-lobed, or 0;
corolla of 2--4 petals, or 0; disk 0; stamens 2--4, rudimentary or 0 in
unisexual pistillate flowers; anthers attached on the back below the
middle, often apiculate by the prolongation of the connective, introrse,
2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally usually by lateral slits;
ovary free, 2 or rarely 3-celled, rudimentary or 0 in the staminate
flower; style simple; ovules 2 in each cell, pendulous, anatropous;
micropyle superior. Fruit (in the North American arborescent genera) a
samara or berry. Seed pendulous; seed-coat membranaceous; embryo
straight in copious fleshy albumen; cotyledons flat, much longer than
the short terete superior radicle turned toward the minute hilum.

The Olive family with twenty-five genera is widely distributed in
temperate and tropical regions chiefly in the northern hemisphere. Of
the five genera indigenous to the United States four are arborescent. To
this family belong _Olea europaea_ L., the Olive-tree of the
Mediterranean basin, now largely cultivated in California for its fruit,
and the Lilacs, Forsythias, Privets, and Jasmines, favorite garden
plants in all countries with temperate climates.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit a winged samara; leaves usually compound.
                                                            1. Fraxinus.
  Fruit a drupe; leaves simple.
    Flowers usually without petals.
                                                          2. Forestiera.
    Flowers with petals.
      Corolla of 4 long linear petals united only at base; leaves
            deciduous.
                                                         3. Chionanthus.
      Corolla tubular; leaves persistent.
                                                           4. Osmanthus.




                          1. FRAXINUS L. Ash.


Trees or shrubs, with thick furrowed or rarely thin and scaly bark,
usually ash-colored branchlets, with thick pith, and compressed obtuse
terminal buds much larger than the lateral buds. Leaves petiolate,
unequally pinnate or rarely reduced to a single leaflet, deciduous;
leaflets conduplicate in the bud, usually serrate, petiolulate or
sessile. Flowers dioecious or polygamous, produced in early spring on
slender elongated pedicels, without bractlets, in open or compact
slender-branched panicles, with obovate linear or lanceolate caducous
bracts, terminal on leafy shoots of the year, developed from the axils
of new leaves, or from separate buds in the axils of leaves of the
previous year, or at the base of young branchlets, and covered by 2
ovate scales; calyx campanulate, deciduous or persistent under the
fruit, or 0; corolla 2--4-parted, the divisions conduplicate in the bud,
united at base, or 0; stamens usually 2, rarely 3 or 4, inserted on the
base of the corolla, or hypogynous; filaments terete, short or rarely
elongated; anthers ovoid or linear-oblong, the cells opening by lateral
slits; ovary 2 or rarely 3-celled, contracted into a short or elongated
style terminating in a 2-lobed stigma; ovules suspended in pairs from
the inner angle of the cell; raphe dorsal. Fruit a 1 or rarely 2 or
3-seeded winged samara; body terete or slightly flattened contrary to
the septum, with a dry or woody pericarp produced into an elongated more
or less decurrent wing, usually 1-celled by abortion or sometimes 2 or
3-celled and winged. Seed solitary in each cell, oblong, compressed,
gradually narrowed and rounded at the ends, filling the cavity of the
fruit; seed-coat chestnut-brown.

Fraxinus with thirty to forty species is widely distributed in the
temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, and within the tropics
occurs on the islands of Cuba and Java. Of the eighteen North American
species here recognized all, with the exception of _Fraxinus dipetala_
Hook., of California, are large or small trees.

Fraxinus produces tough straight-grained valuable wood, and some of the
species are large and important timber-trees. The waxy exudations from
the trunk and leaves of _Fraxinus Ornus_ L., of southern Europe and Asia
Minor furnish the manna of commerce used in medicine as a gentle
laxative; and the Chinese white wax is obtained from the branches of
_Fraxinus chinensis_ Roxb.

_Fraxinus_ is the classical name of the Ash-tree.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Flowers with a corolla, in terminal panicles on lateral leafy
        branchlets of the year; leaflets 3--7, lanceolate to
        ovate-lanceolate (Ornus).
                                                 1. F. cuspidata (E, H).
  Flowers without a corolla, dioecious or polygamous, in axillary
        panicles, from separate buds, in the axils of leaves of the
        previous year (Fraxinastrum).
    Flowers with a calyx.
      Leaflets with obscure veins, not more than 3/4' long; fruit
            narrow-spatulate to oblong-obovate; rachis slightly winged.
                                                      2. F. Greggii (E).
      Leaflets with distinct veins, more than 3/4' long; rachis without
            a wing.
        Body of the fruit compressed, its wing extending to the base.
          Branchlets 4-sided.
            Leaves usually 5-foliolate, with ovate acute leaflets;
                  flowers unknown.
                                                     3. F. Lowellii (F).
            Leaves usually reduced to a single ovate or orbicular
                  leaflet; flowers polygamous.
                                                      4. F. anomala (F).
          Branchlets terete.
            Leaflets 5--7, oblong-ovate; fruit oblong-elliptic to
                  spatulate, often 3-winged, long-stipitate.
                                               5. F. caroliniana (A, C).
            Leaflets 3--5, oblong; fruit lanceolate to oblanceolate, the
                  body extending to the base of the fruit.
                                                   6. F. pauciflora (C).
        Body of the fruit nearly terete.
          Wing of the fruit terminal or slightly decurrent on the body.
            Leaves and branchlets glabrous (_tomentose in one form of
                  7_).
              Leaflets sessile or nearly sessile 5--7 rarely 5, ovate to
                    oblong-ovate, rarely elliptic, acute or
                    short-acuminate, glaucescent below.
                                                    7. F. Standleyi (H).
              Leaflets stalked.
                Leaflets 5--7, ovate to lanceolate, abruptly pointed or
                      acuminate, usually pale below.
                                                 8. F. americana (A, C).
                Leaflets usually 5, ovate to obovate, rounded or acute
                      at apex.
                                                     9. F. texensis (C).
            Leaves and branches pubescent; leaflets oblong-ovate to
                  lanceolate, pale below; fruit linear-oblong.
                                              10. F. biltmoreana (A, C).
          Wing of the fruit decurrent to below the middle of the body.
            Leaflets 7--9, usually 7; leaves and branches pubescent
                  (_glabrous in one form of 12_).
              Fruit 2'--3' in length.
                                                 11. F. profunda (A, C).
              Fruit 1'--2-1/2' in length.
                                            12. F. pennsylvanica (A, E).
            Leaflets 3--5.
              Leaves and branchlets glabrous; fruit up to 1-1/2' in
                    length.
                                           13. F. Berlandieriana (C, E).
              Leaves and branchlets pubescent or glabrous; fruit not
                    more than 1/2' in length.
                                                 14. F. velutina (F, H).
            Leaflets 5--7, usually 7, the lateral generally sessile;
                  leaves and branchlets pilose-pubescent, rarely
                  glabrous.
                                                  15. F. oregona (B, G).
    Flowers without a calyx; leaflets 5--11; wing of the fruit decurrent
          to the base of the body.
      Branchlets quadrangular; lateral leaflets short-stalked.
                                            16. F. quadrangulata (A, C).
      Branchlets terete; lateral leaflets sessile.
                                                    17. F. nigra (A, C).


                      1. Fraxinus cuspidata Torr.

[Illustration: Fig. 738]

Leaves 5'--7' long, with a slender pale petiole sometimes slightly
wing-margined, and 3--7 lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate long-stalked
leaflets gradually narrowed at apex into a long slender point, cuneate
at base nearly entire or coarsely and remotely serrate above the middle
with recurved teeth (var. _serrata_ Rehd.), or with 3--5, rarely
7-foliolate leaves, with broader often ovate entire leaflets
occasionally with simple leaves at the base of the branchlets (var.
_macropetala_ Rehd.); slightly puberulous when they unfold on the lower
surface, and at maturity thin, dark green above, paler below,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and 1/4'--3/4' wide, with a pale midrib and obscure
veins; petiolules slender, sometimes nearly 1' in length. Flowers
perfect, extremely fragrant, appearing in April, in open glabrous
panicles 3'--4' long and broad, terminal on lateral leafy branchlets
developed from the axils of leaves of the previous year, calyx
cup-shaped, 1/16' long, with acute apiculate attenuate teeth of unequal
length, deciduous, corolla 2/3' long, thin and white, divided to below
the middle into 4 linear-oblong lobes pointed at apex, and much longer
than the nearly sessile oblong long-pointed anthers ovary 2-celled, with
a thick 2-lobed nearly sessile stigma. Fruit elliptic to oblong-obovate,
1' long and 1/4' wide, the wing round and slightly emarginate at apex,
and decurrent nearly to the base of the flat nerveless longer body.

A tree, rarely 20 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--8' in diameter, and
slender terete branchlets light red-brown when they first appear, soon
becoming darker and marked by scattered pale lenticels and ashy gray and
roughened by the dark elevated lunate leaf-scars in their second year;
more often a shrub or small shrubby tree, with numerous slender
spreading stems 6 deg.--8 deg. tall. Winter-buds: terminal acute, nearly 1/2'
long, with dark reddish brown glutinous scales.

Distribution. Rocky slopes and dry ridges; Western Texas, valley of the
Rio Grande (mouth of Devil's River, Valverde County) to the Chisos
Mountains, and in southern New Mexico; in Coahuila, Nuevo Leon and
Chihuahua; the var. _macropetala_ in canyons of northern Arizona; the
var. _serrata_ (fig. 738) in Coahuila.


                      2. Fraxinus Greggii A. Gray.

[Illustration: Fig. 739]

Leaves 1-1/2'--3' long, with a winged petiole and rachis, and 3--7
narrow spatulate to oblong-obovate leaflets entire or crenately serrate
above the middle with remote teeth, a slender midrib, and obscure
reticulate veins, thick and coriaceous, dark green on the upper surface
rather paler and covered with small black dots on the lower surface,
1/2'--3/4' long, 1/8'--1/4' wide, and nearly sessile. Flowers perfect or
unisexual, on slender pedicels 1/8'--1/4' long, from the axils of ovate
acuminate rusty-pubescent bracts, in pubescent panicles 1/2'--3/4' in
length; calyx campanulate, scarious; stamens 1 or 2, filaments longer
than the calyx, anthers declinate, nearly 1/8' long; ovary broad-ovate,
rounded at apex, longer than the calyx, the short style terminating in
large reflexed stigmatic lobes. Fruit narrow-spathulate to
oblong-obovate, 1/2'--2/3' long and about 1/4' wide, the thin wing
decurrent on the short terete body, rounded and emarginate at apex and
tipped with the elongated persistent conspicuous style.

A tree, rarely 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk 8 deg.--10 deg. long and occasionally
8' in diameter, and slender terete branchlets dark green and puberulous
when they first appear, soon becoming ashy gray and roughened by
numerous minute pale elevated lenticels, gradually turning dark gray, or
brown in their second and third years; more often a shrub, with numerous
slender erect stems 4 deg.--12 deg. tall. Winter-buds: terminal, about 1/8'
long, obtuse, with thick ovate light brown pubescent scales rounded on
the back. Bark of the trunk thin, gray or light brown tinged with red,
separating on the surface into large papery scales. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, brown, with thick lighter-colored sapwood.

Distribution. Western Texas, along rocky beds of streams and deep
ravines, Valverde County (near Devil's River, Del Rio and Comstock); on
the mountains of northeastern Mexico; apparently most common and of its
largest size on the Sierra Nevada of Nuevo Leon.


                       3. Fraxinus Lowellii Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 740]

Leaves 3-1/2'--6' long, with a stout glabrous or slightly villose
petiole, and 5 or rarely 3 ovate stalked leaflets, acuminate and
long-pointed, acute or rarely rounded at apex, cuneate at base, serrate,
often only above the middle, with small remote teeth, yellow-green,
glabrous, or puberulous along the midrib above, glabrous or rarely
sparingly villose near the base of the slender pale midrib below,
2-1/4'--3' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with thin primary veins arching and
united near the slightly thickened and revolute margins; on vigorous
shoots occasionally 1-foliolate with a broad-ovate or semiorbicular
leaflet. Flowers unknown. Fruit ripening in July, in long glabrous
panicles, oblong-obovate to oblong-elliptic, surrounded at base by the
minute slightly dentate calyx, 1'--1-1/2' long, 1/4'--1/3' wide, the
wing broad or gradually narrowed and rounded, and often emarginate at
apex and extending to the base of the thin compressed many-rayed body
about three-quarters the length of the fruit.

A tree, 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with dark deeply furrowed bark, stout
quadrangular often winged branchlets orange-brown in their first season
and dark gray-brown the following year.

Distribution. Arizona, rocky slopes of Oak Creek Canyon about twenty
miles south of Flagstaff, Coconino County, and in Copper Canyon, west of
Camp Verde, Yavapai County.


                      4. Fraxinus anomala S. Wats.

[Illustration: Fig. 741]

Leaves mostly reduced to a single leaflet but occasionally 2 or
3-foliolate, the leaflets broad-ovate or orbicular, rounded or acute or
rarely obcordate at apex, cuneate or cordate at base, and entire, or
sparingly crenately serrate above the middle, covered above when they
unfold with short pale hairs and pubescent beneath, and at maturity thin
but rather coriaceous, dark green above, paler below, 1-1/2'--2' long
and 1'--2' wide, or when more than one much smaller, with a broad rather
conspicuous midrib and obscure veins, and when solitary raised on a
stout grooved petiole rusty-pubescent early in the season, becoming
glabrous, and often 1-1/2' long, or short-petiolulate in the compound
leaves. Flowers appearing when the leaves are about two thirds grown, in
short compact pubescent panicles, with strap-shaped or lanceolate acute
bracts 1/2' long and covered with thick brown villose tomentum, perfect
or unisexual by the abortion of the stamens, the 2 forms occurring in
the same panicle; calyx cup-shaped, minutely 4-toothed; anthers
linear-oblong, orange colored, raised on slender filaments nearly as
long as the stout columnar style. Fruit obovate, 1/2' long, the wing
rounded and often deeply emarginate at apex, surrounding the short
flattened striately nerved body, and 1/3' wide.

A tree, 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a short trunk 6'--7' in diameter, stout
contorted branches forming a round-topped head, and branchlets at first
quadrangular, dark green tinged with red and covered with pale
pubescence, orange colored and puberulous in their first winter and
marked by elevated pale lenticels and narrow lunate leaf-scars, and in
their second or third year terete and ashy gray; often a low shrub, with
numerous spreading stems. Winter-buds: terminal broad-ovoid, acuminate
or obtuse, covered with thick orange-colored tomentum, and 1/8'--1/4'
long. Bark of the trunk dark brown slightly tinged with red, 1/4' thick
and divided by shallow fissures into narrow ridges separating into small
thin appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, light brown,
with thick lighter colored sapwood of 30--50 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. In the neighborhood of streams; valley of the McElmo
River, southwestern Colorado; Carriso Mountains, San Juan County,
northwestern New Mexico; northeastern (Apache County), and the Grand
Canyon of the Colorado River, Coconino County, Arizona; southern Utah to
the Charleston Mountains, southwestern Nevada and adjacent California
(Inyo County).


          5. Fraxinus caroliniana Mill. Water Ash. Swamp Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 742]

Leaves 7'--12' long, with an elongated stout terete pale petiole, and
5--7 long-stalked ovate to oblong acute or acuminate leaflets rarely
rounded at apex, cuneate or sometimes rounded or subcordate at base, and
coarsely serrate with acute incurved teeth, or entire, pilose above and
more or less hoary-tomentose below when they unfold, and at maturity
thick and firm, 3'--6' long and 2'--3' wide, dark green above, paler or
sometimes yellow-green and glabrous or pubescent (var. _Rehderiana_
Sarg.) beneath, particularly along the conspicuous midrib and the
numerous arcuate veins connected by obscure reticulate veinlets. Flowers
dioecious, appearing in February and March in short or ultimately
elongated panicles inclosed in the bud by chestnut-brown pubescent
scales; staminate flower with a minute or nearly obsolete calyx, and 2
or sometimes 4 stamens, with slender filaments and linear apiculate
anthers; calyx of the pistillate flower cup-shaped, deeply divided and
laciniate, as long as the ovary gradually narrowed into an elongated
slender style. Fruit elliptic to oblong-obovate, frequently 3-winged,
surrounded at base by the persistent calyx, 2' long, 1/3'--3/4' wide,
often marked on the 2 faces by a conspicuous impressed midvein, the body
short, compressed, and surrounded by the broad thin many-nerved
sometimes bright violet-colored wing, acute or acuminate, or rounded and
emarginate at apex and usually narrowed below into a stalk-like base.

A tree, rarely more than 40 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 12' in
diameter, small branches forming a narrow often round-topped head, and
slender terete branchlets light green and glabrous or tomentose when
they first appear, light brown tinged with red and sometimes covered
with a glaucous bloom or rarely pubescent or tomentose (var.
_Rehderiana_ Sarg.) in their first winter, becoming in their second year
light gray or yellow, occasionally marked by large pale lenticels, and
by the elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars displaying a short row of
conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds: terminal, 1/8'
long, with 3 pairs of ovate acute chestnut-brown puberulous scales,
those of the outer rank thickened at base, rounded on the back, and
shorter than the others. Bark of the trunk 1/16'--1/8' thick, light
gray, more or less marked by large irregularly shaped round patches, and
separating on the surface into small thin closely appressed scales. Wood
light, soft, weak, close-grained, nearly white sometimes tinged with
yellow, with thick lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Deep river swamps inundated during several months of the
year, usually under the shade of larger trees, or rarely in drier
ground; coast region of the Atlantic and Gulf states, valley of the
Potomac River, Virginia, near Washington, D.C., to Florida southward to
Lake County and on the west coast to the valley of the lower
Apalachicola River, and to the valley of the Neches River (Beaumont,
Jefferson County), Texas, and northward through western Louisiana to
southwestern (Malvern, Hot Springs County) Arkansas; east of the
Mississippi River occasionally appearing in isolated stations remote
from the coast (Anson County, North Carolina, _C. L. Boynton_, Pike
County, Georgia, _R. H. Harper_, Forest County, Mississippi, _T. G.
Harbison_); in Cuba.


                6. Fraxinus pauciflora Nutt. Water Ash.

                       _Fraxinus floridana_ Sarg.

[Illustration: Fig. 743]

Leaves 5'--9' long, with an elongated stout terete petiole, and 3--7,
usually 5, elliptic to oblong-obovate or ovate leaflets, acuminate or
rarely abruptly pointed at apex, gradually narrowed and rounded at the
often unsymmetric base, finely or coarsely serrate, scurfy-pubescent
above and hoary-tomentose below when they unfold, and at maturity thick
and firm, dark green and glabrous or puberulous on the upper surface and
more or less tomentose on the lower surface, 3'--4' long and 1'--1-1/4'
wide, with a slender midrib, and thin primary veins arcuate and united
within the thickened revolute margins; petiolules of the lateral
leaflets 1/4'--1/2' long, much shorter than those of the terminal
leaflet. Flowers dioecious, appearing late in February or early in
March, in elongated panicles inclosed in the bud by chestnut-brown
pubescent scales; staminate flower composed of an annular disk and 2 or
3 stamens, with short filaments and apiculate anthers; calyx of the
pistillate flower cup-shaped, slightly lobed, as long as the ovary
gradually narrowed into the slender style. Fruit oblong to lanceolate or
oblanceolate, surrounded at base by the persistent calyx, 1'--2' long,
1/4'--1/2' wide, marked on each of the 2 faces by a broad impressed
midvein, the body near the base of the many-nerved wing narrowed,
rounded, and emarginate at apex.

A tree, 30 deg.--40 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes 12' in diameter, small
spreading branches, and slender terete branchlets light orange-brown and
occasionally marked by large pale lenticels during their first season,
ashy gray and roughened the following year by the large horizontal
obcordate elevated leaf-scars displaying a central ring of
fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds terminal, broad-ovoid, acute,
rusty-pubescent, about 1/4' long. Bark of the trunk 1/16'--1/8' thick,
light gray, and broken on the surface into small thin closely appressed
scales.

Distribution. Deep swamps; valleys of the St. Mary's and Flint Rivers
(Albany), southern Georgia; Florida, near Jacksonville, Duval County,
valley of the Caloosahatchee River, and Bonita Springs, Lee County, to
the shores of Lake Okeechobee, and in the valley of the lower
Apalachicola River; most abundant in southern Florida.


                      7. Fraxinus Standleyi Rehd.

[Illustration: Fig. 744]

Leaves 5'--7' long, with a slender glabrous petiole flattened, or
slightly concave on the upper side, and 7--9 ovate to oblong-ovate
rarely elliptic leaflets, acute or short-acuminate or rarely rounded at
apex, broad-cuneate at base, slightly and irregularly serrate,
yellow-green and glabrous above, glaucescent, slightly reticulate,
minutely punctulate, glabrous or slightly villose on the slender midrib
below, or rarely closely villose over the entire lower surface,
1-1/2'--2-1/2' long and 1'--2' wide, with usually 5--7 primary veins,
the terminal leaflet raised on a petiolule up to 1/2' long, the lateral
short-petiolulate, or nearly sessile. Flowers not seen. Fruit ripening
in September, on slender pedicels, in glabrous panicles 3'--5' long,
oblong-obovate, acute, rarely obtuse and occasionally emarginate at
apex, surrounded at base by the minute calyx deeply divided into
acuminate lobes, 3/4'--1-1/2' long and 1/6'--1/4' wide, the wing
decurrent nearly to the middle of the subterete or slightly compressed
ellipsoid or oblong body.

A tree, sometimes 30 deg. high, usually smaller, with a trunk only a few
inches in diameter, and slender terete glabrous branches orange-brown or
rarely on vigorous shoots dark red-brown and lustrous. Winter-buds:
terminal ovoid, gradually narrowed and acute at apex, 1/3' long.

Distribution. Mountain canyons at altitudes of 5500 deg.--8000 deg.; New Mexico
(Lincoln, Grant and Luna Counties); Arizona (Cochise, Pima and Coconino
Counties); on the San Jose Mountains, Sonora, at an altitude of 7200 deg.;
passing into var. _lasia_ Rehd. with branchlets, lower surface of the 7
leaflets and petioles densely tomentose; in Oak Creek and Sycamore
canyons south of Flagstaff, Coconino County, at Fort Apache, Navajo
County, on the White Mountains, Graham County, and on the Chiricahua
Mountains, Cochise County, Arizona; and near Santa Rita, Grant County,
New Mexico. A single plant, possibly a shrub, of the Mexican _Fraxinus
papilosa_ Ling. differing chiefly from _F. Standleyi_ in the glaucous
papillose under surface of the leaves, has been seen at an altitude of
6750 deg. on the west sides of the San Luis Mountains, Grant County, New
Mexico.


                  8. Fraxinus americana L. White Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 745]

Leaves 8'--12' long, with a stout grooved petiole, and 5--9, usually 7,
ovate to oblanceolate or oval, often falcate abruptly pointed or
acuminate leaflets, cuneate or rounded at base, crenulate-serrate or
nearly entire, thin but firm, dark green above, pale or light green and
glabrous or slightly pubescent below, or rarely thicker, lanceolate,
long-acuminate, entire, glabrous and silvery white below (var.
_crassifolia_ Sarg.), 3'--5' long and 1-1/2'--3' wide, with a broad
midrib, and numerous conspicuous veins arcuate near the margins; falling
early in the autumn after turning on some individuals deep purple and on
others clear bright yellow; petiolules 1/4'--1/2' or that of the
terminal leaflet up to 1' in length. Flowers dioecious, opening before
the leaves late in the spring, in compact ultimately elongated glabrous
panicles from buds covered with dark ovate scales rounded at apex and
slightly keeled on the back; calyx campanulate, slightly 4-lobed in the
staminate flower, and deeply lobed or laciniately cut in the pistillate
flower; stamens 2 or occasionally 3, with short stout filaments, and
large oblong-ovate apiculate anthers at first nearly black, later
becoming reddish purple; ovary contracted into a long slender style
divided into 2 spreading dark purple stigmatic lobes. Fruit rarely
deeply tinged with purple (f. _iodocarpa_ Fern.), 1'--2-1/2' long and
usually about 1/4' wide, or sometimes not more than 1/2' long (var.
_microcarpa_ A. Gray), in crowded clusters 6'--8' in length, lanceolate
or oblanceolate, surrounded at base by the persistent calyx, the wing
pointed or emarginate at apex and terminal or slightly decurrent on the
terete body.

A tree, sometimes 120 deg. high, with a tall massive trunk 5 deg.--6 deg. in
diameter, stout upright or spreading branches forming in the forest a
narrow crown, or with sufficient space a round-topped or pyramidal head,
and thick terete branchlets dark green or brown tinged with red and
covered with scattered pale caducous hairs when they first appear, soon
becoming light orange color or ashy gray and marked by pale lenticels,
becoming in their first winter gray or light brown, lustrous, often
covered with a glaucous bloom and roughened by the large pale
semiorbicular leaf-scars displaying near the margins a line of
conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds: terminal
broad-ovoid, obtuse, with 4 pairs of scales, those of the outer pair
ovate, acute, apiculate, conspicuously keeled on the back, nearly black,
slightly puberulous, about one half the length of the scales of the
second pair rather shorter than those of the third pair, lengthening
with the young shoots, and at maturity oblong-ovate, narrowed and
rounded at apex, keeled, 1/2' long, and rusty-pubescent, the scales of
the inner pair becoming 2/3' long, ovate, pointed, keeled, sometimes
slightly pinnatifid, green tinged with brown toward the apex, covered
with pellucid dots and very lustrous. Bark of the trunk 1'--3' thick,
dark brown or gray tinged with red, and deeply divided by narrow
fissures into broad flattened ridges separating on the surface into thin
appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, strong, close-grained, tough, and
brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood; used in large quantities in
the manufacture of agricultural implements, for the handles of tools, in
carriage-building, for oars and furniture, and in the interior finish of
buildings; the most valuable of the American species as a timber-tree.

Distribution. Common in rich rather moist soil on low hills, and in the
neighborhood of streams; Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, southern Quebec and
Ontario and the southern peninsula of Michigan, and westward and
southward to eastern Minnesota, central Iowa, southeastern Nebraska,
eastern Kansas, and northern Oklahoma to the valley of the Salt Fork of
the Arkansas River in Woods County (near Alva, _G. W. Stevens_), and to
Florida to Taylor County and the valley of the lower Apalachicola River,
and through the Gulf states to the valley of the Trinity River, Texas;
of its largest size on the bottom-lands of the basin of the lower Ohio
River; southward and west of the Mississippi River less common and of
smaller size; on the Appalachian Mountains up to altitudes of 3800 deg.; the
var. _crassifolia_ at Mt. Victory, Harding County, Ohio, Campbell,
Dunklin County, Missouri, and near Texarkana, Bowie County, Texas.

Often planted in the eastern states as a shade and ornamental tree, and
occasionally in western and northern Europe.

A form with the wing of the fruit extending nearly to the middle of the
body distinguished as _Fraxinus Smallii_ Britt. has the appearance of a
hybrid between _F. americana_ and _F. pennsylvanica_ var. _lanceolata_;
individuals of this form have been found near McGuire's Mill, on the
Yellow River, Guinnett County, Georgia; near Rochester, Munroe County,
New York; and near Lake Wingra, Dane County, Wisconsin.


                9. Fraxinus texensis Sarg. Mountain Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 746]

Leaves 5'--8' long, with a long slender terete petiole, and 5 or
occasionally 7 usually long-stalked ovate broad-oval or obovate
leaflets, rounded or acute, or often abruptly pointed at apex, cuneate,
rounded or slightly cordate at base, and coarsely crenulate-serrate,
chiefly above the middle, light green slightly tinged with red and
pilose with occasional pale caducous hairs when they unfold, and at
maturity thick and firm, glabrous, dark green on the upper surface, pale
on the lower surface, 1'--3' long and 3/4'--2' wide, and occasionally
furnished below with tufts of long white hairs at the base of the broad
midrib, and in the axils of the numerous conspicuous veins forked near
the margins and connected by coarse reticulate veinlets; petiolules
slender, 1/4'--1/2' and on the terminal leaflet up to 1' in length.
Flowers dioecious, appearing in March as the leaves begin to unfold, in
compact glabrous panicles from the axils of leaves of the previous year,
and covered in the bud by ovate rounded orange-colored scales; staminate
flower composed of a minute or nearly obsolete 4-lobed calyx and 2
stamens, with short filaments and linear-oblong light purple apiculate
anthers; calyx of the female flower deep cup-shaped, and divided to the
base into 4 acute lobes; ovary gradually narrowed into a long slender
style. Fruit in short compact clusters, spatulate to oblong, surrounded
at base by the persistent calyx, 1/2'--1' long and 1/8'--1/4' wide, the
wing rounded or occasionally emarginate at apex, and terminal on the
short terete many-rayed body; very rarely with 3 or 4 wings extending to
the base of the fruit.

A tree, rarely 50 deg. high, with a short trunk occasionally 2 deg.--3 deg. in
diameter, thick spreading often contorted branches, and stout terete
branchlets dark green tinged with red and slightly puberulous when they
first appear, becoming light yellow-brown or light orange color during
the summer, and in their first winter light brown marked by remote
oblong pale lenticels and by large elevated lunate leaf-scars displaying
a row of conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and dark or reddish
brown in their second or third season; usually much smaller.
Winter-buds: terminal acute, with 3 pairs of scales, those of the first
pair broad-ovate, rounded at the apex, dark orange color, pilose toward
the base, and rather shorter than the ovate rounded scales of the second
pair coated with rufous tomentum and becoming 1/2' long or about one
half the length of the linear strap-shaped scales of the inner pair
truncate or emarginate at the apex and orange color. Bark of the trunk
1/2'--3/4' thick, dark gray and deeply divided by narrow fissures into
broad scaly ridges. Wood heavy, hard, strong, light brown, with thin
lighter colored sapwood; valued as fuel and occasionally used for
flooring.

Distribution. Texas, high dry limestone bluffs and ridges, in the
neighborhood of Dallas, Dallas County, and Fort Worth, Tarrant County,
to the valley of the Colorado River near Austin, Travis County, and over
the Edwards Plateau to Bandera, Kerr, Edwards and Palo Pinto Counties.

Hardy in the Arnold Arboretum.


                    10. Fraxinus biltmoreana Beadl.

[Illustration: Fig. 747]

Leaves 10'--12' long, with a stout pubescent or puberulous petiole, and
7--9 oblong-ovate to ovate-lanceolate or oval often falcate entire or
obscurely toothed leaflets acuminate at apex, rounded or cuneate and
often inequilateral at base, yellow-bronze color and nearly glabrous
above, coated beneath, particularly on the midrib and veins, with long
white hairs when they unfold, and at maturity 3'--6' long, 1-1/2'--2'
wide, thick and firm in texture, dark green and slightly lustrous on the
upper surface, pale, or glaucous and puberulous on the lower surface and
villose along the slender yellow midrib, and primary veins arcuate near
the slightly thickened and incurved margins; petiolules pubescent,
1/4'--1/2' or that of the terminal leaflet up to 2' in length. Flowers
dioecious, appearing with the leaves about the 1st of May, in a rather
compact pubescent panicle, with scarious caducous bracts and bractlets;
staminate flower with a minute cup-shaped very obscurely dentate calyx
and nearly sessile oblong acute anthers; calyx of the pistillate flower
much larger and deeply lobed; ovary oblong, gradually narrowed into the
slender style divided at apex into 2 short stigmatic lobes. Fruit
linear-oblong, in elongated glabrous or puberulous clusters,
1-1/2'--1-3/4' long and about 1/4' wide, the wing terminal, only
slightly narrowed at the ends, emarginate at apex, and two and a half to
three times longer than the short ellipsoid terete many-nerved body.

A tree, 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, stout
ascending or spreading branches forming an open symmetrical head, and
stout light or dark gray branchlets soft-pubescent usually during two
seasons, much roughened during their first winter and often for two or
three years by the large elevated mostly obcordate or sometimes
orbicular leaf-scars displaying a marginal line of fibro-vascular
bundle-scars. Winter-buds: terminal ovoid, usually broader than long,
and covered with bright brown scales, those of the outer pair keeled on
the back and apiculate at apex, the others rounded, accrescent, and
slightly villose. Bark of the trunk rough, dark gray, and slightly
furrowed.

Distribution. Banks of streams and on low river benches; western New
Jersey (Bordentown, Burlington County); eastern Pennsylvania (Bucks
County); near Arlington, Alexandria County, Great Falls, Fairfax County,
Woodbridge, Prince William County, and Clifton Forge, Alleghany County,
Virginia; near Easton, Monongalia County, West Virginia, and along the
Appalachian Mountains up to altitudes of 2200 deg. to northern Georgia; in
northern Alabama (St. Bernard, Cullman County), and westward to eastern
Kentucky, central Tennessee and through Ohio northward to Erie County;
southern Indiana and Illinois (Richland County), to southeastern
Missouri (Campbell, Dunklin County).


                11. Fraxinus profunda Bush. Pumpkin Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 748]

Leaves 9'--18' long, with a stout tomentose petiole, and usually 7 but
occasionally 9 lanceolate or elliptic entire or slightly serrate
leaflets acuminate or abruptly long-pointed at apex, rounded, cuneate
and often unsymmetric at base, coated below when they unfold with hoary
tomentum, and pilose on the upper surface with short pale hairs,
particularly on the midrib and veins, and at maturity thick and firm in
texture, dark yellow-green and nearly glabrous on the upper surface,
soft-pubescent on the lower surface, 5'--10' long and 1-1/2'--5' wide,
with a stout yellow midrib deeply impressed and puberulous above and
numerous slender primary veins; petiolules stout, tomentose early in the
season, usually becoming glabrous or nearly glabrous, 1/4'--1/2' or that
of the terminal leaflet up to 2' in length. Flowers dioecious, in
elongated much-branched pubescent panicles, with oblong or
oblong-obovate scarious bracts and bractlets; staminate flower with a
minute campanulate obscurely 4-toothed calyx, and 2 or 3 stamens, with
comparatively long slender filaments and oblong apiculate anthers;
pistillate flower with a large deeply lobed calyx accrescent and
persistent under the fruit, and an ovary gradually contracted into a
slender style. Fruit in long drooping many-fruited pubescent clusters,
oblong, 2'--3' in length and often 1/2' wide, the wing sometimes
falcate, rounded, apiculate, or emarginate at apex, and decurrent to
below the middle or nearly to the base of the thick terete many-rayed
body.

A tree, occasionally 120 deg. high, with a slender trunk 3 deg. in diameter
above the much enlarged and buttressed base, small spreading branches
forming a narrow rather open head, and stout branchlets marked by large
pale lenticels, coated at first with hoary tomentum, tomentose and
pubescent during their first winter and light gray and pilose or
glabrous the following year, and marked by the oblong slightly raised
obconic leaf-scars nearly surrounding the lateral buds; usually much
smaller. Winter-buds terminal, broad-ovate, obtuse, light reddish brown,
and covered with close pale pubescence. Bark of the trunk 1/2'--3/4'
thick, light gray and divided by shallow fissures into broad flat or
rounded ridges broken on the surface into thin closely appressed scales.

Distribution. Deep river swamps often inundated during several months of
the year; western New York (_H. F. Sartwell_); southern Indiana and
Illinois; western Kentucky (Caldwell and McCracken Counties) and
Tennessee (Henderson County); southeastern Missouri, eastern Arkansas
(Moark and Corning, Clay County, and Varner, Lincoln County); near New
Orleans, Louisiana, eastern Mississippi (near Columbus, Lowndes County),
and in the valley of the lower Apalachicola River, western Florida.

Occasionally cultivated; hardy in the Arnold Arboretum.


               12. Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marsh. Red Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 749]

Leaves 10'--12' long, with a stout slightly grooved pubescent petiole,
and 7--9 oblong-lanceolate, ovate-elliptic or slightly obovate leaflets
gradually narrowed at apex into a long slender point, unequally cuneate
at base, and obscurely serrate, or often entire below the middle, when
they unfold coated below and on the petiole with hoary tomentum, and
lustrous and puberulous on the upper surface, and at maturity thin and
firm, 4'--6' long, 1'--1-1/2' wide, light yellow-green above and pale
and covered below with silky pubescence, with a conspicuous midrib and
branching veins; in the autumn turning yellow or rusty brown before
falling; petiolules thick, grooved, pubescent, 1/8'--1/4' or that of the
terminal leaflet up to 1' in length. Flowers dioecious, appearing late
in spring as the leaves begin to unfold, in a rather compact tomentose
panicle, covered in the bud with ovate rusty-tomentose scales; staminate
flower with a minute obscurely toothed cup-shaped calyx, and 2 stamens,
with short slender filaments and linear-oblong light green anthers
tinged with purple; calyx of the pistillate flower cup-shaped, deeply
divided, as long as the ovary gradually narrowed into an elongated style
divided at apex into 2 green stigmatic lobes. Fruit in an open glabrous
or pubescent panicle, lanceolate to slightly oblanceolate or
oblong-obovate or elliptic, 1'--2-1/2' long, 1/4'--1/3' wide, surrounded
at base by the persistent calyx, the thin wing narrowed, rounded and
occasionally emarginate or acute or acuminate and often apiculate at
apex, decurrent to below the middle or nearly to the gradually tapering
base of the slender terete many-rayed body.

A tree, 40 deg.--60 deg. high, with a trunk rarely exceeding 18'--20' in
diameter, stout upright branches forming a compact irregularly shaped
head, and slender terete branchlets more or less coated when they first
appear with pale tomentum sometimes persistent until their second or
third year or often disappearing during the first summer, ultimately
becoming ashy gray or light brown tinged with red, frequently covered
with a glaucous bloom and marked by pale lenticels, and in their first
winter by the semicircular leaf-scars displaying a short row of large
fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds: terminal, about 1/8' long,
with 3 pairs of scales coated with rufous tomentum, those of the outer
pair acute, rounded on the back, truncate at apex, and rather shorter
than those of the other pairs 1'--1-1/2' long at maturity and sometimes
pinnately cut toward the apex. Bark of the trunk 1/2'--2/3' thick, brown
tinged with red, and slightly furrowed, the surface of the ridges
separating into thin appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, rather strong,
brittle, coarse-grained, light brown, with thick lighter brown sapwood
streaked with yellow; sometimes confounded commercially with the more
valuable wood of the White Ash. Variable in the length of the petiolules
and in the shape of the fruit and the width of its wing; a form with
short-stalked or nearly sessile leaflets, found chiefly in Nebraska has
been described as _F. campestris_ Britt. and a form with the wing of the
spatulate fruit sometimes 1/4' wide as _F. Michauxii_ Britt.

Distribution. Low rich moist soil near the banks of streams and lakes;
Nova Scotia to Manitoba, and southward to central Georgia, northern
Alabama (St. Bernard, Cullman County, and Attalla, Etowah County),
northeastern Mississippi (Tishomingo County), southern Indiana and
Illinois, northern Missouri, eastern Kansas and southwestern Oklahoma
(Cache, Comanche County); usually confined in the Carolinas to the
Piedmont region and foothills of the high mountains. Passing into


        Fraxinus pennsylvanica var. lanceolata Sarg. Green Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 750]

Leaves with rather narrower and shorter and usually more sharply serrate
leaflets lustrous and bright green on both surfaces, and glabrous or
pubescent along the midrib below.

A round-topped tree, rarely more than 60 deg. high, or with a trunk more
than 2 deg. in diameter, slender spreading branches, ashy gray terete
glabrous branchlets marked by pale lenticels, and rusty-pubescent
bud-scales.

Distribution. Banks of streams; valley of the Penobscot River (Orono,
Penobscot County), Maine, to northern Vermont and the valley of the St.
Lawrence River, near Montreal, Province of Quebec, and to the valley of
the Saskatchewan (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan), and in the United States
westward to North Dakota, eastern Wyoming to the base of the Bighorn
Mountains, and on the mountains of northern Montana, and southward to
western Florida to the valley of the lower Apalachicola River, Dallas
County, Alabama, central Mississippi, Louisiana, Oklahoma to Comanche
County, and Texas to the valley of the Guadalupe River; most abundant in
the basin of the Mississippi River; attaining its largest size on the
rich bottom-lands of eastern Texas and here often 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a
trunk 2 deg.--3 deg. in diameter; on the southern Appalachian Mountains
ascending to altitudes of 2000 deg.--2500 deg. As it usually grows in the east
with its bright green glabrous leaves and glabrous branchlets the Green
Ash appears distinct from the Red Ash, but trees occur over the area
which it inhabits, but more often westward, with slightly pubescent
leaves and branchlets which may be referred as well to one tree as to
the other and make it impossible to distinguish satisfactorily as
species the Green and Red Ash.

Often planted as a shade and ornamental tree in the middle western and
occasionally in the eastern states, but less valuable than the White
Ash.


                    13. Fraxinus Berlandieriana DC.

[Illustration: Fig. 751]

Leaves 3'--7' long, with a slender petiole, and 3--5 lanceolate,
elliptic or obovate leaflets, acuminate or abruptly acuminate or acute
at apex, cuneate or rarely rounded at base, mostly entire or remotely
serrate, thin, dark green and glabrous on the upper surface, rather
paler and glabrous or furnished with small axillary tufts of white hairs
on the lower surface, 3'--4' long and 1/2'--1-1/2' wide; petiolules
slender, 1-1/4'--1-1/3' or that of the terminal leaflet up to 1-1/2' in
length. Flowers dioecious, in a short glabrous panicle inclosed in the
bud by broad-ovate rounded chestnut-brown pubescent scales; staminate
flower with a minute obscurely lobed calyx and 2 stamens, with short
filaments and linear-oblong apiculate anthers; calyx of the pistillate
flower cup-shaped, deeply divided, and as long as the ovary gradually
narrowed into the slender style. Fruit ripening in May, oblong-obovate
to spatulate, acute or acuminate at apex, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/4' wide,
the wing decurrent nearly to the base of the compressed many-rayed
clavate body gradually narrowed into a long slender base surrounded by
the enlarged deeply lobed calyx.

A tree, rarely more than 30 deg. high, or with a trunk more than a foot in
diameter, and terete slender branchlets light green when they first
appear, becoming in their first winter light brown tinged with red or
ashy gray, and marked by occasional lenticels and by the small elevated
nearly circular leaf-scars displaying a short row of large
fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Winter-buds: terminal acute, with dark
brown puberulous scales. Bark of the trunk dark gray tinged with red,
1'--1-1/2' thick, and divided by shallow interrupted fissures into
narrow ridges. Wood light, soft, close-grained, light brown, with thick
lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Texas, banks of streams and mountain canyons, valley of the
Colorado River (Bastrop and Travis Counties), and those of the San
Antonio and Nueces Rivers to the lower Rio Grande, and over the Edwards
Plateau to Palo Pinto County; in northeastern Mexico.


                      14. Fraxinus velutina Torr.

[Illustration: Fig. 752]

Leaves 4'--5' long, with a broad densely villose petiole grooved like
the slender rachis on the upper side, and 3--5 elliptic to ovate or
slightly obovate leaflets acute at apex, narrowed and rounded or cuneate
at base, finely crenulate-serrate above the middle, pubescent above and
tomentose below when they unfold, and at maturity thick, pale green,
glabrous on the upper surface, tomentose on the lower surface,
1'--1-1/2' long and 3/4'--1' wide, with a prominent midrib and primary
veins, and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petiolules of the lateral
leaflets 1/6' or less or that of the terminal leaflet up to 1/2' in
length. Flowers dioecious, appearing in March and April with the
unfolding of the leaves, on long slender pedicels in elongated pubescent
panicles, covered in the bud by broad-ovate tomentose scales rounded at
apex; calyx cup-shaped, densely pubescent; stamens, with short slender
filaments and oblong apiculate anthers; ovary nearly inclosed in the
calyx, shorter than the nearly sessile lobes of the stigma. Fruit
ripening in September, on slender villose pedicels, in large
many-fruited clusters, oblong-obovate to elliptic, surrounded at base by
the enlarged deeply divided calyx, rarely more than 3/4' long and 1/6'
wide, the wing terminal, rounded and often emarginate or acute at apex,
shorter than the terete many-rayed clavate body attenuate at base and
5/12'--1/2' in length.

A slender tree, 25 deg.--30 deg., rarely 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in
diameter, stout often spreading branches forming a round-topped head,
and slender terete branchlets coated during their first season with
hoary tomentum, and ashy gray, glabrous and marked by large obcordate
dark leaf-scars in their second year. Winter-buds: terminal acute, 1/8'
long, with 3 pairs of broad-ovate pointed tomentose scales, those of the
inner pair strap-shaped and 1/2' long when fully grown. Bark of the
trunk 1/3'--1/2' thick, gray slightly tinged with red, and deeply
divided into broad flat broken ridges separating on the surface into
small thin scales. Wood heavy, rather soft, not strong, close-grained,
light brown, with thick lighter colored sapwood; used locally for
axe-handles and in the manufacture of wagons.

Distribution. Mountain canyons up to altitudes of 6000 deg., central and
southern Arizona and southern New Mexico. Passing into the following
varieties: var. _coriacea_ Rehd. (_Fraxinus coriacea_ S. Wats.)
differing in its thicker more coriaceous often more coarsely serrate
leaflets and in the less densely pubescent or glabrescent branchlets;
southern Utah (St. George, Washington County) to southeastern
California; var. _glabra_ Rehd. with glabrous 3--7-foliolate leaves and
glabrous branchlets; common with the species; occasionally cultivated in
the cities of Arizona; more distinct is


                  Fraxinus velutina var. Toumeyi Rehd.

                       _Fraxinus Toumeyi_ Britt.

[Illustration: Fig. 753]

Leaves 3-1/2'--6' long, with a villose-pubescent petiole, and 5--7
lanceolate to elliptic or rarely obovate acuminate and long-pointed or
acute leaflets, finely serrate above the middle, glabrous on the upper
surface, covered on the lower surface with close fine pubescence,
1-1/2'--3' long and 1/2'--1' wide; petiolules slender, pubescent,
1/8'--1/2' or that of the terminal leaflet up to 1' in length;
occasionally on vigorous shoots reduced to a single leaflet. Flowers as
in the species. Fruit narrow-oblong, 1' long and often not more than
1/12' wide, or spatulate with the wing longer or shorter than the body,
and sometimes only about 3/4' long and 1/16' wide, with the wing longer
or not more than half the length of the body.

A tree, usually 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 6'--8' in diameter, and ashy
gray branchlets pale pubescent when they first appear, becoming glabrous
or puberulous during their second season.

Distribution. Mountain canyons at altitudes of 5000 deg.--6000 deg.; in Arizona
more common than _F. velutina_; less abundant in southern New Mexico; in
Sonora.

Often used to shade the streets in the towns of southern Arizona.


                       15. Fraxinus oregona Nutt.

[Illustration: Fig. 754]

Leaves 5'--14' long, with a stout grooved and angled pubescent,
tomentose or glabrous petiole, and usually 5--7, rarely 3, or on young
trees occasionally 9, ovate to elliptic or rarely oval or obovate
leaflets usually contracted at apex into a short broad point, gradually
narrowed at base, and entire or remotely and obscurely serrate, usually
coated below and on the petioles with thick pale tomentum when they
unfold and pubescent above, or nearly glabrous or pilose with a few
scattered hairs, and at maturity light green on the upper surface, paler
and usually tomentose, puberulous or rarely glabrous (var. _glabra_
Rehd.), on the lower surface, 3'--7' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a
broad pale midrib, conspicuous veins arcuate near the margins, and
reticulate veinlets, the lateral usually sessile, rarely on petiolules
up to 1/2', or that of the terminal leaflet up to 1' in length; turning
yellow or russet brown in the autumn before falling. Flowers dioecious,
appearing in April or May when the leaves begin to unfold, in compact
glabrous panicles covered in the bud by broad-ovate scales coated with
rufous pubescence; staminate flower composed of a minute calyx, short
filaments, and short-oblong apiculate anthers; calyx of the pistillate
flower laciniately cut and shorter than the ovary narrowed into a stout
style divided into long conspicuous stigmatic lobes. Fruit in ample
crowded clusters, oblong, obovate to oblanceolate or elliptic, rounded
and often emarginate or acute at apex, 1'--2' long and 1/4'--1/3' wide,
the wing decurrent to the middle or nearly to the attenuate base of the
clavate or ellipsoid slightly compressed many-rayed body.

A tree, frequently 70 deg.--80 deg. high, with a long trunk occasionally 4 deg. in
diameter, stout branches forming a narrow upright head or a broad
shapely crown, and thick terete branchlets more or less densely coated
with pale or rarely rufous silky pilose tomentum persistent during their
second year or occasionally deciduous during their first summer,
becoming light red-brown or orange color, glabrous or puberulous, often
covered with a slight glaucous bloom, marked by small remote pale
lenticels, and during their first and second winters by the large
elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars displaying a short row of conspicuous
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, rarely always glabrous (var. _glabra_
Rehd.). Winter-buds: terminal acute, 1/8'--1/4' long, with 4 pairs of
scales covered with pale hairs or with rusty pubescence, those of the
inner rows often foliaceous at maturity. Bark of the trunk 1'--1-1/2'
thick, dark gray, or brown slightly tinged with red, and deeply divided
by interrupted fissures into broad flat ridges separating on the surface
into thin scales. Wood light, hard, brittle, coarse-grained, brown, with
thick lighter colored sapwood; largely used in the manufacture of
furniture, for the frames of carriages and wagons, in cooperage, the
interior finish of houses, and for fuel.

Distribution. Usually in rich moist soil in the neighborhood of streams;
coast region of southern British Columbia, southward through western
Washington and Oregon and the California coast region to the Bay of San
Francisco and the Santa Cruz Mountains, and along the western foothills
of the Sierra Nevada to those of the mountains of San Bernardino and San
Diego Counties, California; the var. _glabra_ in Los Angeles and San
Bernardino Counties, and east of the Sierra Nevada in Inyo County (Ash
Creek, near Owens Lake), and occasionally northward in California; most
abundant and of its largest size on the bottom-lands of the rivers of
southwestern Oregon; one of the most valuable of the deciduous-leaved
timber-trees of Pacific North America.

Occasionally cultivated; hardy in the Arnold Arboretum.


              16. Fraxinus quadrangulata Michx. Blue Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 755]

Leaves 8'--12' long, with a slender petiole glabrous, or puberulous
toward the base, and 5--11 oblong-ovate to lanceolate long-pointed
coarsely serrate leaflets unequally rounded or cuneate at base, and
coated when they unfold on the lower surface with thick brown tomentum,
and at maturity thick and firm, yellow-green and glabrous above, pale
and glabrous or sometimes furnished with tufts of pale hairs along the
base of the conspicuous midrib below, 3'--5' long and 1'--2' wide, with
short stout petiolules and 8--12 pairs of veins arcuate near the
margins; turning pale yellow in the autumn before falling. Flowers
perfect, appearing as the terminal buds begin to expand, in
loose-branched panicles from small obtuse buds with scales keeled on the
back, apiculate at apex, and covered with thick brown tomentum; calyx
reduced to an obscure ring; corolla 0; stamens 2, with nearly sessile
broad connectives and dark purple oblong obtuse anther-cells; ovary
oblong-ovoid, gradually narrowed into a short style divided at apex into
2 light purple stigmatic lobes generally maturing and withering before
the anthers open. Fruit oblong to oblong-cuneate, 1'--2' long and
1/3'--1/2' wide, the wing rounded and often emarginate or acute at apex,
surrounding the flat body faintly many-rayed on both surfaces.

A tree, usually 60 deg.--70 deg. or occasionally 120 deg. high, with a trunk 2 deg.--3 deg.
in diameter, small spreading branches forming a slender head, and stout
4-angled branchlets more or less 4-winged between the nodes, dark orange
color and covered with short rufous pubescence when they first appear,
becoming gray tinged with red in their second year and marked by
scattered pale lenticels and by the large elevated obcordate leaf-scars
displaying a lunate row of fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and in their
third year light brown or ashy gray and then gradually becoming terete.
Winter-buds: terminal about 1/4' long, with 3 pairs of scales, those of
the outer row thick, rounded on the back, usually obscurely pinnate
toward the apex, dark reddish brown, slightly puberulous or often
hoary-tomentose, partly covering the bud, those of the inner rows
strap-shaped, coated with light brown tomentum, often pinnate, becoming
1'--1-1/2' long. Bark of the trunk 1/2'--2/3' thick, irregularly divided
into large plate-like scales, the light gray surface slightly tinged
with red separating into thin minute scales. Wood heavy, hard,
close-grained, rather brittle, light yellow streaked with brown, with
thick lighter colored sapwood of 80--90 layers of annual growth; largely
used for flooring and in carriage-building, and not often distinguished
commercially from that of other species of the northern and middle
states. A blue dye is obtained by macerating the inner bark in water.

Distribution. Rich limestone hills, occasionally descending into the
bottom-lands of fertile valleys; southwestern Ontario through southern
Michigan to southwestern Iowa and southward through western Ohio and
southeastern Indiana to eastern and central Kentucky (near Clarksville,
Montgomery County), eastern Tennessee and northern Alabama (near
Huntsville, Madison County), and through Missouri to southeastern
Kansas, southwestern Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma (near Pawhuska,
Osage County); nowhere very abundant; of its largest size in the basin
of the lower Wabash River, Illinois, and on the western slopes of the
Big Smoky Mountains, Tennessee.

Occasionally cultivated as an ornament of parks and gardens in the
eastern United States.


            17. Fraxinus nigra Marsh. Black Ash. Brown Ash.

[Illustration: Fig. 756]

Leaves 12'--16' long, with a stout pale petiole, and 7--11 oblong or
oblong-lanceolate long-pointed leaflets, unequally cuneate or sometimes
rounded at base, serrate with small incurved apiculate teeth, the
lateral sessile, the terminal on a petiolule up to 1' in length, covered
especially below when they unfold with rufous hairs, and at maturity
thin and firm, dark green above, paler below, glabrous with the
exception of occasional tufts of rufous hairs along the under side of
the broad pale midrib, 4'--5' long and 1'--2' wide, with many
conspicuous primary veins arcuate near the margins and obscurely
reticulate veinlets; turning rusty brown and falling early in the
autumn. Flowers polygamous, without a perianth, appearing before the
leaves in a compact or ultimately elongated panicle 4'--5' long, and
covered in the bud by broad-ovate dark brown or nearly black scales
rounded at apex; staminate flowers on separate trees or mixed with
perfect flowers, and consisting of 2 large deeply pitted oblong dark
purple apiculate anthers attached on the back to short broad filaments;
pistillate flower consisting of a long slender style deeply divided into
2 broad purple stigmas and often accompanied by 1 or 2 perfect or
globose rudimentary pink anthers sessile or borne on long or short
filaments. Fruit in open panicles 8'--10' in length, oblong to slightly
oblong-obovate, 1'--1-1/2' long and 1/3' wide, with a thin wing,
surrounding the short flat faintly nerved body, rounded and emarginate
at apex and narrowed and rounded or cuneate at base.

A tree, occasionally 80 deg.--90 deg. high, with a tall trunk rarely exceeding
20' in diameter, slender mostly upright branches forming a narrow head,
and stout terete branchlets dark green and slightly puberulous when they
first appear, soon becoming ashy gray or orange color and marked by
large pale lenticels, growing darker during their first winter and then
roughened by the large suborbicular leaf-scars displaying a semicircular
row of conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars; usually much smaller.
Winter-buds: terminal broad-ovate, acute, rather less than 1/4' long,
with 3 pairs of scales, those of the outer pair thick and rounded on the
back at base, gradually narrowed and acute at apex, dark brown, slightly
puberulous, falling as the bud begins to enlarge in the spring, and
shorter than the scales of the inner rows coated on the outer surface
with rufous pubescence, those of the second pair becoming strap-shaped,
1' long, 1/3' wide, and about half as long as the pinnate usually
foliaceous inner scales. Bark of the trunk gray slightly tinged with
red, 1/3'--1/2' thick, and divided into large irregular plates
separating into thin papery scales. Wood heavy, rather soft, not strong,
tough, coarse-grained, durable, easily separable into thin layers, dark
brown, with thin light brown often nearly white sapwood; largely used
for the interior finish of houses and in cabinet-making, and for fences,
barrel hoops, and in the manufacture of baskets.

Distribution. Deep cold swamps and the low banks of streams and lakes;
southern Newfoundland and the northern shores of the Gulf of St.
Lawrence to Lake Winnipeg, and southward to New Castle County, Delaware,
the mountains of West Virginia, southwestern Indiana (Knox County; now
probably exterminated by drainage), central Iowa, central Missouri, and
northwestern Arkansas.




                   2. FORESTIERA Poir. Swamp Privet.


                            _Adelia_ Michx.

Trees or shrubs, with thin close bark, slender branchlets, and small
scaly buds. Leaves simple, entire or serrulate, petiolate, deciduous or
persistent. Flowers dioecious or polygamous, minute, on slender
ebracteolate pedicels, in fascicles or panicles, their bracts caducous,
from buds in the axils of leaves of the previous year and covered with
numerous scales; calyx reduced to a narrow ring or cup-shaped, 5 or
6-lobed; corolla 0; stamens hypogynous; filaments 2--4; anthers ovoid,
opening by lateral slits; ovary 2-celled, gradually narrowed into a
slender style terminating in an abruptly enlarged 2-lobed stigma; ovules
2 in each cell, suspended from its apex; raphe dorsal. Fruit 1 or very
rarely 2-celled, drupaceous, oblong or subglobose, with thin flesh and a
thin-walled stone; seed 1 in each cell, pendulous, testa membranaceous;
albumen fleshy; cotyledons plane, nearly filling the cavity of the
stone.

Forestiera with 14 species is distributed from the southern United
States and Mexico through Central America to Paraguay, and through the
West Indies to Brazil.

The generic name is in memory of the French physician and botanist
Charles Leforestiere.


                     1. Forestiera acuminata Poir.

[Illustration: Fig. 757]

Leaves elliptic, acuminate and long-pointed at apex, gradually narrowed
and cuneate at base, serrate above the middle with small remote incurved
teeth, glabrous with the exception of occasional hairs on the upper side
of the slender midrib, yellow-green on the upper surface, paler on the
lower surface, 2-1/2'--4-1/2' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with usually 5
or 6 pairs of slender primary veins and slightly thickened and incurved
margins, deciduous; petioles slender, often slightly winged above the
middle, 1/4'--1/2' in length. Flowers appearing in April and May before
the leaves from ovoid pointed buds 1/8' long, with thickened pale
chestnut-brown scales; calyx reduced to a narrow slightly lobed ring;
corolla 0; staminate in many-flowered fascicles, on short pedicels from
the axils of broad-obovate thin yellow apiculate conspicuous bracts;
stamens 4, on long slender filaments; anthers bright yellow; ovary
reduced to a minute ovoid body; pistillate flowers on slender pedicels
1/8' long, in glabrous pedunculate several-flowered panicles
3/4'--1-1/4' long, their bracts caducous; stamens with shorter filaments
and abortive or rarely fertile anthers, or usually 0; ovary
oblong-ovoid, slightly unsymmetric, gradually narrowed into the long
slender style enlarged into the thickened imperfectly 2-lobed terminal
stigma. Fruit falling as soon as ripe in June and July, oblong-ovoid,
gradually narrowed, acute and tipped with the remnants of the style at
apex, gradually narrowed and rounded at base, slightly compressed and
unsymmetric, dark blue-purple, 1'--1-1/4' long, about 1/4' thick, with
thin dry flesh, and a striate stone rounded at base, straight on one
side and rounded on the other, its wall covered with thin vertical
scales spongy in appearance, and conspicuously longitudinally ridged on
the inner surface the ridges terminating in long slender tips forming
the acuminate apex of the stone; seeds ellipsoid, slightly compressed,
striate, light brown, about 1/3' in length.

A tree, rarely 50 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in diameter, small
spreading branches, and slender light brown branchlets becoming darker
in their second year, and marked by numerous lenticels and by the small
elevated nearly orbicular leaf-scars. Winter-buds: terminal ovoid,
pointed, about 1/16' long, with numerous scales increasing in size from
the outer to the inner ranks; usually much smaller, and generally a
shrub 10 deg.--15 deg. high and broad. Bark close, slightly ridged, dark brown.

Distribution. Borders of streams and swamps in low moist soil; valley of
the lower Wabash River, southwestern Indiana, southern Illinois
northward along the Mississippi River to Pike County, and to central
Tennessee, and from southern Missouri through Arkansas to eastern
Oklahoma (near Muskogee, Muskogee County) and eastern Texas to the
valley of the lower Colorado River inland to Colorado County (shores of
Eagle Lake), and through Louisiana, central and southern Mississippi and
Alabama to western Florida (Branford, Suwanee County) and on the
Savannah River, near Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia; most abundant in
Missouri, Arkansas and Texas; comparatively rare east of the Mississippi
River, but probably of its largest size in eastern Louisiana.

Occasionally cultivated; hardy in the Arnold Arboretum.




                           3. CHIONANTHUS L.


Trees or shrubs, with stout terete or slightly angled branchlets, thick
pith, and buds with numerous opposite scales. Leaves simple,
conduplicate in the bud, deciduous. Flowers dioecious or rarely
polygamous, on elongated ebracteolate pedicels, in 3-flowered clusters
terminal on the slender opposite branches, of ample loose panicles, with
foliaceous persistent bracts, from separate buds in the axils of the
upper leaves of the previous year; calyx minute, deeply 4-parted, the
divisions imbricated in the bud, persistent under the fruit; corolla
white, deeply divided into 4 or rarely 5 or 6 elongated linear lobes
conduplicate-valvate in the bud, united at base into a short tube, or
rarely separate; stamens 2, inserted on the base of the corolla opposite
the axis of the flower, or rarely 4 in the staminate flower, included;
filaments terete, short; anthers ovoid, attached on the back below the
middle, apiculate by the elongation of the connective, 2-celled, the
cells opening by longitudinal lateral or subextrorse slits; ovary ovoid,
abruptly contracted into a short columnar style; stigma thick and
fleshy, slightly 2-lobed; in the staminate flower of the Asiatic species
reduced to a minute subglobose body; ovules laterally attached near the
apex of the cell; raphe ventral. Fruit an ovoid or oblong, usually 1 or
rarely 2 or 3-seeded thick-skinned drupe tipped with the remnants of the
style; flesh thin and dry, stone thick-walled, crustaceous. Seed filling
the cavity of the stone, ovoid; seed-coat chestnut-brown.

Chionanthus inhabits the middle and southern United States with one
species, and northern and central China with another.

The specific name, from {chion} and {anthos}, is in allusion to the
light and graceful clusters of snow-white flowers.


       1. Chionanthus virginica L. Fringe-tree. Old Man's Beard.

[Illustration: Fig. 758]

Leaves ovate or oblong, acuminate, short-pointed or sometimes rounded at
apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate below, entire, with undulate
margins, and coarsely reticulate-venulose, yellow-green and lustrous
above, pubescent below, and ciliate on the margins when they unfold, and
at maturity 4'--8' long, 1/2'--4' wide, thick and firm, dark green on
the upper surface, pale and glabrous on the lower surface except on the
stout midrib and conspicuous arcuate primary veins more or less covered
with short white hairs; turning bright clear yellow before falling early
in the autumn; petioles stout, puberulous, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers
slightly and agreeably fragrant, appearing when the leaves are about one
third grown, in loose pubescent drooping panicles 4'--6' in length, the
bracts at the base of the lower branches of the inflorescence oblong,
glabrous on the upper surface, pubescent on the lower surface, and
sometimes 1' long, those at the base of the upper branches oval,
successively smaller, and gradually passing into the minute laciniate
bracts subtending the lateral pedicels of the 3-flowered clusters
terminating the last divisions of the panicle; some individuals bearing
occasional perfect flowers among others functionally dioecious, some
with sterile or rarely perfect anthers and a well-developed stigma, and
others with an imperfectly developed stigma and fertile anthers; calyx
light green, glabrous, with acute entire or laciniately cut lobes;
corolla 1' long, marked on the inner surface near the base by a row of
bright purple spots; anthers light yellow, with a green connective.
Fruit ripening in September, in loose few-fruited clusters, their bracts
leaf-like and sometimes 2' in length, oval or short-oblong, 1' long,
dark blue or nearly black, and often covered with a glaucous bloom;
seeds 1/3' long, ovoid, narrowed at apex and covered with a thin light
chestnut-brown coat marked by reticulate veins radiating from the hilum.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in diameter, stout
ashy gray or light brown branches forming an oblong rather narrow head,
and stout branchlets light green and covered with pale pubescence or
sometimes glabrous when they first appear, terete or slightly angled in
their first winter, often much thickened below the nodes, light brown or
orange color, and marked by large scattered darker colored lenticels and
by the elevated semiorbicular leaf-scars displaying a semicircular row
of conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars; often a shrub, with several
stout thick spreading stems. Winter-buds broad-ovoid, acute, 1/8' long,
with about 5 pairs of scales increasing in length from the outer to the
inner pair, ovate, acute, keeled on the back, light brown and slightly
pilose on the outer surface, bright green and lustrous on the inner
surface, and ciliate on the margins with scattered white hairs, those of
the inner pair at maturity obovate, gradually narrowed below,
foliaceous, and 1'--1-1/2' long. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/2' thick, and
irregularly divided into small thin appressed brown scales tinged with
red. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, and light brown, with thick
lighter colored sapwood. The bark is tonic and is sometimes used in
decoctions and in the treatment of intermittent fevers, or as an
aperient and diuretic, and in homoeopathic practice.

Distribution. Banks of streams in rich moist soil; southeastern
Pennsylvania to the Manitee River region, western Florida, and through
the Gulf states to northern Arkansas (Baxter and Cleburne Counties),
southwestern Oklahoma (near Page, Leflore County) and the valley of the
Brazos River, Texas; ascending on the southern Appalachian Mountains to
altitudes of 4000 deg.

Often cultivated as an ornamental plant in the eastern United States,
and in western and central Europe.




                           4. OSMANTHUS Lour.


Trees or shrubs, with terete or slightly angled branches, and fibrous
roots. Leaves simple, persistent. Flowers fragrant, polygamo-dioecious
or perfect, on ebracteolate pedicels subtended by scale-like bracts, in
short axillary racemes or in short axillary or rarely terminal
fascicles; calyx minute, 4-toothed or divided, the divisions imbricated
in the bud, persistent under the fruit; corolla tubular, 4-lobed, the
lobes imbricated in the bud, ovate, obtuse, spreading after anthesis;
stamens 2, inserted on the tube of the corolla opposite the lateral
lobes of the calyx, or rarely 4; filaments terete, short; anthers ovoid
or linear-oblong, blunt, or apiculate by the prolongation of the
connective, attached on the back below the middle, 2-celled, the cells
opening longitudinally by marginal slits, sometimes rudimentary or 0 in
the pistillate flower; ovary subglobose; style columnar, short or
elongated, crowned with an entire capitate stigma; ovules laterally
attached near the apex of the cell; raphe ventral. Fruit a fleshy
1-seeded ovoid or globose drupe tipped with the remnants of the style;
flesh thin and succulent; stone hard and bony. Seed filling the cavity
of the stone; cotyledons flat, much longer than the short superior
radicle turned toward the hilum.

Osmanthus with ten species inhabits eastern North America, the Hawaiian
Islands, Polynesia, Japan, China, and the Himalayas. _Osmanthus
fragrans_ Lour., a native of China and the temperate Himalayas, is
cultivated in China for its fragrant minute cream-colored or yellow
flowers used by the Chinese to perfume tea, and is everywhere a favorite
garden plant.

The generic name, from {osme} and {anthos}, relates to the fragrance of
the flowers.


              1. Osmanthus americanus B. & H. Devil Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 759]

Leaves oblong-lanceolate or obovate, acute or rarely rounded and
occasionally emarginate at apex, and gradually narrowed and cuneate at
base, with thickened revolute margins, when they unfold coated beneath
with pale tomentum, and at maturity thick and coriaceous, glabrous,
bright green, lustrous above, obscurely reticulate-venulose, 4'--5' long
and 1/2'--2-1/2' wide, with a broad pale midrib and remote forked
primary veins arcuate near the margins; persistent until their second
year; petioles stout, 1/2'--3/4' in length. Flowers opening in March
from pilose inflorescence-buds formed the previous autumn in the axils
of the leaves of the year, the staminate, pistillate, and perfect
flowers on different individuals in 3-flowered clusters, sessile or
short-pedicellate, in pedunculate cymes or short racemes, with
scale-like nearly triangular acute persistent bracts; calyx puberulous,
with acute rigid lobes, and much shorter than the creamy white corolla
1/8' long when expanded, with an elongated tube and short spreading
ovate rounded lobes; stamens inserted on the middle of the tube of the
corolla, included or slightly exserted, small and often rudimentary in
the pistillate flower; ovary abruptly contracted into a stout columnar
style crowned with a large exserted capitate stigma, reduced in the
staminate flower to a minute point. Fruit ripening early in the autumn,
oblong or obovoid, 1' long, dark blue, with thin flesh and a thick or
sometimes thin-walled brittle ovoid pointed stone; seed ovoid, covered
with a chestnut-brown coat marked by broad conspicuous pale veins
radiating from the short broad ventral hilum and encircling the seed.

A tree, occasionally 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a trunk sometimes a foot in
diameter, and slender slightly angled ultimately terete branchlets light
or red-brown and marked by minute pale lenticels, becoming ashy gray in
their second year and roughened by the small elevated orbicular
leaf-scars displaying a ring of minute fibro-vascular bundle-scars;
usually much smaller and often shrubby. Winter-buds narrow-lanceolate,
1/2' long, with 2 thick lanceolate reddish brown puberulous scales. Bark
of the trunk thin, dark gray or gray tinged with red, and roughened by
small thin appressed scales displaying in falling the dark cinnamon red
inner bark. Wood heavy, very hard and strong, close-grained, difficult
to work, dark brown, with thick light brown or yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Usually in moist soil near the borders of streams and
Pine-barren ponds and swamps, and occasionally on dry sandy uplands;
coast region of the south Atlantic and Gulf states, from the valley of
the lower Cape Fear River, North Carolina, to the valley of the
Kissimmee River, the interior of the peninsular (Lake and Orange
Counties) and the shores of Tampa Bay, Florida, and westward to eastern
Louisiana.




                           LXI. BORRAGINACEAE.


Scabrous-pubescent trees or shrubs, with watery juice, and terete
branchlets. Leaves simple, alternate or subverticillate, penniveined,
persistent or tardily deciduous, without stipules. Flowers regular,
perfect, in terminal or axillary dichotomous often scorpioid-branched
cymes; calyx usually 5-lobed, persistent under the fruit; corolla
hypogynous, 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud; stamens 5,
inserted on the tube of the corolla opposite its lobes; filaments
filiform; anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally;
pistil of 2 carpels; ovary undivided (in the arborescent genera of the
United States), sessile on the hypogynous inconspicuous disk, more or
less completely 4-celled; style single, 2-branched or parted toward the
apex; stigmas clavate or capitate; ovule solitary in each cell. Fruit
drupaceous (in the arborescent genera of the United States), tipped with
the remnants of the style, with 2--4 nutlets or cells. Seeds ascending;
seed-coat membranaceous.

The Borage family with ninety-five genera, mostly of herbaceous plants,
is widely distributed and most abundant in temperate regions, especially
in the Mediterranean basin and central Asia.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Branches of the style 2-branched; fruit partly or entirely inclosed in
        the enlarged calyx.
                                                              1. Cordia.
  Branches of the style not branched; fruit not inclosed in the calyx.
    Calyx valvately splitting into 5 minute teeth; fruit with 2--4
          1-seeded nutlets.
                                                            2. Beureria.
    Calyx 5-parted or cleft, the divisions imbricated in the bud; fruit
          with 2 2-seeded nutlets.
                                                             3. Ehretia.




                              1. CORDIA L.


Trees or shrubs, with petiolate entire persistent leaves and naked buds.
Flowers in terminal scorpioid-branched cymes; calyx tubular or
campanulate, conspicuously many-ribbed or rayed, the teeth valvate in
the bud; corolla funnel form; anthers oblong-ovate; ovary 4-celled;
style slender, elongated, 2-branched above the middle, the branches
2-parted, their division stigmatic to the base; ovule ascending,
laterally attached below the middle to the inner angle of the cell,
suborthotropous; micropyle superior. Fruit entirely or partly inclosed
in the thickened calyx; flesh dry and corky or sweet and juicy; stone
thick-walled, hard and bony, 1--4-celled, usually 1 or 2-seeded. Seeds
without albumen; embryo filling the cavity of the seed; cotyledons thick
and fleshy or membranaceous, longitudinally plicate or corrugated, much
shorter than the superior radicle turned toward the hilum.

Cordia with two hundred and fifty species inhabits the tropical and warm
extratropical regions of the two hemispheres, the largest number of
species being American. Of the four species found within the territory
of the United States two are trees. Some of the species are valuable
timber-trees, and others are cultivated for their edible fruits.

The generic name is in honor of Valerius Cordus (1515--1544), the German
writer on pharmacy and botany.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Corolla orange or flame color; fruit inclosed in the smooth glabrous
        thickened ivory-white calyx; leaves ovate.
                                                    1. C. Sebestena (D).
  Corolla white with a yellow centre; fruit entirely or partly inclosed
        in the thin many-ribbed tomentose orange-brown calyx; leaves
        oval or oblong-ovate.
                                                 2. C. Boissieri (E, H).


                  1. Cordia Sebestena L. Geiger-tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 760]

Leaves unfolding through a large part of the year, ovate, short-pointed
or rounded at apex, rounded, subcordate, or cuneate at base, entire or
remotely and coarsely serrate above the middle, covered when they
unfold, like the branches of the inflorescence, the outside of the
calyx, and the young branchlets, with thick dense rusty tomentum and
with short rigid pale hairs, and at maturity thick and firm, dark green,
scabrous-pubescent, or often nearly glabrous below, reticulate-venulose,
5'--6' long and 3'--4' wide, with a broad midrib usually covered below
with pale hairs, especially in the axils of remote primary veins
connected by conspicuous cross veinlets; petioles stout, pubescent,
1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers appearing throughout the year on slender
pedicels, in open flat cymes 6'--7' in diameter, some individuals
producing flowers with short included stamens and elongated styles, and
others with exserted stamens and included styles; calyx tubular,
1/2'--2/3' long, and obscurely many-rayed, with short nearly triangular
rigid teeth; corolla orange or flame color, puberulous on the outer
surface, with a slender tube about twice as long as the calyx and
spreading rounded lobes, irregularly undulate on the margins and
1'--1-1/2' in diameter when fully expanded; ovary conic, glabrous,
contracted into a slender style branched near the apex. Fruit
broad-ovate, rather abruptly narrowed and pointed at apex, concave at
base, 1-1/4'--1-1/2' long and about 3/4' broad, inclosed in the
thickened fibrous calyx smooth and ivory-white on the outer surface;
flesh thin, pale, and corky, separable from the irregularly sulcate
thick-walled stone gradually narrowed and acuminate at apex, and deeply
lobed at base; seeds linear-lanceolate, 1/2' long, with a delicate white
seed-coat.

A tree, in Florida 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a tall trunk 5'--6' in diameter,
slender upright branches forming a narrow close round-topped head, and
stout branchlets with thick pith, dark green at first, becoming ashy
gray and marked by large nearly orbicular cordate leaf-scars displaying
2 central circular clusters of fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Bark of the
trunk 1/2'--3/4' thick, dark brown, frequently nearly black, and deeply
and irregularly divided into narrow ridges broken on the surface into
short thick appressed scales. Wood heavy, hard, close-grained, dark
brown, with thick light brown or yellow sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Flamingo near Cape Sable (_A. A. Eaton_) and
Madeira Hammock, Munroe County, and on the southern keys; on the Bahama
Islands, on most of the Antilles, and in Guiana and New Granada.

Often planted in tropical countries as an ornament of gardens.


                 2. Cordia Boissieri A. DC. Anacahuita.

[Illustration: Fig. 761]

Leaves oval to oblong-ovate, acute or rounded at apex, rounded or
subcordate at base, entire or obscurely crenulate-serrate, covered when
they unfold like the branches of the inflorescence, both surfaces of the
calyx and the young branchlets with rusty or dark brown tomentum and
short white usually matted hairs, thick and firm, dark green, minutely
rugose and more or less scabrous above, coated below with thick soft
pale or rufous tomentum, 4'--5' long and 3'--4' wide, with a broad
midrib, and conspicuous primary veins forked near the margins and
connected by cross veinlets; deciduous at the end of their first year;
petioles stout, tomentose, 1'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers opening from
April to June, slightly fragrant, sessile or short-pedicellate, in open
terminal dichotomous cymes; calyx tubular or subcampanulate,
conspicuously many-ribbed, with 5 linear acute teeth, and about half as
long as the tube of the white corolla puberulous on the outer surface,
marked in the throat by a large light yellow spot, the lobes rounded,
imbricated in the bud, and 2' across when fully expanded; ovary
glabrous, gradually narrowed into a slender 2-branched style. Fruit
ovoid, 1' long, about 3/4' broad, pointed at apex, lustrous, bright
red-brown, and inclosed entirely or partly by the thin fibrous now
conspicuously rayed orange-brown calyx coated on the outer surface with
thick short pale tomentum, and often splitting nearly to the base; flesh
thin, sweet, and pulpy, separating easily from the ovoid smooth light
brown stone gradually narrowed from above the middle, faintly
reticulate-veined, and marked by 4 longitudinal lines and at the
acuminate apex by a deeply 4-lobed thin cap, thick-walled, hard and
bony, deeply lobed at base; seeds ovoid, acute, 1/4' long, with a thin
delicate pure white coat.

A tree, occasionally 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a short often crooked trunk
6'--8' in diameter, stout spreading branches forming a low round-topped
head, and stout branchlets, becoming in their second year dark gray or
brown, slightly puberulous, and marked by occasional large lenticels and
by elevated obcordate leaf-scars; or often a shrub, with numerous stems
sometimes only 2 deg. or 3 deg. tall. Bark of the trunk thin, gray tinged with
red, and irregularly divided into broad flat ridges, the surface
ultimately separating into long thin papery scales. Wood light, rather
soft, close-grained, and dark brown, with thick light brown sapwood.

Distribution. Dry limestone ridges, and depressions in the desert;
valley of the Rio Grande, Texas, and southern New Mexico, southward into
Mexico; most abundant and of its largest size in Tamaulipas and Nuevo
Leon between the mouth of the Rio Grande and the base of the Sierra
Madre.




                           2. BEURERIA Jacq.


Trees or shrubs, with oblong-obovate or ovate leaves involute in the
bud, persistent. Flowers on slender bracteolate pedicels, in terminal
corymbose many-flowered cymes, with linear-lanceolate caducous bracts
and bractlets; calyx campanulate, 5-toothed, the divisions closed and
valvate in the bud; corolla white, campanulate, the lobes broad-ovate,
spreading after anthesis; anthers ovoid, rugulose, apiculate; ovary
incompletely 4-celled by the development of the 2 parietal placentas,
narrowed into a terminal style 2-parted at apex, the divisions more or
less coalescent; stigmas capitate; ovules attached on the back near the
middle of the inner face of the revolute placentas, anatropous; raphe
ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit subglobose, flesh thin; stone
somewhat 4-lobed and separable into 4 thick-walled bony 1-seeded nutlets
rounded and furnished on the back with a thick spongy longitudinal
many-ridged appendage, flattened on their converging inner faces and
attached at apex to a filiform column. Seed terete, filling the seminal
cell, longitudinally incurved round a rather small cavity opposite an
elevated oblong scar on one of the inner faces of the nutlet and
connected with the hilum by a narrow passage; seed-coat membranaceous,
light brown; embryo axile in fleshy albumen; cotyledons plane; radicle
slender, elongated, turned toward the hilum.

Beureria with forty species is confined to tropical America, two species
reaching the shores of southern Florida; of these one is a tree and the
other _Beureria revoluta_ H. B. K. is an arborescent shrub.

The generic name is in honor of J. A. Beurer, an apothecary at
Nuremberg.


                       1. Beureria ovata Meyers.

               _Beureria havanensis_ Hitch., not Meyers.

[Illustration: Fig. 762]

Leaves elliptic to oval or broad-obovate, acute and often apiculate or
rounded and then occasionally emarginate at apex, gradually narrowed and
cuneate at base entire, densely covered when they unfold with white
caducous hairs, and at maturity thick, dark yellow-green and lustrous
above, paler below, 2-1/2'--3' long and 1-1/4'--2' wide, with slightly
thickened undulate margins, a slender, orange-colored midrib, thin
primary veins and conspicuous reticulate veinlets more prominent above
than below; usually persistent through their second summer; petioles
slender, covered when they first appear like the very young branchlets
with long white hairs, very soon glabrous, 1/2'--1' in length. Flowers
opening in spring and late in autumn on pedicels 1/2' long and furnished
near the middle with an acuminate scarious bractlet 1/4' in length and
caducous from a persistent base, in open glabrous 15--20-flowered
long-stalked cymes 3'--4' in diameter, with slender branches, and small
bracts; calyx gradually narrowed into a stipe-like base, the lobes
acuminate, ciliate on the margins; corolla subcampanulate, creamy white,
with a short tube somewhat enlarged in the throat, and broad-ovate
spreading lobes 3/4' across when expanded; stamens rather longer than
the tube of the corolla, anthers much shorter than the filaments; ovary
conic, glabrous, gradually contracted into a slender exserted style
divided only toward the apex or sometimes nearly entire, and crowned
with 2 capitate stigmas. Fruit ripening in early autumn or early spring
from autumnal flowers, bright orange-red, 1/2' in diameter, with a thick
tough skin and thin dry flesh inclosing the 4 nutlets, the enlarged
spreading calyx becoming sometimes 1/2' across.

A tree, in Florida occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a buttressed and
often fluted trunk 8'--10' in diameter, and slender branchlets light red
and pilose with caducous hairs when they first appear, becoming in their
first winter dark red, orange color or ashy gray, and sometimes
roughened by pale lenticels, their thin bark often separating into
delicate scales; usually much smaller and often a shrub, with numerous
spreading stems. Winter-buds minute, globose, covered with hoary
tomentum, nearly immersed in the bark. Bark of the trunk 1/16'--1/8'
thick, light brown tinged with red, more or less fissured and divided on
the surface into thick plate-like irregular scales. Wood hard, strong,
very close-grained, brown streaked with orange, with thick hardly
distinguishable sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Cocoanut Grove, Dade County (_Miss O. Rodham_),
and on the southern keys; common; on the Bahama Islands and on many of
the Antilles.




                           3. EHRETIA P. Br.


Trees or shrubs, with entire or dentate leaves, and scaly buds. Flowers
small, in terminal and axillary scorpioid clusters; calyx open or closed
in the bud, the divisions imbricated, ovate or linear; corolla usually
white, with a short or cylindric tube and spreading obtuse lobes; ovary
oblong-conic, 1-celled before anthesis, becoming incompletely 4-celled
by the development of the 2 parietal placentas; style columnar, parted
into 2 divisions terminating in capitate stigmas; ovules attached
laterally near the middle on the inner face of the revolute placentas,
anatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit fleshy, small,
globose, with thin flesh; stone separable into 2 2-celled thick-walled
bony nutlets rounded on the back, plane on the inner face, and attached
to a thin axile column. Seed terete, usually erect, filling the
longitudinally incurved seminal cavity; seed-coat thin, membranaceous,
light brown; embryo axile in thin albumen; cotyledons ovate, plane,
shorter than the elongated superior radicle turned toward the hilum.

Ehretia with about forty species is widely distributed through tropical
and warm extratropical regions of the two hemispheres, with a single
species extending into southeastern Texas.

The generic name commemorates the artistic and scientific labors of the
German botanical artist, George Dionysius Ehret (1708--1770).


              1. Ehretia elliptica DC. Anaqua. Knackaway.

[Illustration: Fig. 763]

Leaves oval or oblong, pointed and apiculate at apex, gradually rounded
or cuneate at base, entire or occasionally furnished above the middle
with a few broad teeth, conspicuously reticulate-venulose, unfolding
late in winter and then thin, light green, lustrous, minutely
tuberculate and pilose above, and covered below like the branches of the
inflorescence, the outer surface of the calyx, and the young branchlets
with rigid pale hairs, often furnished with axillary tufts of white
hairs, and at maturity subcoriaceous, dark green and roughened on the
upper surface by the enlarged circular crowded pale tubercles, and more
or less covered with soft pale or rufous pubescence on the lower
surface, especially on the narrow midrib, and numerous primary veins
arcuate near the margins; irregularly deciduous during the winter;
petioles stout, grooved, pubescent, 1/8'--1/4' in length. Flowers
opening from autumn to early spring, in compact racemose
scorpioid-branched panicles 2'--3' long and broad, on short leafy
branches of the year, with linear acute deciduous bracts about 1/4'
long; calyx open in the bud, divided to the base into 5 linear acute
divisions and nearly as long as the campanulate tube of the corolla,
with ovate thin white lobes 1/2' across when expanded. Fruit ripening in
autumn and spring, light yellow, 1/4' in diameter, with thin sweet
rather juicy edible flesh, and 2 2-seeded nutlets.

A tree, sometimes 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 3 deg. in
diameter, stout spreading branches forming a handsome compact
round-topped head, and slender branchlets, without a terminal bud,
covered when they first appear, like the under surface of the leaves,
the branches of the inflorescence, and the outer surface of the calyx of
the flower, with rigid hirsute pale hairs, becoming in their first
winter light brown tinged with red, sometimes puberulous, often
roughened by numerous pale lenticels, and by small depressed obcordate
leaf-scars displaying a short lunate row of fibro-vascular bundle-scars;
usually much smaller within the territory of the United States, and
often a low shrub. Winter-buds: axillary, minute, 1 or 2 together,
superposed, buried in the bark, and covered by 2 pairs of dark scales
persistent on the base of the growing branchlet and at maturity acute,
dark chestnut-brown, coated with pale hairs, and sometimes 1/4' in
length. Bark of young stems and of the branches thin, light brown, and
broken into thick appressed scales, becoming on old trunks sometimes 1'
thick, deeply furrowed and divided into long thick irregular plate-like
scales gray or reddish brown on the surface and separating into thin
flakes. Wood heavy, hard, not strong, close-grained, difficult to split,
light brown, with thick slightly lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. River valleys in fertile soil, or as a shrub on dry barren
ridges; valleys of the upper Marcos and of the Guadalupe Rivers, Texas,
to the Rio Grande; often extremely common on the bottom-lands, and
probably of its largest size in the United States on the Guadalupe and
Nueces Rivers sixty or seventy miles from the coast; through Nuevo Leon
and Coahuila to the mountains of San Luis Potosi.

Often planted as a shade-tree in the streets of the cities and towns of
western Texas and northeastern Mexico.




                           LXII. VERBENACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with opposite simple entire persistent leaves, without
stipules. Flowers perfect; calyx 5-toothed or parted, persistent under
the fruit; corolla 4 or 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud;
stamens 4, inserted on the tube of the corolla in pairs of different
lengths, anthers 2-celled, introrse, the cells opening longitudinally;
ovary sessile on the annular disk; style simple, 2-lobed and stigmatic
at apex. Fruit a fleshy drupe or a capsule.

The Verbena family with seventy-eight genera, largely composed of
herbaceous plants, is widely scattered through temperate and tropical
regions. Some of the species are important timber-trees, the most
valuable being the Teak, _Tectoria grandis_ L. f., of southeastern Asia
and the Malay Archipelago, and some of the tropical species of Vitex.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Flowers in axillary or terminal racemes; staminodium 1; ovary
        imperfectly 4-celled; fruit a fleshy drupe.
                                                        1. Citharexylon.
  Flowers cymose in pedunculate spikes or heads; staminodium 0; ovary
        1-celled; fruit a capsule.
                                                           2. Avicennia.




                           1. CITHAREXYLON L.


Trees or shrubs, with coriaceous lustrous leaves, slightly angled
branchlets, without a terminal bud, and with minute axillary buds.
Flowers small, on short ebracteolate pedicels, alternate or scattered on
the filiform rachis of a slender raceme; calyx membranaceous,
tubular-campanulate, truncate, minutely 5-toothed, spreading and
cup-shaped under the fruit; corolla salver-form, usually white, the
spreading limb somewhat oblique, 5-lobed, the lobes broad-ovate,
rounded, slightly unequal, the 2 posterior exterior, sometimes reduced
to staminodia; stamens included; filaments short, filiform, slightly
thickened at base, the 2 anterior filaments longer than the others;
anthers oblong; staminodium 1, posterior, linear, acute, rarely fertile;
ovary ovoid, incompletely 4-celled by the development of two parietal
placentas, gradually narrowed into a short included style; ovule
solitary in each cell, erect, attached laterally near the base,
ascending, anatropous; micropyle inferior. Fruit a 2-stoned 4-seeded
fleshy drupe tipped with the remnants of the style, with thin flesh and
a thick-walled bony stone separable into 2 2-seeded compressed smooth
light brown nutlets rounded on the back and concave on the inner face.
Seed erect, without albumen, filling the seminal cavity; seed-coat
membranaceous, light brown; embryo subterete, straight; cotyledons thick
and fleshy, oblong, much longer than the short inferior radicle turned
toward the oblong basal hilum.

Citharexylon with about twenty species is confined to tropical America,
where it is distributed from southern Florida through the West Indies to
southern Mexico, Lower California, Bolivia, and Brazil.

The generic name, from {kithara} and {xylon}, is a translation of the
English West Indian name Fiddle Wood, a corruption of the earlier
French-colonial Bois Fidele, in allusion to the strength and toughness
of the wood of the trees of this genus.


               1. Citharexylon fruticosum L. Fiddle Wood.

                     _Citharexylon villosum_ Jacq.

[Illustration: Fig. 764]

Leaves oblong-obovate to oblong, acute, acuminate, rounded or emarginate
at apex, and gradually narrowed at base, with thickened slightly
revolute margins, and glabrous or coated with short pubescence (var.
_villosum_ Schulz); conspicuously reticulate-venulose, pale green,
3'--4' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a broad pale midrib rounded on the
upper side and remote prominent arcuate veins; petioles stout, grooved,
2/3' in length, separating in falling from an elevated nearly circular
persistent woody base. Flowers fragrant, appearing throughout the year
on slender pedicels from the axils of scarious pubescent bracts, in
drooping axillary pubescent racemes crowded near the end of the branches
and 2'--4' long; calyx coated with pale hairs, or sometimes nearly
glabrous; corolla 1/8' across the expanded lobes of the limb, and
covered on the inner surface of the tube with pale hairs; staminodium
minute. Fruit subglobose to oblong-ovoid, light red-brown, very
lustrous, 1/3' in diameter, with thin sweet rather juicy flesh, and
inclosed nearly to the middle in the cup-like pale brown slightly and
irregularly lobed or sometimes nearly entire calyx; seeds oblong,
narrowed at the rounded ends, about 1/8' long.

A tree, in Florida rarely more than 30 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--7' in
diameter, slender upright branches forming a narrow irregularly shaped
head, and slender slightly many-angled branchlets light yellow and
covered with pale simple caducous hairs or pubescent when they first
appear, becoming in their second year terete and ashy gray; or often a
shrub, with numerous low stems. Winter-buds globose, nearly immersed in
the bark, and covered with hoary pubescence. Bark of the trunk
1/16'--1/8' thick, light brown tinged with red, the surface separating
into minute appressed scales. Wood heavy, exceedingly hard, strong,
close-grained, clear bright red, with thin lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, Cape Canaveral to the southern keys; common and
of its largest size in the United States on the shores of Bay Biscayne
near the mouth of the Miami River, Dade County; northward usually a low
shrub; on the Bahama Islands and on many of the Antilles.




                            2. AVICENNIA L.


Trees, with coriaceous persistent leaves, stout pithy branches thickened
at the nodes and marked by interpetiolar lines, and long thick
horizontal roots producing numerous short vertical thick and fleshy
leafless stems rising above the surface of the soil. Flowers opposite,
cymose, in centripetal pedunculate spikes or heads, closely invested by
a bract and 2 bractlets, the peduncles solitary or in pairs in the axils
of upper leaves and ternate on the end of the branches, their bracts and
bractlets concave, acute, apiculate, keeled on the back, scarious,
slightly ciliate on the margins, shorter than the corolla, persistent
under the fruit; calyx cup-shaped, coated like the bracts and bractlets
with canescent pubescence, divided nearly to the base into 5 concave
ovate rounded lobes imbricated in the bud; corolla campanulate, white,
with a straight cylindric tube shorter than the glabrous or tomentose
spreading 4-lobed limb, the posterior lobe usually larger than the
others; stamens exserted; filaments short, filiform, slightly thickened
at base; anthers ovoid; ovary ovoid, pubescent, 1-celled, gradually
narrowed into an elongated slender style divided at apex into 2 lobes
stigmatic on their inner face; ovules 4, suspended from the summit of a
free central placenta, orthotropous, naked. Fruit an ovoid oblique
compressed 1-seeded capsule apiculate at apex; pericarp thin, light
green, villose-pubescent on the outer surface, longitudinally veined on
the inner surface, opening by the ventral suture and displaying the
embryo enlarging before separating from the branch, ultimately 2-valved.
Seed naked, without albumen; embryo filling the cavity of the fruit,
light green; cotyledons thick and fleshy, broader than long, slightly
pointed, deeply cordate at base, unequal, conduplicate; radicle
elongated, clavate, retrorsely hirsute, inferior, descending obliquely
and included between the lobes of the cotyledons slightly attached near
the apex in the bottom of the capsule to the withered columella by a
minute papillose point; plumule hairy.

Avicennia with three species is widely distributed on maritime shores of
the tropics of the two worlds, with one species reaching those of the
southern United States. Avicennia produces hard strong wood. The bark is
rich in tannic acid, and is used for tanning leather. The chief value of
these trees is in their ability to live on low tidal shores by the
structure of the embryo, which is growing and ready to take root as soon
as it falls into the soft mud, and in the long horizontal roots
furnished with short vertical fleshy leafless branches or aerating
roots, forming a close network which holds the soil together and
prevents it from being washed away by outflowing tides, and extends the
growth of the tree by numerous stems which soon form dense thickets.

The generic name is in honor of the illustrious physician of the Orient,
Avicenna of Bokhara (980--1036).


               1. Avicennia nitida Jacq. Black Mangrove.

[Illustration: Fig. 765]

Leaves oblong or lanceolate-elliptic, rounded or acute at apex and
gradually narrowed at base, dark green and often lustrous above,
hoary-tomentulose below, 2'--3' long and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with
slightly thickened revolute margins, a broad midrib thickened and
grooved toward the base on the upper side, and oblique primary veins
arcuate and joined close to the margins, conspicuous on the 2 surfaces,
and connected by prominent reticulate veinlets; appearing irregularly
and falling early in their second season; petioles broad, channeled,
enlarged at base, and about 1/2' in length. Flowers produced
continuously throughout the year, their bracts and bractlets nearly 1/4'
long, coated with pale or slightly rufous pubescence and about as long
as the lobes of the calyx, in few-flowered short spikes on stout
4-angled canescent peduncles 1/2'--1-1/2' in length, the lateral
peduncles of the ternate terminal cluster subtended by oblong acute
bracts 1/2' long; corolla 1/2' across the expanded slightly tomentose
lobes, and nearly closed in the throat. Fruit 1'--1-1/2' long and
3/4'--1' wide.

A tree, occasionally 60 deg.--70 deg. high, with a short trunk rarely 2 deg. in
diameter, spreading branches forming a broad round-topped head, and
branchlets at first slightly angled, coated with fine hoary deciduous
pubescence, and light orange color, becoming in their second year more
or less contorted, light or dark gray, conspicuously marked by the
interpetiolar lines and by horizontal leaf-scars displaying a central
row of fibro-vascular bundle-scars; usually not more than 20 deg.--30 deg. tall,
with a short slender stem, and toward the northern limit of its range a
low shrub. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/2' thick, roughened with thin
irregularly appressed dark brown scales tinged with red, and in falling
displaying the bright orange-red inner bark. Wood very heavy, hard,
rather coarse-grained, with numerous medullary rays and eccentric layers
of annual growth, dark brown or nearly black, with thick brown sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, St. Augustine to the southern keys on the east
coast, and from Cedar Keys to Cape Sable on the west coast; on some of
the islands in Mississippi Sound, and on the shore of Terrebonne and
Cameron Parishes, and on most of their islands, Louisiana; on the Bahama
Islands, on many of the Antilles, and southward to Brazil; and on the
west coast of Africa; in the United States of its largest size in
Florida just north of Cape Sable; north of Matanzas Inlet on the east
coast of Florida usually with stems only a few feet tall.




                           LXIII. SOLANACEAE.


Trees, shrubs or herbs, with colorless juice and rank smelling foliage,
alternate rarely opposite leaves, without stipules, and perfect regular
yellow, white or purple flowers on ebracteolate pedicels in usually
dichotomous cymes; calyx campanulate, usually 5-lobed, the lobes
slightly imbricated or valvate, usually persistent; corolla
gamopetalous, usually 5, rarely 4-lobed, the lobes induplicate-valvate
or plicate in the bud; stamens inserted on the tube of the corolla and
alternate with and as many as its lobes, equal or unequal; filaments
filiform or dilated at base; anthers 2-celled, introrse, opening by
apical or longitudinal slits, disk pulvinate or annular, entire, sinuate
or 2-lobed or 0; ovary sessile or stipitate on the disk, 2 or rarely
3--5-celled; style slender, terminating in a small or more or less
dilated stigma; ovules numerous, attached in many series on the axile
placenta, rarely few or solitary, anatropous or slightly amphitropous.
Fruit baccate or capsular. Seeds numerous; testa membranaceous or
crustaceous; embryo usually slender and curved in fleshy albumen;
cotyledons semiterete, shorter than the radicle turned toward the hilum.

A family of 83 genera widely distributed in tropical and temperate
regions; often producing fruit with narcotic or poisonous properties,
and containing among its useful members the Potato and the Tomato.




                             1. SOLANUM L.


Herbs, shrubs or rarely trees. Leaves alternate, lobed or pinnatifid,
persistent or deciduous. Flowers in mostly lateral, extra-axillary or
axillary clusters; calyx and corolla 5, rarely 4--10-parted, the calyx
persistent under the fruit, corolla rotate in the bud; stamens 5, rarely
4--6, exserted; filaments short; anthers oblong or acuminate, rarely
ovoid, converging round the style, opening at apex by two pores; disk
not conspicuous, or annular; ovary usually 2, rarely 3 or 4-celled;
style simple; stigma usually small; ovules numerous. Fruit baccate,
often surrounded by the enlarged calyx, usually globose and juicy; seeds
compressed, orbicular or subreniform.

Solanum with some 1200 species is widely distributed through the
tropics, with a few species extending into cooler regions, the larger
number of species occurring in the New World.

The name is of uncertain derivation.


                      1. Solanum verbascifolium L.

[Illustration: Fig. 766]

Leaves ovate to elliptic or oblong, acute or acuminate at apex, rounded
or cuneate at base, entire, thickly coated when they unfold with hoary
tomentum, and at maturity thin, yellow-green and stellate-pubescent on
the upper surface, paler and more densely stellate-pubescent on the
lower surface, 5'--7' long and 1'--3' wide, with slightly undulate
margins, a prominent midrib and slender primary veins; persistent;
petioles slender, densely stellate-pubescent, 3/4'--1' in length.
Flowers appearing throughout the year on pedicels 1/4' long and much
thickened at maturity, in broad many-flowered dichotomous
stellate-pubescent cymes on peduncles 1'--4' in length from the axils of
upper leaves; calyx about 1/2' long, densely stellate, the lobes
triangular-ovate; corolla about 3/4'--1' wide after the expansion of the
oblong-ovate lobes; stamens exserted. Fruit globose, yellow, 1/2'--3/4'
in diameter, surrounded at base by the densely stellate calyx, with
ovate acute lobes about 1/6' long; seeds nearly orbicular to obovoid,
much compressed, yellow, 1/12' in diameter.

A tree, rarely 20 deg. high, with a trunk 4' or 5' in diameter, spreading
branches forming a flat-topped head, and stout unarmed branchlets
densely stellate-tomentose during their first season, becoming glabrous
and light orange-brown or gray-brown in the following year; usually
smaller and generally a shrub. Bark of the trunk thin, close, much
roughened by many wart-like excrescences, light greenish or yellowish
gray.

Florida, rich hummocks, Merritt's Island on the east coast, southward to
the shores of Bay Biscayne, and to the Cape Sable region; on the Bahama
Islands, and many of the Antilles, in Mexico and Central America, in the
tropics of the Old World and in southeastern China; now thoroughly
established but more probably introduced than indigenous in Florida.




                           LXIV. BIGNONIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, and opposite or rarely alternate
simple (in the arborescent genera of the United States) leaves, without
stipules. Flowers perfect, large and showy; calyx closed in the bud,
bilabiately splitting in anthesis; corolla hypogynous, 2-lipped,
5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud; stamens 2 or 4, inserted on
the corolla, introrse; anthers 2-celled, the cells opening
longitudinally; staminodia 1 or 3; ovary sessile, 1 or 2-celled,
gradually narrowed into a slender simple style 2-lobed and stigmatic at
apex; ovules numerous, horizontal, anatropous; raphe ventral; micropyle
superior. Fruit a linear woody loculicidally 2-valved capsule, or a
berry. Seeds without albumen; embryo filling the cavity of the seed.

The Bignonia family with about one hundred genera, many of them of
scandent plants, is widely distributed in the tropics and most abundant
in the New World, with a few genera extending into temperate regions. Of
the five genera of the United States three are arborescent. Many of the
species are important timber-trees.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit a linear woody capsule; ovary 2-celled; leaves thin, deciduous.
    Stamens 4; staminodium 1; leaves linear, often alternate or
          scattered.
                                                           1. Chilopsis.
    Stamens 2; staminodia 3; leaves oblong-ovate, mostly opposite.
                                                             2. Catalpa.
  Fruit a berry; stamens 4; staminodium 1; ovary 1-celled; leaves
        coriaceous, persistent.
                                                           3. Enallagma.




                          1. CHILOPSIS D. Don.


A tree, with slender terete branches, without a terminal bud, minute
compressed rusty-pubescent axillary buds covered by several imbricated
scales, those of the inner rows accrescent, deeply furrowed bark, soft
coarse-grained dark-colored wood, and fibrous roots. Leaves opposite,
alternate or scattered, involute in the bud, linear or
linear-lanceolate, long-pointed, entire, 3-nerved, the lateral nerves
obscure, reticulate-venulose, thin, light green, smooth or glutinous,
short-petiolate or sessile from an enlarged base, deciduous, in falling
leaving small elevated suborbicular scars. Flowers on slender pedicels
from the axils of ovate acute scarious tomentose deciduous bracts and
bibracteolate near the middle, in short puberulous crowded racemes or
rarely panicles terminal on leafy branches of the year; calyx pale
pubescent, puberulous or rarely glabrous, closed before anthesis into an
ovoid rounded apiculate bud splitting to the base into 2 ovate
divisions, minutely toothed or long-pointed at apex, the upper with 3,
the lower with 2 rigid teeth, membranaceous, dark green; corolla white
shaded into pale purple or rarely white, slightly oblique, enlarged and
blotched with yellow in the throat, the limb undulate-margined, the
upper lip 2-lobed, the lower unequally 3-lobed, the central lobe much
longer than the others; stamens 4, inserted in 1 row near the base of
the corolla in pairs, introrse; filaments filiform, glabrous, the
anterior nearly twice as long as the posterior; anther oblong, the cells
divergent in anthesis; staminodium 1, posterior, linear, acute; disk
thin, nearly obsolete; ovary 2-celled, conic, glabrous, divided at apex
into 2 ovate flat rounded lobes; ovules inserted in many series on a
central placenta. Fruit a slender elongated thin-walled capsule
gradually narrowed from the middle to the ends, splitting into 2 concave
valves. Seeds numerous, inserted in 2 ranks near the margin of the thin
flat woody septum free from the walls of the capsule, compressed,
oblong; seed-coat thin, light brown, longitudinally veined, produced
into broad lateral wings divided at their rounded ends into a long
fringe of thin soft white hairs; cotyledons plane, broader than long,
slightly 2-lobed, and rounded laterally; radicle short, erect, turned
toward the oblong basal hilum.

The genus is represented by a single species, a native of the region
adjacent to the boundary between the United States and Mexico.

The generic name, from {cheilos} and {opsis}, is without special
significance.


                1. Chilopsis linearis DC. Desert Willow.

[Illustration: Fig. 767]

Leaves unfolding in early spring, 6'--12' long and 1/4'--1/3' wide;
deciduous during the following winter. Flowers appearing in early summer
in racemes or narrow panicles 3'--4' long, and continuing to open for
several months in succession, 3/4'--1-1/2' long and 3/4'--1-1/4' across
the expanded lobes of the corolla. Fruit ripening in the autumn, 7'--12'
long, 1/4' thick in the middle, persistent on the branches during the
winter; seeds 1/3' long and 1/8' wide.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk usually more or less reclining,
often hollow, and sometimes a foot in diameter, slender upright branches
forming a narrow head, and branchlets glabrous or covered with dense
tomentum when they first appear, light chestnut-brown during their first
season, later becoming darker and tinged with red, or sometimes ashy
gray; or often a straggling shrub. Bark of the trunk 1/8'--1/4' thick,
dark brown, and divided into broad branching ridges broken on the
surface into small thick plate-like scales. Wood soft, not strong,
close-grained, brown streaked with yellow, with thin light-colored
sapwood of 2 or 3 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Banks of streams, and depressions in the desert, usually
in dry gravelly porous soil; valley of the lower Rio Grande, and through
western Texas, southern New Mexico, Arizona, southern Utah and Nevada to
San Jacinto Valley, San Diego County, California; in northern Mexico and
Lower California (Calamujuit).

Occasionally cultivated as an ornamental plant in the southern states,
and in Mexico.




                            2. CATALPA Scop.


Trees, with stout terete branchlets, without a terminal bud, minute
globose axillary buds nearly immersed in the bark and covered by
numerous scales, the inner accrescent, thick pith, thin scaly bark, soft
light-colored wood very durable in contact with the soil, and fibrous
roots. Leaves opposite or in verticels of 3, involute in the bud, entire
or lobed, oblong-ovate, often cordate, long-petiolate, deciduous.
Flowers on slender bracteolate pedicels, in terminal compound
trichotomously branched panicles or corymbs, with linear-lanceolate
deciduous bracts and bractlets; calyx membranaceous, subglobose, closed
and apiculate in the bud, in anthesis splitting nearly to the base into
2 broad-ovate entire pointed apiculate lobes; corolla thin, variously
marked and spotted on the inner surface, inserted on the nearly obsolete
disk, the tube broad, campanulate, occasionally furnished on the upper
side near the base with an external lobed appendage, and oblique and
enlarged above into a broad limb, with spreading lips undulate on the
margin, the posterior 2-parted, the anterior deeply 3-lobed; stamens and
staminodia inserted near the base of the corolla; stamens 2, anterior,
included or slightly exserted; filaments flattened, arcuate; anthers
oblong, carried to the rear of the corolla and face to face on either
side of the stigma by a half turn of the filaments near their base, the
cells divergent in anthesis; staminodia 3, free, filiform, minute or
rudimentary; ovary 2-celled, sessile on the hypogynous nearly obsolete
disk, abruptly contracted into an elongated filiform style divided at
apex into 2 stigmatic lobes exserted above the anthers; ovules inserted
in many series on a central placenta. Fruit an elongated subterete
capsule tapering from the middle to the ends, persistent on the branches
during the winter, ultimately splitting into 2 valves. Seeds numerous,
compressed, oblong, inserted in 2--4 ranks near the margin of the flat
or more or less thickened woody septum free from the walls of the
capsule; seed-coat thin, light brown or silvery gray, longitudinally
veined, produced into broad lateral wings notched at base of the seed
and divided at their narrowed or rounded ends into tufts of long coarse
white hairs; cotyledons plane, broader than long, slightly 2-lobed,
rounded laterally; radicle short, erect, turned toward the oblong
conspicuous basal hilum.

Catalpa with seven species is confined to the eastern United States, the
West Indies, and eastern China, two of the species being North American.
Catalpa contains a bitter principle and is a tonic and diuretic.

The generic name is that by which one of the North American species was
known among the Cherokee Indians.


               CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES.

  Flowers in many-flowered crowded panicles; calyx glabrous; corolla
        thickly-spotted on the inner surface; fruit slender,
        thin-walled; leaves short-acuminate.
                                                 1. C. bignonioides (C).
  Flowers in few-flowered open panicles; calyx often sparingly villose
        or pubescent; corolla inconspicuously spotted; fruit stout,
        thick-walled; leaves caudate-acuminate.
                                                  2. C. speciosa (A, C).


          1. Catalpa bignonioides Walt. Catalpa. Indian Bean.

                        _Catalpa Catalpa_ Karst.

[Illustration: Fig. 768]

Leaves broad-ovate, rather abruptly contracted into a slender point or
sometimes rounded at apex, cordate at base, entire or often laterally
lobed, coated below when they unfold with pale tomentum and pilose
above, and at maturity thin and firm, light green and glabrous on the
upper surface, pale and pubescent on the lower surface, 5'--6' long and
4'--5' wide, with a prominent midrib, and primary veins arcuate near the
margins, connected by reticulate veinlets and furnished in the axils
with clusters of dark hairs; turning black and falling after the first
severe frost in the autumn; petioles stout, terete, 5'--6' in length.
Flowers opening at the end of May or in June, on slender sparingly
villose or glabrous pedicels, in compact many-flowered panicles 8'--10'
long and broad, with light green branches tinged with purple; calyx 1/2'
long, glabrous, green or light purple; corolla white, nearly 2' long,
1-1/2' wide, marked on the inner surface on the lower side by 2 rows of
yellow blotches following 2 parallel ridges or folds, and in the throat
and on the lower lobes of the limb by crowded conspicuous purple spots.
Fruit ripening in the autumn, in thick-branched orange-colored panicles,
remaining unopened during the winter, 6'--20' long and 1/4'--1/3' thick
in the middle, with a thin wall bright chestnut-brown on the outer
surface and light olive-brown and lustrous on the inner surface,
splitting in the spring into 2 flat valves; seeds about 1' long, 1/4'
wide, silvery gray, with pointed wings terminating in long pencil-shaped
tufts of white hairs.

A tree, rarely 60 deg. high, with a short trunk 3 deg.--4 deg. in diameter, long
heavy brittle branches forming a broad head, and dichotomous branchlets
green shaded with purple when they first appear, and during their first
winter thickened at the nodes, slightly puberulous, lustrous, light
orange color or gray-brown, covered with a slight glaucous bloom, marked
by large pale scattered lenticels, and by large oval elevated leaf-scars
containing a circle of conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars, becoming
in their third or fourth year, reddish brown and marked by a network of
thin flat brown ridges. Winter-buds covered by chestnut-brown
broad-ovate rounded slightly puberulous loosely imbricated scales, those
of the inner ranks when fully grown bright green, pubescent, and
sometimes 2' in length. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/3' thick, light brown
tinged with red, and separating on the surface into large thin irregular
scales. Wood not strong, coarse-grained, light brown, with lighter
colored often nearly white sapwood of 1 or 2 layers of annual growth;
used and highly valued for fence-posts and rails.

Distribution. Usually supposed to be indigenous on the banks of the
rivers of southwestern Georgia, western Florida, and central Alabama and
Mississippi, and now widely naturalized through the south Atlantic
states and in Kentucky and Tennessee.

Often planted for the decoration of parks and gardens in the eastern
United States, and hardy as far north as eastern New England, and in
western, central, and southern Europe. A dwarf round-headed form (var.
_nana_ Bur.) of unknown origin is often cultivated under the erroneous
name of _C. Bungei_ Hort, not C. A. Meyer.

x _Catalpa hybrida_ Spaeth a hybrid of this species and the Chinese _C.
ovata_ G. Don is occasionally cultivated.


              2. Catalpa speciosa Engelm. Western Catalpa.

[Illustration: Fig. 769]

Leaves oval, long-pointed, cordate at base, and usually entire or
furnished with 1 or 2 lateral teeth, pilose above when they unfold and
covered below and on the petioles with pale or rufous tomentum, and at
maturity thick and firm, dark green on the upper surface and covered
with soft pubescence on the lower surface, especially on the stout
midrib and the primary veins furnished in their axils with large
clusters of dark glands, 10'--12' long and 7'--8' wide; turning black
and falling after the first severe frost of the autumn; petioles stout,
terete, 4'--6' in length. Flowers appearing late in May or early in
June, on slender purple glabrous pedicels furnished near the middle with
1--3 bractlets, in open few-flowered panicles 5'--6' long and broad,
with green or purple branches marked by orange-colored lenticels, the
lowest branches often in the axils of small leaves; calyx purple, often
sparingly villose or pubescent on the outer surface; corolla white,
often spotted externally with purple near the base, about 2' long and
2-1/2' wide, and marked internally on the lower side by 2 bands of
yellow blotches following 2 lateral ridges and by occasional purple
spots spreading over the lobes of the lower lip of the limb; filaments
marked near the base by oblong purple spots. Fruit 8'--20' long,
1/2'--3/4' in diameter near the middle, with a thick wall splitting
toward spring into 2 concave valves; seeds 1' long and 1/3' wide, with a
light brown coat, and wings rounded at the ends and terminating in a
fringe of short hairs.

A tree, in the forest occasionally 120 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk
rarely 4-1/2 deg. in diameter, slender branches forming a narrow
round-topped head, and branchlets light green often tinged with purple
and pilose with scattered pale hairs when they first appear, light
orange color or reddish brown, covered with a slight bloom during their
first winter, and marked by numerous conspicuous pale lenticels and by
the elevated oval leaf-scars 1/4' long and displaying a circular row of
large fibro-vascular bundle-scars, becoming darker in their second and
third years; usually smaller, and in open situations rarely more than
50 deg. high, with a short trunk and a broad head of spreading branches.
Winter-buds covered by loosely imbricated ovate chestnut-brown scales
keeled on the back, slightly apiculate at apex, those of the inner ranks
at maturity foliaceous, obovate, acute, gradually narrowed below to a
sessile base, many-nerved with dark veins, pubescent on the lower
surface, and sometimes 2-1/2' long and 3/4' wide. Bark of the trunk
3/4'--1' thick, brown tinged with red, and broken on the surface into
thick scales. Wood light, soft, not strong, coarse-grained, light brown,
with thin nearly white sapwood of 1 or 2 layers of annual growth;
largely used for fence-posts, rails, telegraph and telephone poles, and
occasionally for furniture and the interior finish of houses.

Distribution. Borders of streams and ponds, and fertile often inundated
bottom-lands; valley of the Vermilion River, Illinois, through southern
Illinois and Indiana, western Kentucky and Tennessee, southeastern
Missouri and northeastern Arkansas; very abundant and probably of its
largest size in southern Illinois and Indiana; naturalized through
cultivation in southern Arkansas, western Louisiana, and eastern Texas.

Often planted in the prairie region of the Mississippi basin as a
timber-tree, and as an ornament of parks and gardens in the eastern
states, and now in many other countries with a temperate climate.




                           3. ENALLAGMA Bail.


Trees, with scaly bark, and stout slightly angled branchlets. Leaves
alternate, short-petiolate, persistent. Flowers solitary, or in
few-flowered fascicles on long bibracteolate peduncles from the axils of
upper leaves or from the sides of the branches; calyx coriaceous,
splitting in anthesis into 2 unequal broad divisions, or sometimes
slightly 5-lobed, deciduous; corolla inserted under the hypogynous
pulvinate fleshy disk, yellow streaked with purple, or dingy purple,
tubular-campanulate, more or less ventricose on the lower side by a
transverse fold, abruptly dilated into an oblique 2-lipped obscurely
5-lobed laciniately toothed limb; stamens 4, inserted in 2 ranks on the
tube of the corolla, in pairs of different lengths, introrse, included
or slightly exserted; filaments filiform; anthers oblong, the cells
divergent; staminodium solitary, posterior, often 0; ovary sessile,
1-celled, ovate-conic, gradually narrowed into an elongated simple
exserted style; stigma terminal, 2-lobed, the lobes stigmatic on their
inner face, or entire; ovules in many ranks on 2 thickened 2-lobed
lateral parietal placentas. Fruit baccate, oblong or ovoid; indehiscent,
umbonate at apex, many-seeded; pericarp thin and brittle; becoming hard,
light brown and separable into 2 layers, the inner membranaceous, filled
with the united and thickened fleshy viscid placentas attached at base
by a cluster of thick fibro-vascular bundles. Seeds imbedded irregularly
in the placental mass, compressed, suborbicular, cordate above and below
and deeply grooved on the convex faces; embryo filling the seminal
cavity, flattened, thick and fleshy, deeply grooved, becoming black in
drying; radicle minute, turned toward the lateral hilum.

Enallagma with three or four species is distributed from southern
Florida through the Antilles to southern Mexico and Central America.


           1. Enallagma cucurbitina Urb. Black Calabash Tree.

                      _Crescentia cucurbitina_ L.

[Illustration: Fig. 770]

Leaves crowded near the end of the branches, obovate-oblong or
ovate-oblong, contracted into a short broad point or rarely rounded or
emarginate at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, and entire,
with cartilaginous slightly revolute margins, coriaceous, dark green and
lustrous above, paler and yellow-green below, 6'--8' long and 1-1/2'--4'
wide, with a broad stout midrib deeply impressed on the upper side,
conspicuous primary veins arcuate and united near the margins, and
reticulate veinlets; unfolding in the spring, and persistent until their
second year; petioles thick, covered with glands, and about 1/4' in
length. Flowers appearing in April and May and also in autumn,
bad-smelling, on thick drooping pedicels solitary in the axils of upper
leaves, 1-1/2'--2' long, furnished below the middle with 2 minute rigid
acute bractlets and enlarged at apex into the thick oblique receptacle;
calyx light green and slightly glandular at base, splitting nearly to
the bottom into 2 ovate pointed lobes nearly as long as the tube of the
corolla; corolla thick and leathery, dull purple or creamy white, and
marked by narrow purple bands on the lower side, and 2' long, with a
narrow tube creamy white within and slightly contracted above the base,
the transverse fold near its apex, the limb erosely cut on the margins
and obscurely 2-lipped, the upper lip slightly divided into 2 reflexed
lobes, the lower obscurely 3-lobed; stamens inserted near the middle of
the tube of the corolla, those of the anterior pair below the others and
above the linear staminodium; ovary obliquely conic; stigma 2-lobed.
Fruit ovoid or oblong, 3'--4' long, 1-1/2'--2' wide, dark green,
minutely rugose-punctulate, and marked with 4 obscure longitudinal
ridges corresponding with the margins and midrib of the carpellary
leaves, raised on the thickened woody disk and pendent on a stout
drooping stalk 1-1/2'--2' long and much enlarged at apex; shell 1/16'
thick, ultimately hard and brittle, lustrous on the outer surface and
lined with a thin membranaceous shining light brown coat marked by the
broad placental scars; seeds 5/8' long and broad and 1/4' thick, with a
minute lateral hilum just above the basal sinus; seed-coat of 2 layers,
the outer thin, dark reddish brown, rugose, and separable from the thick
pale felt-like inner layer; cotyledons with 2 ear-like folds near the
base, inclosing the radicle in their lower sinus.

A tree, in Florida 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with a trunk 4'--5' in diameter, long
slender drooping branches covered with wart-like excrescences, and stout
slightly angled branchlets roughened and somewhat enlarged at the nodes
by the thickening of the large crowded cup-shaped persistent woody bases
of the leaves, and covered with thin creamy white bark becoming dark or
ashy gray in their third year. Winter-buds with linear acute apiculate
scales becoming woody, and persistent for one or two years. Bark of the
trunk about 1/8' thick, light brown tinged with red, and irregularly
divided into large thin scales. Wood heavy, hard, very close-grained,
thin, light brown or orange color, with lighter colored sapwood.

Distribution. Florida, only near the shores of Bay Biscayne on rich
hummocks; common on the shores of many of the Antilles, and southward to
southern Mexico, the Pacific coast of the Isthmus of Panama, and to
Venezuela.

B. Ovary inferior (_partly superior in Caprifoliaceae_).




                             LXV. RUBIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, and opposite simple entire leaves
turning black in drying, with stipules. Flowers regular, perfect;
calyx-tube adnate to the ovary, its limb 4 or 5-lobed or toothed;
corolla 4 or 5-lobed; stamens inserted on the tube of the corolla, as
many as and alternate with its lobes; filaments free, or united at base;
anthers introrse, 2-celled, the cells opening longitudinally; disk
epigynous, annular; ovary inferior; style slender; ovules numerous, or 1
in each cell; raphe ventral; micropyle superior. Fruit capsular,
akene-like, or drupaceous. Seeds with albumen; seed-coat membranaceous.

The Madder family with some three hundred and fifty genera is chiefly
tropical, with a few herbaceous genera confined exclusively to temperate
regions. To this family belong the Coffee, the Cinchonas, South American
trees yielding quinine from their bark, and the plant which produces
ipecacuanha, a species of Cephaelis and a native of Brazil, the Gardenia
and other plants cultivated for their fragrant flowers.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Fruit a capsule; seeds numerous, surrounded by a wing; parts of the
        flower in 5's.
    Calyx 5-lobed, the lobes unequal, sometimes developing into
          rose-colored leaf-like bodies; filaments free; wing of the
          seed broad, oblong-ovate, unsymmetric on the sides; leaves
          deciduous.
                                                           1. Pinckneya.
    Calyx 5-toothed; filaments united into a short tube; wing of the
          seed narrow, symmetric; leaves persistent.
                                                            2. Exostema.
  Fruit akene-like, 1 or 2-seeded; parts of the flower in 4's or rarely
        in 5's, flowers in pedunculate globose heads; leaves deciduous.
                                                        3. Cephalanthus.
  Fruit drupaceous, with a 4-celled stone; parts of the flower in 4's;
        leaves persistent.
                                                           4. Guettarda.




                          1. PINCKNEYA Michx.


A tree, with fibrous roots, scaly light brown bitter bark, resinous
scaly buds, stout terete pithy branchlets coated while young with hoary
tomentum, becoming glabrous, and marked by scattered minute white
lenticels and large nearly orbicular or obcordate leaf-scars displaying
a lunate row of numerous crowded fibro-vascular bundle-scars. Leaves
complanate in the bud, elliptic to oblong-ovate, acute at apex, cuneate
at base, and gradually narrowed into a long stout petiole, thin, coated
at first with pale pubescence, and at maturity dark green and puberulous
above, paler and puberulous below, especially along the stout midrib and
primary veins, deciduous; stipules interpetiolar, conspicuously
glandular-punctate at base on the inner face, inclosing the leaf in the
bud, triangular, subulate, pink, becoming oblong, acute, scarious, light
brown, caducous. Flowers in pedunculate terminal and axillary pubescent
trichotomous few-flowered cymes, with linear-lanceolate acute bracts and
bractlets at first pink, becoming scarious, deciduous, or sometimes
enlarging and rose-colored; flower-buds sulcate, coated with thick pale
tomentum; calyx-tube clavate, bracteolate at base, covered with hoary
tomentum, not closed in the bud, the limb 5-lobed, with
subulate-lanceolate lobes green tinged with pink, scarious, or in the
central flower of the ultimate division of the cyme with 1 or rarely
with 2 of the lobes produced into oval or ovate acute rose-colored
puberulous membranaceous leaf-like bodies, deciduous; corolla
salver-form, light yellow, cinereo-tomentose, with a long narrow tube
somewhat enlarged in the throat, 5-lobed, the lobes valvate in the bud,
oblong, obtuse, marked by red lines and pilose with long white hairs on
the inner surface, recurved after anthesis; stamens exserted; filaments
filiform, free; anthers oblong, emarginate; ovary 2-celled; style
filiform, exserted, slightly enlarged, 2-lobed and stigmatic at apex;
ovules numerous, inserted in 2 ranks on a thin 2-lipped placenta
longitudinally adnate to the inner face of the cell. Fruit a subglobose
obscurely 2-lobed 2-celled capsule, loculicidally 2-valved, the valves
thin and papery, light brown, puberulous, especially at the base,
faintly rayed, marked by oblong pale spots and by the scars left by the
falling of the deciduous calyx-limb and style, sometimes tardily
septicidally 2-parted to the middle, persistent on the branches during
the winter, the valves finally falling from the woody axis, their outer
layer very thin, brittle, separable from the slightly thicker tough
woody inner layer. Seeds horizontal, 2-ranked, minute, compressed;
seed-coat thin, light brown, reticulate-veined, produced into a broad
thin oblong-ovate wing, unsymmetrical on the sides, acute at apex, and
longer above than below the seed; embryo elongated, immersed in the
thick fleshy albumen; cotyledons ovate-oblong, foliaceous, longer than
the terete radicle turned toward the hilum.

The genus is represented by a single species of the southeastern United
States.

The generic name is in honor of Charles Cotesworth Pinckney (1746--1825)
of South Carolina, the Revolutionary patriot.


                1. Pinckneya pubens Michx. Georgia Bark.

[Illustration: Fig. 771]

Leaves unfolding in March, 5'--8' long, 3'--4' wide; petioles
2/3'--1-1/2' in length. Flowers 1-1/2' long appearing late in May and
early in June, in open clusters 7'--8' across, their petaloid
calyx-lobes sometimes 2-1/2' long and 1/2' wide. Fruit ripening in the
autumn 1' long and 2/3' wide; seeds with their wings about 1/2' long and
1/3' wide.

A tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk occasionally 8'--10' in diameter,
slender spreading branches forming usually a narrow round-topped head,
and branchlets coated when they first appear with hoary tomentum soon
turning light red-brown, pubescent during the summer, and slightly
puberulous during their first winter, ultimately becoming glabrous.
Winter-buds: terminal ovoid, terete, 1/2' long, contracted above the
middle into a slender point, and covered by the dark red-brown
lanceolate acute stipules of the last pair of leaves of the previous
year, often persistent at the base of the growing shoots and marked at
the base by 2 broadly ovate pale scar-like slightly pilose elevations;
axillary buds obtuse, minute, nearly immersed in the bark. Bark of the
trunk about 1/4' thick, with a light brown surface divided into minute
appressed scales. Wood close-grained, soft, weak, brown, with
lighter-colored sapwood of 8--10 layers of annual growth. The bark has
been used in the treatment of intermittent fevers.

Distribution. Low wet sandy swamps on the borders of streams; coast
region of South Carolina through southern Georgia and northern Florida
to the valley of the lower Apalachicola River; rare and local.




                           2. EXOSTEMA Rich.


Trees or shrubs, with terete branchlets, and bitter bark. Leaves sessile
or petiolate, persistent; stipules interpetiolar, deciduous. Flowers
axillary and solitary or in terminal pedunculate cymes, fragrant, the
peduncle bibracteolate above the middle; calyx-tube ovoid, clavate or
turbinate, the limb short, 5-lobed, the lobes nearly triangular,
persistent; corolla 5-lobed, white, salver-form, the tube long and
narrow, erect, the lobes of the limb linear, elongated, spreading,
imbricated in the bud; filaments filiform, exserted, united at base into
a tube inserted on and adnate to the tube of the corolla; anthers
oblong-linear; ovary 2-celled; style elongated, slender, exserted;
stigma capitate, simple or minutely 2-lobed; ovules numerous, attached
on the 2 sides of a fleshy oblong peltate placenta fixed to the inner
face of the cell, ascending. Fruit a many-seeded 2-celled capsule
septicidally 2-valved, the valves 2-parted, their outer layer
membranaceous, separable from the crustaceous inner layer. Seeds
compressed, oblong, imbricated downward on the placenta; seed-coat
chestnut-brown, lustrous, produced into a narrow wing; embryo minute, in
fleshy albumen; cotyledons flat; radicle terete, inferior.

Exostema with about twenty species is confined to the tropics of
America, and is most abundant in the Antilles, one species reaching the
shores of southern Florida. The bark contains active tonic properties,
and has been used as a febrifuge.

The generic name, from {exo} and {stema}, relates to the long exserted
stamens.


               1. Exostema caribaeum R. & S. Prince Wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 772]

Leaves oblong-ovate to lanceolate, contracted into a slender point and
apiculate at apex, gradually narrowed and cuneate at base, entire, thick
and coriaceous, dark green on the upper surface and yellow-green on the
lower surface, 1-1/2'--3' long and 1/2'--1-1/4' wide, with a prominent
orange-colored midrib and conspicuous reticulate veinlets; unfolding in
the autumn and in early spring and summer, and persistent for 1 or 2
years; petioles slender, orange-colored, 1/4'--1/2' in length; stipules
nearly triangular, apiculate, with entire dentate or ciliate margins,
about 1/16' long, and in falling marking the branchlets with ring-like
scars. Flowers axillary, solitary, appearing from March until June,
about 3' long, on slender pedicels spirally twisted before the flowers
open; calyx-tube ovoid; corolla glabrous; filaments united into a short
tube. Fruit 2/3' long, becoming black in drying; seeds oblong, 1/8'
long, with a dark brown papillose coat and a light brown wing.

A glabrous tree, in Florida sometimes 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a trunk
10'--12' in diameter, slender erect branches forming a narrow head, and
terete branchlets dark green at first, soon becoming dark red-brown and
covered with pale lenticels, and in their second year ashy gray and
conspicuously marked by the elevated leaf-scars. Bark of the trunk about
1/8' thick, and divided by deep fissures into square smooth pale or
nearly white plates. Wood very heavy, exceedingly hard, strong,
close-grained, light brown handsomely streaked with different shades of
yellow and brown, with bright yellow sapwood of 12--20 layers of annual
growth.

Distribution. Florida, shores of Bay Biscayne and on the Everglade Keys,
Dade County, and on the southern keys; abundant on Key West and Upper
Metacombe Key; on many of the Antilles, in southern Mexico, and on the
west coast of Nicaragua.




                           3. CEPHALANTHUS L.


Small trees or shrubs, with opposite or verticillate petiolate leaves,
interpetiolar stipules, and scaly buds. Flowers nectariferous, yellow or
creamy white, sessile in the axils of glandular bracts, in dense globose
pedunculate terminal or axillary solitary or panicled heads; receptacle
globose, setose; calyx-tube obpyramidal, with a short limb unequally 4
or 5-toothed or lobed; corolla tubular salver-form, divided into 4 or 5
short spreading or reflexed lobes usually furnished with a minute dark
gland at the base or on the side of each sinus, puberulous on the inner
surface of the tube, the lobes imbricated in the bud; stamens inserted
on the throat of the corolla; filaments short; anthers linear-oblong,
sagittate, apiculate at base; pistil of 2 carpels; ovary 2-celled; style
filiform, elongated; stigma clavate, entire; ovule solitary in each
cell, suspended from the apex of the cell on a short papillose funicle,
anatropous. Fruit obpyramidal, coriaceous, 2-coccous. Seeds oblong,
pendulous, covered at apex by a white spongy aril; embryo straight in
cartilaginous albumen; cotyledons oblong, obtuse; radicle elongated,
superior.

Cephalanthus with seven species is widely distributed in North and South
America, and in southern and eastern Asia, and the Malay Archipelago.

The generic name, from {kephale} and {anthos}, relates to the capitate
inflorescence.


              1. Cephalanthus occidentalis L. Button Bush.

[Illustration: Fig. 773]

Leaves ovate, lanceolate or elliptic, acute, acuminate or short-pointed
at apex, rounded or cuneate at base, thin, dark green on the upper
surface, paler and glabrous or puberulous on the lower surface, 2'--7'
long and 1/2'--3-1/2' wide, with a stout light yellow midrib often
covered below with long white hairs and 5 or 6 pairs of slender primary
veins nearly parallel with the sides of the leaf; deciduous, or
persistent during the winter; petioles stout, grooved, glabrous,
1/2'--3/4' in length; stipules minute, nearly triangular. Flowers:
flower-heads 1'--1-1/2' in diameter on slender peduncles 1'--2' long,
usually in panicles 4'--5' in length, their lower peduncles from the
axil of upper leaves; flowers creamy white, very fragrant, opening from
the middle of May in Florida and Texas to the middle of August in Canada
and on the mountains of California; calyx usually 4 or occasionally
5-lobed, with short rounded lobes, and slightly villose toward the base;
corolla glandular or eglandular; anthers nearly sessile, included,
discharging their pollen before the flowers open; disk thin and obscure.
Fruit ripening late in the autumn in heads 5/8'--3/4' in diameter, green
tinged with red and ultimately dark red-brown.

A tree, occasionally 40 deg.--50 deg. high, with a straight tapering trunk a
foot in diameter, and frequently free of limbs for 15 deg.--20 deg., ascending
and spreading branches, and stout branchlets with a thick pith, glabrous
and marked by large oblong pale lenticels, and developed mostly in
verticels of 3's from the axillary buds of one of the upper nodes,
without a terminal bud, light green when they first appear, pale reddish
brown, covered with a glaucous bloom during their first winter and then
marked by small semicircular leaf-scars displaying semilunate
fibro-vascular bundle-scars, and connected by the persistent black
stipules or by their subulate scars, darker the following season, and
dark brown in their third year, the bark then beginning to separate into
the large loose scales found on the large branches and on the stems of
small plants; usually a shrub, only a few feet high. Winter-buds
axillary, single or in pairs or in 3's one above the other, minute,
nearly immersed in the bark. Bark of large trunks dark gray-brown or
often nearly black, divided by deep fissures into broad flat ridges
broken on the surface into elongated narrow scales. The bark contains
tannin, and has been used in the treatment of fevers and in homoeopathic
practice.

Distribution. Swamps and the low wet borders of ponds and streams; New
Brunswick to Ontario, southern Michigan, southern Minnesota, eastern
Nebraska, Kansas and western Oklahoma (near Canton, Blaine County),
southward to the shores of Bay Biscayne and the Everglade Keys, Dade
County, Florida, eastern Texas to the valley of the Rio Grande, southern
New Mexico, and Arizona, and widely distributed in California; in Mexico
and Cuba; very rarely arborescent at the north and of its largest size
on the margins of river-bottoms and swamps and in pond holes in southern
Arkansas and eastern Texas; ascending on the southern Appalachian
Mountains to altitudes of 2500 deg.; passing into var. _pubescens_ Rafn.,
with leaves soft pubescent below especially on the midrib and veins, and
pubescent petioles, inflorescence and branchlets; southern Indiana,
southeastern Missouri, southern Arkansas, western Louisiana and eastern
Texas to the valley of the lower Brazos River.

Occasionally cultivated in the northeastern states as an ornamental
plant.




                           4. GUETTARDA Endl.


Small trees or shrubs, with bitter bark, opposite or rarely verticellate
persistent leaves, interpetiolar deciduous stipules, and scaly buds.
Flowers sessile or short-pedicellate, with or without bractlets, in
axillary forked pedunculate cymes, their bracts and bractlets
lanceolate, acute, minute, deciduous; calyx globose, the limb produced
above the ovary into an elongated 4--7-lobed tube; corolla
salver-shaped, with an elongated cylindric tube naked in the throat, and
a 4-lobed limb, the oblong lobes imbricated in the bud; stamens
included; filaments free, short; anthers oblong-linear; ovary 4-celled,
the cells elongated, tubular; style stout; stigma capitate; ovule
solitary, suspended on the thickened funicle from the inner angle of the
cell. Fruit a fleshy 1-stoned 2--9-seeded subglobose drupe, with thin
flesh, and a bony or ligneous globose 4--9-celled stone obtusely angled
or sulcate, the cells narrow and often curved upward. Seed compressed,
suspended on the thick funicle closing the orifice of the wall of the
stone, straight or excurved; albumen thin and fleshy; embryo elongated,
cylindric or compressed; cotyledons flat, minute, not longer than the
elongated terete radicle turned toward the hilum.

Guettarda with about fifty species is chiefly tropical American, with
one species widely distributed on maritime shores from east tropical
Africa to Australia and the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Of the species
found within the territory of the United States two are arborescent. The
bark of some of the species is occasionally employed as a tonic and
febrifuge, and a few species are cultivated in tropical gardens for the
delightful fragrance of their white flowers.

The generic name is in honor of Jean Etienne Guettard (1715--1786), the
distinguished French botanist and mineralogist.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves thin, pilose or glabrate above.
                                                    1. G. elliptica (D).
  Leaves coriaceous, hispidulose-papillose and scabrate above.
                                                       2. G. scabra (D).


                       1. Guettarda elliptica Sw.

[Illustration: Fig. 774]

Leaves broad-oval to oblong-elliptic, acute or obtuse and apiculate at
apex, and cuneate or rounded at base, covered with pale silky hairs when
they unfold, and at maturity thin, dark green, pilose or glabrate on the
upper surface, lighter colored and pubescent on the lower surface,
especially along the stout midrib and in the axils of the 4--6 pairs of
primary veins, 3/4'--2-1/2' long and 1/2'--1' wide; unfolding in Florida
in May and June and persistent on the branches until the trees begin
their growth the following year; petioles stout, hairy, 1/4'--1/2' in
length. Flowers pedicellate, appearing in Florida in June, yellowish
white, 1/4' long, in slender hairy-stemmed cymes from the axils of
leaves of the year near the end of branches, or from bud-scales at base
of young shoots, their peduncle shorter than the leaves, forked near the
apex, often with a flower in the fork and 3 at the end of each branch,
or the lateral flowers of these clusters replaced by branches producing
3 flowers at their apex, the bractlets subtending the branches of the
peduncle, and the lateral flowers of the ultimate divisions of the
inflorescence linear-lanceolate, acute, coated with hairs, about 1/16'
long, deciduous; calyx-lobes nearly triangular, acute, coated on the
outer surface with long pale hairs, and half as long as the erect
corolla canescent externally, with rounded lobes. Fruit ripening in
November, dark purple, pilose, 1/3' in diameter, crowned with the
remnants of the persistent calyx-tube, the flesh sweet and mealy; stone
obscurely ridged and usually 2--4-seeded; seeds oblong-lanceolate,
compressed, nearly straight, with a thin pale coat.

A tree, in Florida occasionally 18 deg.--20 deg. high, with an irregularly
buttressed or lobed trunk 5'--6' in diameter, the deep depressions
between the lobes continuous or often interrupted, small upright
branches, and thin terete branchlets coated when they first appear with
long pale or rufous hairs and light red-brown or ashy gray and
conspicuously marked by pale lenticels, and in their second year by
large elevated orbicular leaf-scars. Winter-buds acuminate, light brown,
coated with pale pubescence, and about 1/8' long. Bark of the trunk
about 1/16' thick, with a smooth dark brown surface covered with large
irregularly shaped pale blotches and numerous small white spots. Wood
heavy, hard, very close-grained, light brown tinged with red, with thin
sapwood of 6--10 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Florida, coast of the southern keys; on the Bahama Islands
and in Jamaica.


                        2. Guettarda scabra Lam.

[Illustration: Fig. 775]

Leaves oval, oblong or ovate, acuminate or rounded and apiculate at
apex, gradually narrowed or broad at the rounded or subcordate base,
entire, coriaceous, dark green, hispidulose-papillose and scabrate on
the upper surface, pale and soft-pubescent on the lower surface, 2'--5'
long and 1-1/4'--3-1/4' wide, with thickened slightly revolute margins,
a stout midrib, usually 8--11 pairs of prominent primary veins and
conspicuous reticulate veinlets; petioles stout, rusty-pubescent,
1/3'--3/4' in length; stipules concave at base, gradually narrowed above
into a long slender point, pubescent, as long as the petioles. Flowers
produced irregularly during the winter and early spring, sessile or
short-pedicellate in the axils of acute bracts, in pedunculate cymes on
slender rusty-pubescent peduncles 1-1/2'--2' in length; calyx
short-oblong, densely pubescent on the outer surface; corolla often 1'
in length, the slender tube retrorsely silky-villose on the outer
surface, the lobes 5--7, usually 5, oblong-obtuse; filaments free,
short; anthers oblong-linear, included, style shorter than the tube of
the corolla; stigma capitate. Fruit ripening in the autumn, subglobose,
pubescent, 1/4' in diameter, and crowned by the persistent tube of the
calyx; flesh thin and dry; stone slightly angled thick-walled,
4--9-seeded.

A tree, in Florida sometimes 20 deg.--25 deg. high, with a tall trunk 2'--2-1/2'
in diameter, small ascending branches forming an open irregular head,
and stout or slender branchlets densely covered during their first
season with rufous pubescence, and light reddish brown, slightly
pubescent and marked by conspicuous leaf-scars in their second year;
often a shrub.

Distribution. Florida, near Miami and on the Everglade Keys, Dade
County, and on the southern keys; on the Bahama Islands and on several
of the Antilles.




                          LXVI. CAPRIFOLIACEAE.


Trees or shrubs, with watery juice, opposite petiolate leaves involute
in the bud, with or without stipules, scaly buds, and fibrous roots.
Flowers regular, perfect, with articulated pedicels, in terminal
compound cymes; calyx-tube adnate to the ovary, 5-toothed; corolla
epigynous, 5-lobed, the lobes imbricated in the bud; stamens 5, inserted
on the tube of the corolla, as many as and alternate with its lobes;
filaments slender, free; anthers oblong, introrse, 2-celled, the cells
opening longitudinally; disk 0 (in the arborescent genera of the United
States); ovary inferior or partly superior, 3--5 or 1-celled; style
short, capitate, 3--5-lobed and stigmatic at apex; ovule solitary,
suspended from the apex of the cell, resupinate; raphe dorsal; micropyle
superior. Fruit drupaceous, crowned with the remnants of the style.
Seeds with copious fleshy albumen; seed-coat membranaceous, adherent to
the albumen; embryo minute, near the hilum; cotyledons ovoid or ovate;
radicle terete, erect.

The Honeysuckle family with ten genera is most abundant in the temperate
regions of the northern hemisphere, with a few species extending into
the tropics and to beyond the tropics in the southern hemisphere. Many
of the species, especially of Lonicera, Sambucus, and Viburnum, are
cultivated in gardens for the beauty of their flowers and fruits.


       CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT GENERA OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Leaves unequally pinnate; fruit with 3--5 nutlets.
                                                            1. Sambucus.
  Leaves simple; fruit with 1 stone.
                                                            2. Viburnum.




                         1. SAMBUCUS L. Elder.


Trees or shrubs, with stout branches containing thick white or brown
pith, and buds with several scales. Leaves petiolate, unequally pinnate,
deciduous, with serrate or laciniate leaflets, the base of the petiole
naked, glandular or furnished with a stipule-like leaflet; stipels
small, leaf-like, usually setaceous, often 0; stipules small,
rudimentary, usually 0 except on vigorous shoots. Flowers small, in
broad terminal corymbose cymes, their bracts and bractlets lanceolate,
acute, scarious, caducous, sometimes ebracteolate; calyx-tube ovoid, the
limb 3--5-lobed or toothed; corolla rotate or slightly campanulate,
equally 3--5-parted; filaments filiform or subulate; ovary inferior or
partly superior, 3--5-celled; style abbreviated, thick and conic,
3--5-lobed, stigmatic at apex. Fruit subglobose, with juicy flesh, and
3--5 oblong cartilaginous punctate-rugulose or smooth 1-seeded nutlets
full and rounded on the back and rounded at the ends. Seeds filling the
cavity of the nutlets, pale brown; cotyledons ovoid.

Sambucus with about twenty species is widely and generally distributed
through the temperate parts of North America, Europe, and Asia, and
inhabits high mountain ranges within the tropics, and in Australia,
Tasmania, and New Zealand. Of the nine or ten North American species
three are arborescent. Sambucus possesses cathartic and emetic
properties in the bark; the flowers are excitant and sudorific, and the
juice of the fruit is alterative and laxative. The dried flowers of the
European _Sambucus nigra_ L., are used in the preparation of an aromatic
distilled water and in flavoring lard, and the hard and compact wood is
made into combs and mathematical instruments. The large pithy shoots of
Sambucus furnish children with pop-guns, pipes, and whistles; and the
fruit of some of the species is cooked and eaten.

_Sambucus_, the name of the Elder-tree, is believed to have been derived
from {sambyke}, a musical instrument, probably in allusion to the use of
the pithy stems.


      CONSPECTUS OF THE ARBORESCENT SPECIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

  Cymes flat-topped; pith usually white; fruit black; nutlets rugose.
    Fruit lustrous.
                                                    1. S. Simpsonii (C).
    Fruit appearing blue from a thick covering of bloom.
                                            2. S. coerulea (B, F, G, H).
  Cymes ovoid; pith pale brown; fruit red; nutlets smooth.
                                                3. S. callicarpa (B, G).


                      1. Sambucus Simpsonii Rehd.

[Illustration: Fig. 776]

Leaves 4'--7' long, 3--7, usually 5-foliolulate, with a glabrous petiole
and usually 5 dark yellow-green leaflets, lustrous and glabrous on the
upper surface with the exception of a few scattered hairs on the midrib,
and paler and glabrous on the lower surface, the terminal leaflet
obovate or oblong-obovate, short-acuminate at apex, and gradually
narrowed at base into a slender petiolule 1/3'--1/2' in length, the
lateral leaflets broad-elliptic to oblong-elliptic, short-acuminate,
broad-cuneate at base, those of the upper pair usually sessile, those of
the lower pair on short stalks rarely more than 1/12' long, serrate
except at the base with small slightly spreading teeth, 1-1/2'--3' long
and 1-1/2'--2-1/2' wide. Flowers slightly fragrant, on slender pedicels
in convex or sometimes flat cymes 3'--8' in diameter, with 4 or 5 rays,
the terminal ray as long or longer than the lateral rays, rarely
shorter; calyx-tube ovoid, the lobes oblong-ovate, acute, about as long
as the tube and slightly exceeding the thick conic style; stamens about
as long as the white corolla-lobes; ovary usually 5, rarely 4-celled.
Fruit subglobose, dark purplish black, about 1/4' in diameter; nutlets
rugose.

A tree, sometimes 15 deg.--18 deg. high, with a trunk often 8' in diameter, and
slightly angled branchlets greenish when they first appear, becoming
light yellow-gray and sometimes covered during their second and third
years with thick corky excrescences; pith white, on 2 or 3-year-old
branches comparatively narrow, occupying only about one-third of the
diameter of the stem.

Distribution. Florida, neighborhood of Jacksonville, Duval County, to
Eustis, Lake County, Bradentown, Manatee County, and Sanibel Island, Lee
County; Mississippi, Ocean Springs, Jackson County; Louisiana, Cameron,
Cameron Parish.


                       2. Sambucus coerulea Raf.

                        _Sambucus glauca_ Nutt.
                      _Sambucus neomexicana_ Woot.

[Illustration: Fig. 777]

Leaves 5'--7' long, with a stout grooved petiole much enlarged and naked
or sometimes furnished at the base with leaf-like appendages, and 5--9
ovate or narrow-oblong leaflets contracted at apex into a long point,
unequally cuneate or rounded at base, and coarsely serrate with
spreading or slightly incurved callous-tipped teeth, the lower leaflets
often 3-parted or pinnate, the terminal one sometimes furnished with 1
or 2 lateral stalked leaflets, yellow-green on the upper surface, pale
on the lower surface, covered with scattered pale hairs when they
unfold, and at maturity glabrous or soft pubescent beneath (var.
_velutina_ Rehd.), thin, rather firm in texture, bright green above and
pale below, 1'--6' long and 1/3'--1-1/2' wide, with a narrow pale midrib
and inconspicuous veins; petiolules slender, those of the lateral
leaflets 1/4'--1/2' and of the terminal leaflet up to 2' in length;
stipels linear, oblong-lanceolate to ovate, rounded or acute at apex,
entire or sharply serrate and leaf-like, 1/16'--1/2' long, caducous,
often 0. Flowers 1/8' in diameter, appearing from April in southern
California to July in British Columbia, in flat long-branched glabrous
or pubescent cymes 4'--10' wide, with linear acute green caducous bracts
and bractlets, the lower branches often from the axils of upper leaves;
flower-buds globose, covered with a glaucous bloom, sometimes turning
red before opening; calyx ovoid, red-brown, with acute scarious lobes;
corolla yellowish white, with oblong divisions rounded at apex, as long
as the stamens. Fruit subglobose, 1/3' in diameter, black, appearing
blue by its thick covering of mealy bloom; flesh rather sweet and juicy.

A tree, 30 deg.--50 deg. high, with a tall straight trunk sometimes enlarged at
base and 12'--18' in diameter, stout spreading branches forming a
compact round-topped head, and branchlets usually without a terminal
bud, green tinged with red or brown when they first appear, and covered
with short white caducous hairs, or densely soft pubescent during their
first season (var. _velutina_ Rehd.), stout, slightly angled, covered
with lustrous red-brown bark in their first winter and nearly encircled
by the large triangular leaf-scars marked by conspicuous fibro-vascular
bundle-scars; pith white or rarely brownish; often a broad shrub, with
numerous spreading stems. Winter-buds axillary generally in pairs,
superposed or in clusters of 4 or 5, only the upper bud or sometimes the
lower usually developing, covered with 2 or 3 pairs of opposite
broad-ovate chestnut-brown scales, those of the inner rank accrescent,
and at maturity acute, entire, green, 1' long, and sometimes developing
into pinnate leaves 2'--3' in length. Bark of the trunk deeply and
irregularly fissured, the dark brown surface slightly tinged with red
and broken into small square appressed scales. Wood light, soft, weak,
coarse-grained, yellow tinged with brown, with thin lighter colored
sapwood.

Distribution. Gravelly rather dry soil of valleys and river-bottoms;
western Montana (neighborhood of Flathead Lake and Missoula, Missoula
County), through Idaho to the coast of British Columbia (Vancouver
Island), and southward to the San Bernardino Mountains and Santa
Catalina Island, California, ascending on the Cascade and Sierra Nevada
Mountains to altitudes of 6000 deg.--8000 deg.; Nevada, King's Canyon, Ormsby
County; Utah, Juab, Juab County, and the neighborhood of Salt Lake City,
Salt Lake County; Colorado, near Trinidad, Las Animas County; New
Mexico, Sacramento Mountains, Otero County; very abundant in the coast
region; comparatively rare in the interior; of its largest size in the
valleys of western Oregon; northward, and east of the Cascade and Sierra
Nevada Mountains rarely arborescent; in southern California often with
smaller leaves and flower-clusters than northward; the var. _velutina_
rare and local, California, Goose Valley, Shasta County; at altitudes of
6000 deg.--7000 deg. on the Sierra Nevada in Sierra, Madera and Kern Counties,
and on Santa Catalina Island; Nevada, on Hunter's Creek, Washoe County,
at an altitude of 6000 deg.

Occasionally planted as an ornamental plant in the Pacific states,
passing into


                 Sambucus coerulea var. arizonica Sarg.

                 _Sambucus mexicana_ Sarg., not Presl.

[Illustration: Fig. 778]

Differing from _Sambucus coerulea_ in its 3--5, usually 3-foliate leaves
with usually elliptic long-acuminate leaflets glabrous or slightly
pubescent when they appear, 1'--3' long and 1/2'--1' wide, their stipels
minute or rudimentary, smaller flower-clusters and fruit not more than
1/4' in diameter.

A tree, often 30 deg. high, with stout spreading branches forming a compact
round-topped head, and slender branchlets glabrous or villose pubescent
early in the season, usually becoming glabrous. Bark of the trunk about
1/4' thick, the light brown surface tinged with red and broken into long
narrow horizontal ridge-like scales. Wood light, soft, close-grained,
light brown, with thin lighter-colored sapwood of 2 or 3 layers of
annual growth.

Distribution. Banks of streams; Arizona, Grand View Trail, Grand Canyon
of the Colorado River and near Flagstaff, Coconino County, Globe, Gila
County, and banks of the Rialta near Tucson, Pima County; common; New
Mexico, near Silver City, Grant County; southern California (San Diego,
Los Angeles, Ventura and Kern Counties).


                     3. Sambucus callicarpa Greene.

[Illustration: Fig. 779]

Leaves 6'--10' long, with a stout slightly grooved petiole and 5--7,
usually 5, elliptic finely or coarsely serrate leaflets, acuminate and
long-pointed at apex, cuneate and often unsymmetric at base, dark green
and glabrous on the upper surface, paler and more or less
villose-pubescent on the lower surface, especially along the slender
midrib, 2-1/2'--5' long and 1/2'--2' wide; petiolules 1/8'--1/4' or that
of the terminal leaflet up to 1-1/2' in length. Flowers on pedicels 1/8'
long, in ovoid to semiorbicular cymes, usually 2-1/2'--3' long and
broad, often somewhat flattened at maturity, on stout peduncles
1-1/2'--3' in length, about 1/3' in diameter, with white or yellow
slightly obovate petals rounded at apex, and stamens rather shorter than
the lobes of the corolla. Fruit about 1/2' in diameter, bright red or
rarely chestnut color (f. _Piperi_ Sarg.); nutlets smooth.

A tree, occasionally 25 deg.--30 deg. high, with a trunk 10'--12' in diameter,
slender branchlets occasionally puberulous early in the season, becoming
glabrous, light brown, separating on the surface into thin scales.

Distribution. River banks in low moist soil, from sea-level in the
neighborhood of the coast up to altitudes of 7000 deg.--8000 deg.; coast of
Alaska (Skagway), southward along the coast to Marin County, California,
and inland to the western slopes of the Cascade and Sierra Nevada
Mountains, southward to Amador County; the f. _Piperi_ in western
Washington.




                       2. VIBURNUM A. L. de Juss.


Trees or shrubs, with tough flexible branchlets, and large winter-buds
naked or covered with scales, those of the arborescent North American
species enclosed in one pair of valvate scales, the buds containing
flower-bearing branches ovoid, swollen below the middle and contracted
into a long or short point and subtended by 2 minute lateral generally
abortive buds formed in the axils of the last leaves of the previous
year, those containing sterile shoots narrow-lanceolate, slightly
angled, acute; axillary buds acute, much flattened, and much smaller
than the terminal bud. Leaves deciduous (in the American species),
without or rarely with stipules, the first pair rudimentary, with small
blades and broad boat-shaped petioles, caducous (in the North American
arborescent species). Flowers on short bracteolate or bibracteolate
pedicels, in terminal or axillary umbel-like flat or panicled cymes,
their bracts and bractlets minute, lanceolate, acute, caducous;
calyx-tube cylindric, the limb short, equally 5-lobed, persistent on the
fruit; corolla rotate, equally 5-lobed, spreading and reflexed after
anthesis; stamens inserted on the base of the corolla; filaments
elongated, exserted; anthers bright yellow; ovary inferior, 1-celled;
style conic, divided at apex into three stigmatic lobes. Fruit 1-celled,
with thin sweet acidulous or oily flesh, stone (in the North American
arborescent species) coriaceous, oval, short-pointed at apex; much
flattened, dull reddish brown, slightly pitted. Seed filling the cavity
of the stone, concave on the ventral face, bright reddish brown, the
thin coat projected into a red narrow irregular often erose marginal
border.

Viburnum with a hundred species is widely and generally distributed
through the temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, and occurs on
the mountains of central and western South America, on the Antilles, the
islands of the Malay Archipelago, and Madagascar. Of the fifteen North
American species four are small trees. Many of the species produce
beautiful flowers and fruits, and are frequently cultivated as ornaments
of parks and gardens.

_Viburnum_ is the classical name of one of the European species.


         CONSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN ARBORESCENT SPECIES.

  Leaves entire or obscurely crenulate; inflorescence long-stalked;
        winter-buds elongated, narrow-lanceolate, acuminate, covered
        with rusty scales.
                                                     1. V. nudum (A, C).
  Leaves sharply serrate; inflorescence sessile or short-stalked.
    Petioles wing-margined; inflorescence sessile; winter-buds
          long-pointed, scurfy pubescent.
                                                2. V. Lentago (A, C, F).
    Petioles usually without margins.
      Petioles nearly glabrous; inflorescence short-stalked; winter-buds
            short-pointed or obtuse, rufous pubescent.
                                               3. V. prunifolium (A, C).
      Petioles of early leaves and the short-pointed winter-buds rusty
            tomentose, inflorescence sessile.
                                                 4. V. rufidulum (A, C).


                          1. Viburnum nudum L.

[Illustration: Fig. 780]

Leaves broad-elliptic to oval or slightly obovate, or in one form
narrow-elliptic (var. _angustifolium_ Torr. & Gray), acute, acuminate or
abruptly short-pointed or rarely rounded at apex, cuneate or rounded at
base, entire or slightly crenulate, covered when they unfold with rusty
scales persistent on the lower side of the midrib and petioles and
occasionally on the whole lower surface, thick, dark green and lustrous
on the upper surface, paler on the lower surface, 4'--6' long and
1-1/2'--2' wide, with a prominent midrib, slender veins, and slightly
thickened and revolute margins; very variable in the size and shape of
the leaves and in the amount of their scurfy covering, those of the
southern tree form usually larger than the leaves of more northern
shrubs; leaves of the var. _angustifolium_ often not more than 2' long
and 1/2' wide; petioles slender, 1/2' in length. Flowers appearing from
the first of May at the south to the middle of June at the north and
occasionally also in the autumn, white or pale cream color, about 1/4'
wide, in flat or slightly convex cymes with ovate acute bracts and
bractlets, 2'--4' in diameter and about as long or rather shorter than
their peduncle. Fruit ripening late in the autumn, globose, pink at
first when fully grown, becoming bright blue, 1/4' in diameter.

A tree, rarely 18'--20' high, with a tall trunk 6'--8' in diameter, with
spreading nearly horizontal branches forming an open head, and slender
branchlets scurfy when they first appear, soon becoming glabrous,
reddish brown and lustrous during their first season and greenish brown
the following year; usually a small or large shrub, and perhaps only a
tree on the borders of swamps near Gainesville, Alachua County, and
Palatka, Putnam County, Florida. Winter-buds reddish brown, covered with
rusty scales, those containing flower-bearing branches, abruptly long
pointed, 1/2'--3/4' in length.

Distribution. Low moist soil usually in the neighborhood of swamps and
streams, and on rich hillsides; southern Connecticut (Milford and Derby,
New Haven County), southward through the coast and Piedmont region, to
De Soto County (near Sebring), Florida, and westward usually in the
neighborhood of the coast to the valley of the lower Brazos River,
eastern Texas, and northward through western Louisiana to central
Arkansas and western Tennessee; occasionally ascending the Appalachian
Mountains to altitudes of 2000 deg.; the var. _angustifolium_ from North
Carolina up to altitudes of 3000 deg. on the Blue Ridge, to northern
Florida.


             2. Viburnum Lentago L. Sheepberry. Nannyberry.

[Illustration: Fig. 781]

Leaves ovate, usually acuminate, with short or elongated points, or
sometimes rounded at apex, cuneate, rounded or subcordate at base, and
sharply serrate with incurved callous-tipped teeth, when they unfold
bronze-green, lustrous, coated on both surfaces of the midrib and on the
petioles with thick rufous pubescence, slightly pilose on the upper
surface and covered on the lower with short pale hairs, and at maturity
bright green and lustrous above, yellow-green and marked by minute black
dots below, 2-1/2'--3' long and 1'--1-1/2' wide, with a slender midrib,
and primary veins connected by conspicuous reticulate veinlets; turning
in the autumn before falling deep orange-red or red and orange color;
petioles broad, grooved, more or less interruptedly winged or
occasionally wingless, 1'--1-1/2' long, those of the first pair of
leaves covered with thick rufous tomentum. Flowers about 1/4' in
diameter, slightly fragrant, appearing from the middle of April to the
1st of June in stout-branched scurfy sessile slightly convex cymes
3'--5' in diameter, with nearly triangular green caducous bracts and
bractlets about 1/16' in length; corolla pale cream color or nearly
white, with ovate lobes acute and slightly erose at apex. Fruit ripening
in September on slender drooping stalks, in red-stemmed few-fruited
clusters, oval or occasionally globose (var. _sphaerocarpum_ A. Gray),
thick-skinned, sweet and rather juicy, black or dark blue, and covered
with a glaucous bloom; stone about 7/8' long and 5/16' wide.

A bushy tree, 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short trunk 8'--10' in diameter,
slender rather pendulous branches forming a compact round-topped head,
and thin divergent branchlets light green, slightly covered with rufous
pubescence when they first appear, and in their first winter light red,
scurfy, marked by occasional dark orange-colored lenticels and by narrow
leaf-scars displaying 3 conspicuous fibro-vascular bundle-scars,
becoming in their second year dark reddish brown and sometimes covered
with a glaucous bloom. Winter-buds light red, generally covered with
pale scurfy pubescence, those containing flower-bearing branchlets 3/4'
in length, abruptly contracted into long narrow tapering points. Bark of
the trunk reddish brown and irregularly broken into small thick plates
divided on their surface into minute thin appressed scales. Wood
bad-smelling, heavy, hard, close-grained, dark orange-brown, with thin
nearly white sapwood.

Distribution. Rocky hillsides, along the borders of forests, or near the
banks of streams and the margins of swamps, in moist soil; valley of the
Riviere du Loup, Province of Quebec, to Saskatchewan, and southward
through the northern states to southern Pennsylvania, central Ohio,
northern Indiana and southern Wisconsin, northeastern Iowa and eastern
Nebraska, and along the Appalachian Mountains up to altitudes of 2500 deg.
to West Virginia; on the Turtle Mountains of North Dakota, the Black
Hills of South Dakota, on the eastern foothills of the Bighorn Mountains
of Wyoming and on those of the Rocky Mountains of Colorado (Boulder,
Boulder County).

Often cultivated as an ornament of parks and gardens in the eastern
United States, and occasionally in Europe.

x _Viburnum Jackii_ Rehd. with characters intermediate between _Viburnum
Lentago_ and _V. prunifolium_ is now believed to be a hybrid between
those species.


            3. Viburnum prunifolium L. Black Haw. Stag Bush.

[Illustration: Fig. 782]

Leaves ovate or rarely obovate, oval or suborbicular, rounded, acute, or
short-pointed at apex, cuneate or rounded at base, and usually rather
remotely or sometimes finely serrate with rigid incurved callous-tipped
teeth, lustrous and tinged with red, glabrous on the lower surface and
covered on the upper side of the midrib and on the bright red petioles
with scattered reddish hairs when they unfold, and at maturity thick or
sometimes coriaceous, dark green and glabrous on the upper surface, pale
and glabrous on the lower surface, 1'--3' long and 1/2'--3' wide, with
slender primary veins connected by reticulate veinlets; in the autumn
turning brilliant scarlet or dark vinous red before falling; petioles
terete, grooved, 1/2'--2/3' in length, and on vigorous shoots sometimes
narrowly wing-margined. Flowers 1/4' in diameter on slender pedicels
bibracteolate at apex, in glabrous short-stemmed flat cymes 2'--4' in
diameter, with subulate caducous bracts about 1/16' long, usually red
above the middle; corolla pure white, with oval to nearly orbicular
lobes. Fruit ripening in October, in few-fruited red-stemmed clusters,
persistent on the branches until the beginning of winter, oval or
slightly obovoid, 1/2'--2/3' long or rarely globose, dark blue and
covered with a glaucous bloom; stone about 1/2' long and 1/3' wide.

A bushy tree, occasionally 20 deg.--30 deg. high, with a short and usually
crooked trunk 6'--8' in diameter, stout spreading rigid branches beset
with slender spine-like branchlets, bright red and glabrous when they
first appear, soon turning green, and in their first winter gray tinged
with red, covered with a slight bloom, and marked by orange-colored
lenticels and by the large lunate leaf-scars displaying 3 fibro-vascular
bundle-scars, and ultimately dark brown tinged with red; or often a low
intricately branched shrub. Winter-buds short-pointed or obtuse, brown,
glabrous or scurfy, those containing flower-bearing branches about 1/2'
long and 1/4' wide, and about twice as large as those containing sterile
branchlets. Bark of the trunk 1/4'--1/3' thick, and broken into thick
irregularly shaped plate-like red-brown scales. Wood heavy, hard,
strong, brittle, close-grained, brown tinged with red, with thick nearly
white sapwood of 20--30 layers of annual growth.

Distribution. Dry rocky hillsides, fence-rows and the sides of roads;
Fairfield County, Connecticut, and the valley of the lower Hudson River,
New York, southward to southeastern Virginia and to the Coast and
Piedmont regions of North and South Carolina up to altitudes of 2000 deg. to
the valley of the Savannah River (near Augusta, Georgia, Richmond
County, rare), and through southern Ohio to Indiana, southern Illinois,
southern and western Kentucky, Missouri and eastern Kansas; very
abundant in Missouri from the northeastern counties southward through
the state.

Often cultivated as an ornament of parks and gardens in the eastern
United States, and occasionally in western and northern Europe.


                 4. Viburnum rufidulum Raf. Black Haw.

[Illustration: Fig. 783]

Leaves elliptic to obovate or oval, rounded, acute, or short-pointed at
apex, cuneate or rounded at base, and finely serrate with slender
apiculate straight or incurved teeth, covered below and on the wings of
the petiole with thick ferrugineous tomentum when they unfold and at
maturity coriaceous, dark green and very lustrous above, pale and dull
below, usually about 3' long and 3/4'--1-1/2' wide, with a stout yellow
midrib, numerous slender primary veins, and reticulate veinlets more or
less covered below throughout the season with rufous tomentum also
occasionally found on the upper side of the midrib; petioles stout,
grooved, 1/2'--3/4' long, and margined with broad or narrow wings.
Flowers 1/4' in diameter, in sessile 3--5 but usually 4-rayed
thick-stemmed ferrugineo-pubescent flat corymbs often 5'--6' in
diameter, with minute subulate bracts and bractlets; corolla creamy
white, with orbicular or oblong rounded lobes. Fruit ripening in
October, in few-fruited drooping red-stemmed clusters, short-oblong or
slightly obovoid, bright blue covered with a glaucous bloom, and
1/2'--2/3' long; stone 1/2' long and about 1/3' wide.

A tree, often 40 deg. high, with a trunk 12'--18' in diameter, short thick
branches forming an open irregular head, and stout branchlets marked by
numerous small red-brown or orange lenticels, when they first appear
more or less coated with ferrugineous tomentum, ashy gray during their
first winter, and dark dull red-brown in their second season.
Winter-buds ferrugineo-tomentose, those containing flower-bearing
branchlets broad-ovoid, full and rounded at base, short-pointed and
obtuse at apex, compressed, often 1/2' long and 1/3' wide, and rather
larger than those containing sterile branchlets. Bark of the trunk
1/4'--1/2' thick, separating into narrow rounded ridges divided by
numerous cross fissures, and roughened by small plate-like dark brown
scales tinged with red. Wood bad-smelling.

Distribution. Dry upland woods and the margins of river-bottom lands;
southwestern Virginia and southern Indiana and Illinois to Hernando
County, Florida, and through the Gulf States to the valleys of the upper
Guadalupe River and of Clear Creek, Brown County, Texas, and to eastern
and southwestern Oklahoma (on the Wichita Mountains, Comanche County),
eastern Kansas and Central Missouri; most abundant and of its largest
size in southern Arkansas, western Louisiana, and eastern Texas.

Occasionally cultivated in the eastern states, and hardy as far north as
eastern Massachusetts.




                      GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS


                                   A
  _Accrescent._ Increasing in size with age.
  _Accumbent._ Lying against, as the radicle against the edges of
          the cotyledons.
  _Acuminate._ Gradually tapering to the apex.
  _Acute._ Pointed.
  _Adnate._ Congenitally united to.
  _Adventitious._ Said of buds produced without order from any part
          of a stem.
  _AEstivation._ The arrangement of the parts of a flower in the bud.
  _Akene_ or _achene_. A small dry and hard, 1-celled, 1-seeded,
          indehiscent fruit.
  _Albumen._ The deposit of nutritive material within the coats of a
          seed and surrounding the embryo.
  _Ament._ A unisexual spike of flowers with scaly bracts, usually
          deciduous in one piece.
  _Amphitropous._ Descriptive of an ovule with the hilum
          intermediate between the micropyle and chalaza.
  _Anatropous._ Descriptive of a reversed ovule, with the micropyle
          close by the side of the hilum, and chalaza at the
          opposite end.
  _Andro-dioecious._ With perfect flowers on one individual and
          staminate flowers only on another.
  _Androgynous._ Applied to an inflorescence composed of male and
          female flowers.
  _Angiospermae._ Plants with seeds borne in a pericarp.
  _Annular._ In the form of a ring.
  _Anterior._ The front side of a flower, that is averse from the
          axis of inflorescence.
  _Anther._ The part of the stamen containing the pollen.
  _Anthesis._ The act of opening of a flower.
  _Apetalous._ Having no petals.
  _Apex._ The top, as the end of the leaf opposite the petiole.
  _Apiculate._ Ending in a short pointed tip.
  _Apophysis._ An enlargement or swelling of the surface of an
          organ.
  _Arcuate._ Moderately curved.
  _Areolate._ Marked by areolae or spaces marked out on a surface.
  _Aril._ An extraneous seed-coat or covering, or an appendage
          growing about the hilum of a seed.
  _Ariloid._ Furnished with an aril.
  _Aristate._ Furnished with awns.
  _Articulate._ Jointed or having the appearance of a joint.
  _Auricled_ or _auriculate_. Furnished with an auricle or
          ear-shaped appendage.
  _Autocarpus_. A fruit consisting of pericarp alone, without
          adherent parts.
  _Axil._ The angle formed on the upper side of the attachment of a
          leaf with a stem.
  _Axillary._ In or from an axil.


                                    B
  _Baccate._ Berry-like.
  _Bark._ The rind or cortical covering of a stem.
  _Berry._ A fruit with a homogeneous fleshy pericarp.
  _Bipinnate._ Doubly or twice pinnate.
  _Bract._ The more or less modified leaf of a flower-cluster.
  _Bracteate._ Furnished with bracts.
  _Bracteolate._ Furnished with bractlets.
  _Bractlet._ The bract of a pedicel or ultimate flower-stalk.
  _Branch._ A secondary axis or division of a trunk.
  _Branchlet._ An ultimate division of a branch.
  _Bud._ The undeveloped state of a branch or flower-cluster with or
          without scales.
  _Bud-scales._ Reduced leaves covering a bud.


                                    C
  _Calyx._ The flower-cup or exterior part of a perianth.
  _Campanulate._ Bell-shaped, or elongated cup-shaped.
  _Campylotropous._ Descriptive of an ovule or seed curved in its
          formation so as to bring the micropyle or apex down near
          the hilum.
  _Canescent._ Hoary, with gray or whitish pubescence.
  _Capsule._ A dry dehiscent fruit of more than one carpel.
  _Carpel._ A simple pistil or an element of a compound pistil.
  _Catkin._ The same as an ament.
  _Caudate._ Furnished with a tail, or with a slender tip or
          appendage.
  _Centripetal._ Developing from without toward the centre.
  _Chalaza._ The part of an ovule where the coats and nucleus are
          confluent.
  _Chartaceous._ Having the texture of paper.
  _Ciliate._ Fringed with hairs.
  _Cinereous._ Ashy gray.
  _Circinnate._ Involute from the apex into a coil.
  _Circumscissile._ Circularly and transversely dehiscent.
  _Clavate._ Club-shaped.
  _Cocci._ Portions into which a lobed fruit with 1-seeded cells
          splits up.
  _Cochleate._ Shell-shaped, spiral like the shell of a snail.
  _Columella._ The persistent axis of a capsule.
  _Commissure._ The face by which 2 carpels unite.
  _Complanate._ Flattened.
  _Conduplicate._ Folded together lengthwise.
  _Cone._ An inflorescence or fruit formed of imbricated scales.
  _Conferruminate._ Stuck together by adjacent faces.
  _Connate._ United congenitally.
  _Connective._ The portion of a stamen which connects the two cells
          or lobes of an anther.
  _Contortuplicate._ Twisted and plaited, or folded.
  _Convolute._ Rolled up from the sides.
  _Cordate._ Heart-shaped.
  _Coriaceous._ Of the texture of leather.
  _Corymb._ A flat-topped or convex open flower-cluster, the flowers
          opening from the outside inward.
  _Corymbose._ Said of flowers arranged in a corymb.
  _Costate._ Having ribs.
  _Cotyledons._ The leaves of the embryo.
  _Crenate._ Scalloped.
  _Crenulate._ The diminutive of crenate.
  _Crispate._ Curled.
  _Crustaceous._ Of hard brittle texture.
  _Cucullate._ Hooded or hood-shaped.
  _Cuneate._ Wedge-shaped, or triangular with an acute angle
          downward.
  _Cyme._ A flower-cluster, the flower opening from the centre
          outward.
  _Cymose._ Bearing cymes or relating to a cyme.


                                    D
  _Deciduous._ Falling, said of leaves falling in the autumn, or of
          parts of a flower falling after anthesis.
  _Declinate._ Bent or curved downward.
  _Decompound._ Several times compound or divided.
  _Decurrent._ Running down, as of the blades of leaves extending
          down their petioles.
  _Decussate._ In pairs alternately crossing at right angles.
  _Dehiscent._ The opening of an anther or capsule by slits or
          valves.
  _Deltoid._ Having the shape of the Greek letter {D}.
  _Dentate._ Toothed.
  _Denticulate._ Minutely toothed.
  _Dextrorse._ Turned or directed to the right.
  _Diadelphous._ Said of stamens combined by their filaments into 2
          sets.
  _Dichotomous._ Forked in pairs.
  _Digitate._ Said of a compound leaf in which the leaflets are
          borne at the apex of the petiole.
  _Dimorphous._ Said of flowers of two forms on the same plant, or
          on plants of the same species.
  _Dioecious._ Unisexual, with the flowers of the 2 sexes borne by
          distinct individuals.
  _Disciferous._ Bearing a disk.
  _Disciform._ Depressed and circular like a disk.
  _Discoid._ Appertaining to a disk.
  _Disk._ The development of the torus or receptacle of a flower
          within the calyx or within the corolla and stamens.
  _Dissepiment._ A partition in an ovary or pericarp.
  _Distichous._ Said of leaves arranged alternately in two vertical
          ranks upon opposite sides of an axil.
  _Dorsal._ Relating to the back.
  _Dorsal suture._ The line of opening of a carpel corresponding to
          its midrib.
  _Drupaceous._ Resembling or relating to a drupe.
  _Drupe._ A stone fruit.
  _Duct._ An elongated cell or tubular vessel found especially in
          the woody parts of plants.


                                    E
  _Eglandular._ Without glands.
  _Ellipsoidal._ Of the shape of an elliptical solid.
  _Elliptic._ Of the form of an ellipse.
  _Emarginate._ Notched at the apex.
  _Embryo._ The rudimentary plant formed in the seed.
  _Endocarp._ The inner layer of a pericarp.
  _Endogenous._ Descriptive of Endogens, monocotyledonous plants
          with stems increasing by internal accessions.
  _Epicarp._ The thin filmy external layer of a pericarp.
  _Epigynous._ Placed on the ovary.
  _Epiphytal._ Said of a plant growing on another plant, but not
          parasitic.
  _Erose._ Descriptive of an irregularly toothed or eroded margin.
  _Excurrent._ Running through the apex or beyond.
  _Exocarp._ The outer layer of a pericarp.
  _Exogenous._ Descriptive of Exogens, plants with stems increasing
          by the addition of a layer of wood on the outside beneath
          the constantly widening bark.
  _Extrorse._ Directed outward, descriptive of an anther opening
          away from the axis of the flower.


                                    F
  _Falcate._ Scythe-shaped.
  _Fascicle._ A close cluster of leaves or flowers.
  _Fascicled._ Arranged in fascicles.
  _Feather-veined._ Having veins extending from the sides of the
          midrib.
  _Ferrugineous._ The color of iron rust.
  _Fibro-vascular._ Consisting of woody fibres and ducts.
  _Filament._ The stalk of an anther.
  _Filamentose._ Composed of threads.
  _Fimbriate._ Fringed.
  _Fistulose._ Hollow through the whole length.
  _Flabellate._ Fan-shaped; much dilated from a wedge-shaped base
          with the broader end rounded.
  _Floccose._ Bearing flocci or tufts of woody hairs.
  _Foliaceous._ Leaf-like in texture or appearance.
  _Foliolate._ Having leaflets.
  _Foliole._ A leaflet.
  _Follicle._ A dry 1-celled seed vessel consisting of a single
          carpel, and opening only by the ventral suture.
  _Funicle._ The stalk of an ovule or seed.


                                    G
  _Gamopetalae._ Plants with a corolla of coalescent petals.
  _Gamopetalous._ Descriptive of a corolla of coalescent petals.
  _Geniculate._ Bent abruptly like a knee.
  _Gibbous._ Swollen on one side.
  _Glabrate._ Nearly glabrous or becoming glabrous.
  _Glabrous._ Smooth, not pubescent or hairy.
  _Gland._ A protuberance on the surface, or partly imbedded in the
          surface of any part of a plant, either secreting or not.
  _Glandular._ Furnished with glands.
  _Glaucescent._ Nearly or becoming glaucous.
  _Glaucous._ Covered or whitened with a bloom.
  _Glomerate._ Said of flowers gathered into a compact head.
  _Gymnospermae._ Plants with naked seeds, that is, not inclosed in a
          pericarp.
  _Gynophore._ The stipe of a pistil.


                                    H
  _Heartwood._ The mature and dead wood of an exogenous stem.
  _Hermaphrodite._ With staminate and pistillate organs in the same
          flower, equivalent to perfect.
  _Hilum._ The scar or place of attachment of a seed.
  _Hirsute._ Hairy, with coarse or stiff hairs.
  _Hispidulous._ Minutely hispid.
  _Hypogynous._ Under or free from the pistil.


                                    I
  _Imbricate._ Overlapping, like the shingles on a roof.
  _Incumbent._ Leaning or resting upon, as the radicle against the
          back of one of the cotyledons.
  _Induplicate._ With edges folded in or turned inward.
  _Inferior._ Said of an organ placed below another, like a calyx
          below an ovary or an ovary below a superior calyx.
  _Inflorescence._ Flower-cluster.
  _Infrapetiolar._ Below the petioles.
  _Innate._ Borne on the apex of the supporting part; in an anther
          the counterpart of adnate.
  _Interpetiolar._ Between the petioles.
  _Introrse._ Turned inward; descriptive of an anther opening toward
          the axis of the flower.
  _Inverse._ Inverted.
  _Involucre._ A circle of bracts surrounding a flower-cluster.
  _Involute._ Rolled inward.


                                    L
  _Laciniate._ Cut into narrow incisions or lobes.
  _Lactescent._ Yielding milky juice.
  _Lamellate._ Composed of thin plates.
  _Lanceolate._ Shaped like a lance; narrower than oblong and
          tapering to the ends, or at least to the apex.
  _Lanuginose._ Clothed with soft reflexed hairs.
  _Leaf._ Green expansions borne by the stem in which assimilation
          and the processes connected with it are carried on.
  _Leaflet._ The separate division of a compound leaf.
  _Legume._ The seed vessel of plants of the Pea family, composed of
          a solitary carpel normally dehiscent only by the ventral
          suture.
  _Lenticels._ Lenticular corky growths on young bark.
  _Lenticellate._ Having lenticels.
  _Lepidote._ Beset with small scurfy scales.
  _Ligulate._ Strap-shaped.
  _Linear._ Said of a narrow leaf several times narrower than long,
          with parallel margins.
  _Lobe._ The division of an organ.
  _Lobulate._ Divided into small lobes.
  _Loculicidal._ Dehiscent into the cavity of a pericarp by the
          back, that is through a dorsal suture.


                                    M
  _Marcescent._ Said of a part of a plant, withering without falling
          off.
  _Medullary rays._ The rays of cellular tissue in a transverse
          section of an exogenous stem and extending from the pith
          to the bark.
  _Membranaceous._ Thin and pliable like a membrane.
  _Micropyle._ The spot or point in the seed at the place of the
          orifice of the ovule.
  _Midrib._ The central or main rib of a leaf.
  _Monoecious._ Unisexual, with the flowers of the two sexes borne
          by the same individual.
  _Mucro._ A small and abrupt tip to a leaf.
  _Mucronate._ Furnished with a mucro.
  _Muricate._ Rough, with short rigid excrescences.


                                    N
  _Naked buds._ Buds without scales.
  _Nectar._ The sweet secretion of various parts of a flower.
  _Nectariferous._ Nectar-bearing.
  _Node._ The portion of the stem which bears a leaf or whorl of
          leaves.
  _Nucleus._ The kernel of an ovule or seed.
  _Nut._ A hard and indehiscent 1-seeded pericarp produced from a
          compound ovary.
  _Nutlet._ A diminutive nut or stone.


                                    O
  _Obclavate._ Inverted club-shape.
  _Obcordate._ Inverted heart-shaped.
  _Oblanceolate._ Lanceolate but tapering toward the base more than
          toward the apex.
  _Oblong._ Longer than broad with nearly parallel sides.
  _Obovate._ Ovate with the broader end toward the apex.
  _Obovoid._ Solid obovate with the broader end toward the apex.
  _Obpyramidal._ Inversely pyramidal.
  _Obtuse._ Blunt or rounded at the apex.
  _Operculate._ Furnished with a lid.
  _Orbicular._ A flat body circular in outline.
  _Orthotropous._ Descriptive of an ovule with a straight axis much
          enlarged at the insertion and the orifice at the other
          end.
  _Oval._ Broad-elliptic, with round ends.
  _Ovate._ Of the shape of the longitudinal section of a hen's egg,
          with the broad end basal.
  _Ovoid._ Solid ovate or solid oval.
  _Ovule._ The part of the flower which becomes a seed.


                                    P
  _Palmate._ Lobed or divided, with the sinuses pointing to or
          reaching the apex of the petiole or insertion.
  _Panicle._ A loose compound flower-cluster.
  _Papilionaceous._ Butterfly-like.
  _Papilliform._ The shape of papillae.
  _Papillate._ Bearing papillae, minute nipple-shaped papillose
          projections.
  _Parietal placenta._ A placenta borne on the wall of the ovary.
  _Pedicel._ The stalk of a flower in a compound inflorescence.
  _Pedicellate._ Borne on a pedicel.
  _Peduncle._ A general flower-stalk supporting either a cluster of
          flowers, or a solitary flower.
  _Pedunculate._ Borne on a peduncle.
  _Peltate._ Descriptive of a plane body attached by its lower
          surface to the stalk.
  _Penniveined._ Same as pinnately veined.
  _Perfect._ Said of a flower with both stamens and pistil.
  _Perianth._ The envelope of a flower consisting of calyx, corolla,
          or both.
  _Pericarp._ The fructified ovary.
  _Persistent._ Said of leaves remaining on the branches over their
          first winter, and of a calyx remaining under or on the
          fruit.
  _Petal._ A division of the corolla.
  _Petiolate._ Having a petiole.
  _Petiole._ The footstalk of a leaf.
  _Petiolulate._ Having a petiolule.
  _Petiolule._ The footstalk of a leaflet.
  _Pilose._ Hairy, with soft and distinct hairs.
  _Pinnae._ The primary divisions of a twice pinnate leaf.
  _Pinnate._ A leaf with leaflets arranged along each side of a
          common petiole.
  _Pistil._ The female organ of a flower, consisting of ovary,
          style, and stigma.
  _Pistillate._ Said of a unisexual flower without fertile stamens.
  _Pith._ The central cellular part of a stem.
  _Placenta._ That part of the ovary which bears the ovules.
  _Plane._ Used in describing a flat surface.
  _Plumule._ The bud or growing part of the embryo.
  _Pollen._ The fecundating cells contained in the anther.
  _Polygamodioecious._ Said of flowers sometimes perfect and
          sometimes unisexual, the 2 forms borne on different
          individuals.
  _Polygamomonoecious._ Said of flowers sometimes perfect and
          sometimes unisexual, the 2 forms borne on the same
          individual.
  _Polygamous._ Said of flowers sometimes perfect and sometimes
          unisexual.
  _Pome._ An inferior fruit of 2 or several carpels inclosed in
          thick flesh.
  _Posterior._ The side of an axillary flower next the axis of
          inflorescence.
  _Prickle._ Outgrowth of the bark.
  _Proliferous._ Bearing offshoots.
  _Puberulent._ Very slightly pubescent.
  _Puberulous._ Minutely pubescent.
  _Pubescence._ A covering of short soft hairs.
  _Pubescent._ Clothed with soft short hairs.
  _Pulvinate._ Cushion-shaped.
  _Punctate._ Dotted with depressions or translucent internal
          glands, or with colored dots.
  _Punctulate._ Minutely punctate.


                                    R
  _Raceme._ An indeterminate or centripetal inflorescence with an
          elongated axis and flowers on pedicels of equal length.
  _Rachis._ The axis of a spike or of a compound leaf.
  _Radial._ Belonging to a ray.
  _Radicle._ The initial stem in an embryo.
  _Raphe._ The adnate cord or ridge connecting the hilum with the
          chalaza in an anatropous ovule.
  _Receptacle._ The axile portion of a blossom bearing sepals,
          petals, stamens, and pistils; the axis or rachis of the
          head, spike, or other flower-cluster.
  _Reniform._ Kidney-shaped.
  _Resupinate._ Upside down.
  _Reticulate._ Netted.
  _Retrorse._ Directed backward or downward.
  _Retuse._ With a shallow notch at a rounded apex.
  _Revolute._ Rolled backward from the margins or apex.
  _Rhombic._ Having the shape of a rhomb.
  _Rhomboidal._ Approaching a rhombic outline; quadrangular with
          lateral angles obtuse.
  _Rind._ The bark of some endogenous stems, like that of Palms.
  _Rostrate._ Narrowed into a slender tip.
  _Rotate._ Circular, flat and horizontally spreading.
  _Rugose._ Wrinkled.
  _Rugulose._ Slightly wrinkled.
  _Ruminate._ Looking as if chewed, like the albumen of the nutmeg.


                                    S
  _Sagittate._ Shaped like an arrowhead.
  _Samara._ An indehiscent winged fruit.
  _Sapwood._ The young living wood of an exogenous stem.
  _Scales._ Thin scarious bodies, usually degenerate leaves.
  _Scarious._ Thin, dry and membranaceous, not green.
  _Scobiform._ Having the appearance of sawdust.
  _Scorpioid._ A form of unilateral inflorescence circinately coiled
          in the bud.
  _Scurfy._ Covered with small bran-like scales.
  _Seed._ The fertilized and mature ovule, the result of sexual
          reproduction in a flowering plant.
  _Segment._ One of the divisions into which a leaf, calyx, or
          corolla may be divided.
  _Semianatropous._ Same as amphitropous.
  _Sepals._ The divisions of a calyx.
  _Septicidal._ Descriptive of a capsule splitting through the lines
          of junction of the carpels.
  _Septum._ A partition.
  _Serrate._ Beset with teeth.
  _Serrulate._ Serrate with small fine teeth.
  _Sessile._ Without a stalk.
  _Setose._ Beset with bristles.
  _Setulose._ Beset with minute bristles.
  _Sheath._ A tubular or enrolled part or organ.
  _Sinistrorse._ Turned or directed to the left.
  _Sinus._ A recess between the lobes of a leaf.
  _Spatulate._ Oblong with the lower end attenuated.
  _Spike._ An indeterminate inflorescence with flowers sessile on an
          elongated common axis.
  _Spine._ A sharp-pointed woody body, commonly a modified branch or
          stipule.
  _Spinescent._ Ending in a spine.
  _Spinose._ Furnished with spines.
  _Stamen._ One of the male organs of a flower.
  _Staminate._ Said of unisexual flowers without pistils.
  _Staminodium._ A sterile or much reduced stamen.
  _Stigma._ The part or surface of a pistil which receives the
          pollen for the fecundation of the ovules.
  _Stigmatic._ Relating to the stigma.
  _Stipe._ A stalk-like support of a pistil or of a carpel.
  _Stipel._ An appendage to a leaflet analogous to the stipules of a
          leaf.
  _Stipellate._ Having stipels.
  _Stipitate._ Having a stipe.
  _Stipulate._ Having stipules.
  _Stipules._ Appendages of a leaf, placed on one side of the
          petiole at its insertion with the stem.
  _Stomata._ Breathing pores or apertures in the epidermis of leaves
          connecting internal cavities with the external air.
  _Stomatiferous._ Furnished with stomata.
  _Stone._ The hard endocarp of a drupe.
  _Strobile._ The same as cone.
  _Strophiolate._ Said of a seed bearing a strophiole or appendage
          at the hilum.
  _Style._ The attenuated portion of a pistil between the ovary and
          the stigma.
  _Subcordate._ Slightly cordate.
  _Subulate._ Awl-shaped.
  _Sulcate._ Grooved or furrowed.
  _Superior._ Growing or placed above; also in a lateral flower for
          the side next the axis.
  _Suture._ A junction, usually a line of opening of a carpel.
  _Syncarp._ A multiple fruit.


                                    T
  _Taproot._ The primary descending root, a direct continuation from
          the radicle.
  _Tegmen._ The inner coat of a seed.
  _Testa._ The outer seed-coat.
  _Thyrsoidal._ Relating to a thrysus.
  _Thyrsus._ A mixed inflorescence with the main axis indeterminate
          and the secondary or ultimate cluster cymose.
  _Tomentose._ Densely pubescent with matted wool or tomentum.
  _Tomentulose._ Slightly pubescent with matted wool.
  _Torose._ Cylindric, with contractions or bulges at intervals.
  _Torulose._ Slightly torose.
  _Torus._ The receptacle of a flower.
  _Transverse._ Horizontal.
  _Trichotomous._ Three-forked.
  _Trifoliate._ Three-leaved.
  _Trifoliolate._ Descriptive of leaves, with 3 leaflets.
  _Truncate._ As if cut off at the end.
  _Tubercle._ A small tuber or excrescence.
  _Tuberculate._ Beset with knobby excrescences.
  _Turbinate._ Top-shaped.
  _Turgid._ Swollen.


                                    U
  _Umbel._ An inflorescence with numerous pedicels springing from
          the same point like the rays of an umbrella.
  _Umbilicus._ The hilum of a seed.
  _Umbo._ A boss or protuberance.
  _Umbonate._ Bearing an umbo.
  _Uncinate._ Hooked, bent, or curved at the tip in the form of a
          hook.
  _Unequally pinnate._ Pinnate, with an odd terminal leaflet.
  _Unguiculate._ Contracted at the base into a claw or stalk.
  _Unisexual._ Said of flowers with either the stamens or pistil 0
          or abortive.
  _Urceolate._ Hollow and contracted at or below the mouth like an
          urn or pitcher.
  _Utricle._ A small bladdery pericarp.


                                    V
  _Valvate._ Said of a bud in which the parts meet without
          overlapping.
  _Valve._ One of the pieces into which a capsule splits.
  _Veinlet._ One of the ultimate or smaller ramifications of a vein.
  _Veins._ Ramifications or threads of fibro-vascular tissue in a
          leaf or other flat organ.
  _Ventral._ Belonging to the anterior or inner face of a carpel.
  _Ventricose._ Swelling unequally or inflated on one side.
  _Vernation._ The disposition of parts in a leaf-bud.
  _Verrucose._ Covered with wart-like elevations.
  _Versatile._ Said of an anther turning freely on its filament.
  _Verticillate._ Arranged in a circle or whorl round an axis.
  _Villose._ Hairy, with long and soft hairs.


                                    W
  _Whorl._ An arrangement of branches or leaves in a circle round an
          axis.
  _Wood._ The hard part of a stem mainly composed of wood-cells,
          wood fibre, or tissue.




                                 INDEX


                                   A
  Abele, 120.
  Abies, 50.
  Abies amabilis, 56.
  Abies balsamea, 52.
  Abies balsamea var. hudsonica, 53.
  Abies balsamea var. macrocarpa, 53.
  Abies balsamea var. phanerolepis, 52.
  _Abies bracteata_, 60.
  Abies cephalonica, 50.
  Abies cilicica, 50.
  Abies concolor, 55.
  Abies Fraseri, 51.
  Abies grandis, 54.
  Abies homolepis, 50.
  Abies lasiocarpa, 53.
  _Abies Lowiana_, 56.
  Abies magnifica, 58.
  Abies magnifica var. shastensis, 59.
  Abies magnifica var. xanthocarpa, 59.
  Abies nobilis, 57.
  Abies Nordmanniana, 50.
  Abies pinsapo, 50.
  Abies Veitchii, 50.
  Abies venusta, 60.
  Acacia, 591, 623.
  Acacia Emoriana, 593.
  Acacia Farnesiana, 592.
  Acacia, Green-barked, 614, 615.
  Acacia Greggii, 595.
  Acacia tortuosa, 593.
  Acacia Wrightii, 594.
  Acer, 681.
  _Acer carolinianum_, 699.
  Acer circinatum, 684.
  _Acer Douglasii_, 683.
  Acer floridanum, 691.
  Acer floridanum var. villipes, 691.
  Acer glabrum, 682.
  Acer glabrum var. Douglasii, 683.
  Acer glabrum f. trisectum, 682.
  Acer grandidentatum, 692.
  Acer leucoderme, 694.
  Acer macrophyllum, 687.
  Acer Negundo, 699.
  Acer Negundo var. arizonicum, 701.
  Acer Negundo var. californicum, 701.
  Acer Negundo var. interior, 701.
  Acer Negundo var. texanum, 701.
  Acer Negundo var. texanum f. latifolium, 701.
  Acer Negundo var. violaceum, 700.
  Acer nigrum, 693.
  Acer nigrum var. Palmeri, 693.
  Acer pennsylvanicum, 686.
  Acer rubrum, 696.
  Acer rubrum var. Drummondii, 698.
  Acer rubrum, var. Drummondii f. rotundatum, 698.
  _Acer rubrum_ var. _rubrocarpum_, 696.
  Acer rubrum var. tomentosum, 696.
  Acer rubrum var. tridens, 699.
  Acer saccharinum, 694.
  Acer saccharum, 688.
  Acer saccharum var. glabrum, 688.
  Acer saccharum var. Rugelii, 689.
  Acer saccharum var. Schneckii, 688, 689.
  Acer saccharum var. sinuosum, 690.
  _Acer sinuosum_, 690.
  Acer spicatum, 685.
  Aceraceae, 680.
  Acoelorraphe, 105.
  Acoelorraphe arborescens, 106.
  Acoelorraphe Wrightii, 106.
  _Adelia_, 853.
  AEsculus, 702.
  _AEsculus austrina_, 709.
  AEsculus Bushii, 704.
  AEsculus californica, 710.
  AEsculus discolor, 709.
  AEsculus discolor var. flavescens, 710.
  AEsculus discolor var. mollis, 709.
  AEsculus georgiana, 706.
  AEsculus georgiana var. lanceolata, 707.
  Aesculus georgiana var. pubescens, 706.
  AEsculus glabra, 703.
  AEsculus glabra var. Buckleyi, 703.
  AEsculus glabra var. leucodermis, 704.
  AEsculus glabra var. micrantha, 704.
  AEsculus glabra var. pallida, 703.
  AEsculus Harbisonii, 707.
  AEsculus Hippocastanum, 702.
  AEsculus hybrida, 705.
  AEsculus mississippiensis, 704.
  AEsculus octandra, 704.
  AEsculus octandra var. virginica, 705.
  AEsculus Pavia, 707.
  Ailanthus altissima, 641.
  Alder, White, 224.
  Alligator Pear, 357.
  Almond Willow, 144.
  Alnus, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226.
  _Alnus acuminata_, 225.
  Alnus maritima, 226.
  Alnus oblongifolia, 225.
  _Alnus oregona_, 222.
  Alnus rhombifolia, 224.
  Alnus rubra, 222.
  Alnus sinuata, 221.
  _Alnus sitchensis_, 221.
  Alnus tenuifolia, 223.
  Alnus vulgaris, 220.
  Alvaradoa, 644.
  Alvaradoa amorphoides, 644.
  Amelanchier, 393.
  _Amelanchier alnifolia_, 396.
  Amelanchier canadensis, 394.
  _Amelanchier canadensis_, 395.
  Amelanchier canadensis var. tomentula, 394.
  _Amelanchier Cusickii_, 396.
  Amelanchier florida, 396.
  Amelanchier laevis, 395.
  Amelanchier laevis f. nitida, 395.
  Amyris, 640.
  Amyris elemifera, 640.
  Amyris parvifolia, 640.
  Anacahuita, 860.
  Anacardiaceae, 655.
  Anamomis dichotoma, 774.
  _Anamomis Simpsonii_, 775.
  Anaqua, 862.
  Angiospermae, 96.
  Anona, 354.
  Anona Cherimolia, 355.
  Anona glabra, 355.
  Anona muricata, 355.
  _Anona palustris_, 355.
  Anona reticulata, 355.
  Anonaceae, 353.
  Ant's Wood, 816.
  Apple, 379.
  Apple, Crab, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 387, 389.
  Apple, Haw, 434.
  Apple, Pond, 355.
  Apple, Turkey, 476.
  Aquifoliaceae, 668.
  Aralia, 778.
  Aralia spinosa, 778.
  Araliaceae, 777.
  Arbor-vitae, 67.
  Arbutus, 799.
  Arbutus arizonica, 801.
  Arbutus Menziesii, 799.
  Arbutus texana, 800.
  _Arbutus xalapensis_, 800.
  Ardisia, 806.
  Ardisia paniculata, 806.
  Arroyo Willow, 153.
  Ash, 833.
  Ash, Black, 852.
  Ash, Blue, 851.
  Ash, Brown, 852.
  Ash, Green, 846.
  Ash, Mountain, 390, 842.
  Ash, Prickly, 635.
  Ash, Pumpkin, 844.
  Ash, Red, 845.
  Ash, Swamp, 838.
  Ash, Wafer, 639.
  Ash, Water, 838, 839.
  Ash, White, 841.
  Ash-leaved Maple, 699.
  Asimina, 353.
  Asimina triloba, 353.
  Asp, Quaking, 121.
  Aspen, 121.
  Australian Eucalypti, 768.
  Austrian Pine, 2.
  Avicennia, 865.
  Avicennia nitida, 866.
  Avocado, 357.


                                    B
  Bald Cypress, 63, 64.
  Balsam, 125.
  Balsam Cottonwood, 126.
  Balsam Fir, 51, 52, 53.
  Balsam, She, 51.
  Bark, Cinnamon, 753.
  Bark, Georgia, 876.
  Basket Oak, 304.
  Bass Wood, 732, 733.
  _Batodendron_, 803.
  _Batodendron glaucescens_, 803.
  Bay, 751.
  Bay, Loblolly, 751.
  Bay, Red, 357.
  Bay, Rose, 792.
  Bay, Swamp, 346, 358.
  Bay, Sweet, 346.
  Bayonet, Spanish, 111, 112.
  Bean, Coral, 616.
  Bean, Horse, 611.
  Bean, Indian, 871.
  Bean, Screw, 602.
  Bearberry, 725.
  Bear Oak, 254.
  Bechtel Crab, 388.
  Beech, 228.
  Beech, Blue, 201.
  Berry, Service, 394, 395, 396.
  Betula, 205.
  Betula alaskana, 217.
  Betula coerulea, 211.
  Betula coerulea var. Blanchardii, 212.
  Betula commixta, 218.
  Betula Eastwoodae, 219.
  Betula fontinalis, 218.
  Betula fontinalis var. Piperi, 219.
  Betula Jackii, 207.
  _Betula kenaica_, 216.
  Betula lenta, 206.
  Betula lutea, 207.
  _Betula montanensis_, 214.
  Betula nigra, 208.
  _Betula occidentalis_, 215.
  Betula papyrifera, 212.
  Betula papyrifera var. cordifolia, 213.
  Betula papyrifera var. elobata, 212.
  Betula papyrifera var. kenaica, 216.
  Betula papyrifera var. minor, 213.
  Betula papyrifera var. montanensis, 214.
  Betula papyrifera var. occidentalis, 215.
  Betula papyrifera var. subcordata, 214.
  Betula pendula, 205, 212.
  _Betula Piperi_, 219.
  Betula populifolia, 210.
  Betula populifolia var. laciniata, 211.
  Betula populifolia var. purpurea, 211.
  Betula Purpusii, 208.
  Betula Sandbergii, 213.
  Betula Sandbergii f. maxima, 213.
  _Betula subcordata_, 214.
  Betulaceae, 200.
  Beureria, 861.
  _Beureria havanensis_, 861.
  Beureria ovata, 861.
  Bignoniaceae, 868.
  Big Shellbark, 186.
  Big Tree, 62.
  Big Tree Plum, 565.
  Billia, 702.
  Bilsted, 367.
  Birch, 205.
  Birch, Black, 206, 216, 218.
  Birch, Blue, 211.
  Birch, Canoe, 212.
  Birch, Cherry, 206.
  Birch, Gray, 207, 210.
  Birch, Paper, 212.
  Birch, Red, 208, 216.
  Birch. River, 208, 218.
  Birch, West Indian, 646.
  Birch, White, 210, 217.
  Birch, Yellow, 207.
  Bird Cherry, 571.
  Bitternut, 180.
  Bitter Pecan, 179.
  Bitter-Sweet Orange, 633.
  Black Ash, 852.
  Black Birch, 206, 216, 218.
  Black Calabash Tree, 873.
  Black Cottonwood, 124, 126.
  Black Haw, 812, 889, 890.
  Black Hemlock, 46.
  Black Ironwood, 721.
  Black Jack Oak, 258.
  Black Mangrove, 866.
  Black Maple, 693.
  Black Oak, 246, 250, 251, 274.
  Black Oaks, 238.
  Black Olive-tree, 765.
  Black Persimmon, 823.
  Black Sloe, 558.
  Black Spruce, 35.
  Black Walnut, 171.
  Black Willow, 140, 160.
  Blolly, 341.
  Blue Ash, 851.
  Blue Beech, 201.
  Blue Birch, 211.
  Blue Jack Oak, 265.
  Blue Myrtle, 727.
  Blue Oak, 283.
  Blue Spruce, 39.
  Borraginaceae, 858.
  Bow Wood, 332.
  Box Elder, 699.
  Box Wood, 680.
  Brittle Thatch, 99, 100.
  Broad-leaved Maple, 687.
  Broussonetia papyrifera, 328.
  Brown Ash, 852.
  Bucida, 765.
  Bucida Buceras, 765.
  Buckeye, 709, 710, 711.
  Buckeye, Fetid, 703.
  Buckeye, Ohio, 703.
  Buckeye, Red-flowered, 707.
  Buckeye, Spanish, 717.
  Buckeye, Sweet, 704.
  Buckthorn, 815.
  Bull Pine, 12, 20.
  Bumelia, 812.
  Bumelia angustifolia, 816.
  Bumelia lanuginosa, 813.
  Bumelia lanuginosa var. albicans, 813.
  Bumelia lanuginosa var. rigida, 814.
  Bumelia lycioides, 815.
  Bumelia monticola, 814.
  Bumelia tenax, 812.
  Burning Bush, 675.
  Burr Oak, 290.
  Bursera, 645.
  Bursera microphylla, 647.
  Bursera Simaruba, 646.
  Burseraceae, 645.
  Bush, Burning, 675.
  Bush, Button, 878.
  Bush, Shad, 394.
  Bush, Stag, 889.
  Bustic, 811.
  Butternut, 169.
  Button Bush, 878.
  Buttonwood, 372, 766, 767.
  Byrsonima, 632.
  Byrsonima lucida, 632.


                                    C
  Cabbage Palmetto, 102.
  Cabbage Tree, 102.
  Cactaceae, 757.
  Calabash Tree, Black, 873.
  California Laurel, 361.
  California Lilac, 727.
  California Nutmeg, 92.
  Calyptranthes, 769.
  Calyptranthes pallens, 769.
  Calyptranthes Zuzygium, 770.
  Camellia Thea, 750.
  Camptotheca, 779.
  Canada Plum, 560.
  Canella, 753.
  Canella Winterana, 753.
  Canellaceae, 753.
  Canoe Birch, 212.
  Canoe Cedar, 68.
  Canotia, 677.
  Canotia holacantha, 678.
  Capparidaceae, 365.
  Capparis, 365.
  Capparis jamaicensis, 365.
  Capparis spinosa, 365.
  Caprifoliaceae, 882.
  Carica, 755.
  Carica Papaya, 756.
  Caricaceae, 755.
  Carolina Poplar, 137.
  Carpinus, 201.
  Carpinus Betulus, 201.
  Carpinus caroliniana, 201.
  Carya, 176.
  Carya alba, 188.
  Carya alba var. subcoriacea. 189.
  Carya aquatica, 181.
  Carya aquatica var. australis, 182.
  _Carya arkansana_, 198.
  Carya Brownii, 181.
  Carya Brownii var. varians, 181.
  Carya Buckleyi, 197.
  Carya Buckleyi var. arkansana, 189.
  Carya Buckleyi var. arkansana f. pachylemma, 199.
  Carya Buckleyi var. villosa, 199.
  Carya carolinae-septentrionalis, 185.
  Carya cordiformis, 180.
  Carya cordiformis var. latifolia, 180.
  Carya Dunbarii, 187.
  Carya floridana, 196.
  Carya glabra, 191.
  Carya glabra var. megacarpa, 192.
  _Carya glabra_ var. _villosa_, 199.
  Carya laciniosa, 186.
  Carya Laneyi, 181.
  Carya Laneyi var. chateaugayensis, 181.
  Carya leiodermis, 189.
  Carya leiodermis var. callicoma, 190.
  _Carya megacarpa_, 192.
  _Carya microcarpa_, 194, 195.
  Carya myristicaeformis, 182.
  Carya Nussbaumerii, 187.
  Carya ovalis, 193.
  Carya ovalis var. borealis, 195.
  Carya ovalis var. hirsuta, 195.
  Carya ovalis var. obcordata, 194.
  Carya ovalis var. obovalis, 195.
  Carya ovalis var. odorata, 195.
  Carya ovata, 183.
  Carya ovata var. complanata, 184.
  Carya ovata var. ellipsoidalis, 184.
  Carya ovata var. fraxinifolia, 185.
  Carya ovata var. Nuttallii, 184.
  Carya ovata var. pubescens, 184.
  Carya pallida, 190.
  Carya pecan, 177.
  _Carya porcina_, 191.
  Carya Schneckii, 189.
  Carya texana, 179.
  _Carya texana_, 197.
  _Carya villosa_, 199.
  Cassada, 811.
  Cassena, 671.
  Cassie, 592.
  Castanea, 230.
  Castanea alnifolia, 233.
  Castanea alnifolia var. floridana, 233.
  Castanea crenata, 230.
  Castanea dentata, 231, 232.
  Castanea mollissima, 230.
  Castanea neglecta, 232.
  Castanea pumila, 232.
  Castanea sativa, 230.
  Castanopsis, 234.
  Castanopsis chrysophylla, 234.
  Castanopsis chrysophylla var. minor, 235.
  Castanopsis sempervirens, 234.
  Catalpa, 870, 871.
  Catalpa bignonioides, 871.
  Catalpa bignonioides var. nana, 872.
  _Catalpa Bungei_, 872.
  _Catalpa Catalpa_, 871.
  Catalpa hybrida, 872.
  Catalpa speciosa, 872.
  Catalpa, Western, 872.
  Cat's Claw, 586, 594, 595.
  Ceanothus, 726.
  Ceanothus arboreus, 727.
  Ceanothus spinosus, 728.
  Ceanothus thyrsiflorus, 727.
  Cedar, 87.
  Cedar, Canoe, 68.
  Cedar Elm, 314.
  Cedar, Incense, 65.
  Cedar Pine, 25.
  Cedar, Port Orford, 77.
  Cedar, Red, 68, 88, 89, 90.
  Cedar, Rock, 87.
  Cedar, Stinking, 91.
  Cedar, Sweet-berried, 82.
  Cedar, White, 67, 75.
  Celastraceae, 674.
  Celtis, 318.
  _Celtis brevipes_, 324.
  _Celtis canina_, 320.
  _Celtis crassifolia_, 320.
  Celtis Douglasii, 321.
  _Celtis Helleri_, 322.
  Celtis laevigata, 323.
  Celtis laevigata var. anomala, 324.
  Celtis laevigata var. brachyphylla, 324.
  Celtis laevigata var. brevipes, 324.
  Celtis laevigata var. texana, 325.
  Celtis laevigata var. texana f. microphylla, 326.
  Celtis Lindheimeri, 322.
  _Celtis mississippiensis_, 323.
  Celtis occidentalis, 319.
  Celtis occidentalis var. canina, 320.
  Celtis occidentalis var. crassifolia, 320.
  Celtis pumila, 326.
  Celtis pumila var. georgiana, 326.
  Celtis reticulata, 323.
  Celtis reticulata var. vestita, 323.
  _Celtis rugulosa_, 321.
  Cephalanthus, 878.
  Cephalanthus occidentalis, 878.
  Cephalanthus occidentalis var. pubescens, 879.
  _Cerasus demissa_, 574.
  Cercidium, 613.
  Cercidium floridum, 614.
  Cercidium Torreyanum, 615.
  Cercis, 603.
  Cercis canadensis, 604.
  Cercis reniformis, 604.
  Cercis texensis, 604.
  Cercocarpus, 550.
  Cercocarpus alnifolius, 552.
  Cercocarpus betuloides, 553.
  _Cercocarpus eximius_, 554.
  Cercocarpus ledifolius, 553.
  _Cercocarpus parvifolius_, 552.
  _Cercocarpus parvifolius_ var. _betuloides_, 553.
  Cercocarpus paucidentatus, 554.
  Cercocarpus Traskiae, 551.
  Cereus, 757.
  Cereus giganteus, 758.
  Chamaecyparis, 75.
  Chamaecyparis Lawsoniana, 77.
  Chamaecyparis nootkatensis, 76.
  Chamaecyparis obtusa, 75.
  Chamaecyparis pisifera, 75.
  Chamaecyparis thyoides, 75.
  Chapote, 823.
  Checkered-bark Juniper, 84.
  Cherry, 555, 806.
  Cherry Birch, 206.
  Cherry, Bird, 571.
  Cherry, Choke, 573.
  Cherry, Indian, 724.
  Cherry, Rum, 575.
  Cherry, Wild, 572, 576, 577, 578.
  Cherry, Wild Black, 575.
  Cherry, Wild Red, 571.
  Chestnut, 230, 231.
  Chestnut, Golden-leaved, 234.
  Chestnut Oak, 236, 305, 306.
  Chestnut Oaks, 241.
  Chickasaw Plum, 569.
  Chilopsis, 869.
  Chilopsis linearis, 869.
  China-tree, 648.
  China-tree, Wild, 714.
  Chinquapin, 232, 233, 234.
  Chionanthus, 855.
  Chionanthus virginica, 855.
  Chittam Wood, 657, 813.
  Chloromeles, 379.
  Choke Cherry, 573.
  Cholla, 760.
  Chrysobalanus, 583.
  Chrysobalanus icaco, 583.
  Chrysobalanus icaco var. pellocarpa, 584.
  Chrysophyllum, 817.
  Chrysophyllum Cainito, 817.
  Chrysophyllum oliviforme, 818.
  _Chytraculia Chytraculia_, 769.
  Cinnamon Bark, 753.
  Cinnamon, Wild, 753.
  Citharexylon, 864.
  Citharexylon fruticosum, 864.
  Citharexylon fruticosum var. villosum, 864.
  Citharexylon villosum, 864.
  Citrus Aurantium, 633.
  Cladrastis, 618.
  Cladrastis lutea, 619.
  Clammy Locust, 625.
  Claw, Cat's, 586, 594, 595.
  Cliftonia, 667.
  Cliftonia monophylla, 667.
  Cocoa Plum, 583.
  Coccolobis, 338.
  Coccolobis laurifolia, 340.
  Coccolobis uvifera, 339.
  Coccothrinax, 100.
  Coccothrinax jucunda, 100.
  Coccothrinax jucunda var. macrosperma, 101.
  Coccothrinax jucunda var. marquesensis, 101.
  Cock-spur Thorn, 402.
  Coffee-tree, 725.
  Coffee-tree, Kentucky, 606.
  Colorado Spruce, 39.
  Colubrina, 729.
  Colubrina arborescens, 731.
  _Colubrina Colubrina_, 731.
  Colubrina cubensis, 730.
  Colubrina reclinata, 729.
  Combretaceae, 764.
  Condalia, 719.
  Condalia obovata, 719.
  Conocarpus, 766.
  Conocarpus erecta, 766.
  Conocarpus erecta var. sericea, 766.
  Coral Bean, 616.
  Cordia, 858.
  Cordia Boissieri, 860.
  Cordia sebestena, 859.
  Cork Elm, 311.
  Cork Wood, 167.
  Cornaceae, 784.
  Cornus alternifolia, 789.
  Cornus asperifolia, 788.
  Cornus florida, 785.
  Cornus florida f. zanthocarpa, 786.
  Cornus mas, 785.
  Cornus Nuttallii, 787.
  Cotinus, 657.
  Cotinus americanus, 657.
  Cotinus coggygria, 657.
  Cotton Gum, 783.
  Cottonwood, 128, 129, 131, 133, 135, 136.
  Cottonwood, Balsam, 126.
  Cottonwood, Black, 124, 126.
  Cottonwood, Narrow-leaved, 127.
  Cottonwood, Swamp, 124.
  Cowania, 549.
  _Cowania Davidsonii_, 549.
  Cowania mexicana, 549.
  _Cowania Stansburiana_, 549.
  Cow Oak, 304.
  Crab Apple, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 387, 389.
  Crab, Bechtel, 388.
  Crab Wood, 654.
  Crabs, Siberian, 379.
  Crataegus, 397.
  Crataegus acclivis, 496.
  Crataegus acutifolia, 409.
  Crataegus aestivalis, 434.
  _Crataegus aestivalis_, 435, 436.
  Crataegus aestivalis var. luculenta, 435.
  Crataegus algens, 407.
  Crataegus amnicola, 426.
  Crataegus annosa, 524.
  Crataegus anomala, 486.
  Crataegus Anomalae, 400.
  Crataegus apiifolia, 530.
  Crataegus apiomorpha, 457.
  Crataegus aprica, 529.
  Crataegus arborea, 412.
  Crataegus arborescens, 443.
  Crataegus arduennae, 406.
  Crataegus arkansana, 466.
  Crataegus arnoldiana, 481.
  Crataegus Ashei, 514.
  Crataegus assurgens, 491.
  Crataegus atrorubens, 446.
  Crataegus basilica, 462.
  _Crataegus Beckwithae_, 454.
  Crataegus berberifolia, 418.
  Crataegus Berlandieri, 471.
  Crataegus blanda, 442.
  Crataegus Boyntonii, 508.
  Crataegus Bracteatae, 400.
  Crataegus brachyacantha, 533.
  Crataegus Brachyacanthae, 400.
  Crataegus brazoria, 430.
  Crataegus Buckleyi, 509.
  Crataegus Bushii, 410.
  Crataegus callicarpa, 451.
  Crataegus canadensis, 473.
  Crataegus Canbyi, 403.
  Crataegus champlainensis, 482.
  Crataegus Chapmanii, 537.
  Crataegus Coccineae, 399.
  _Crataegus coccinea_ var. _rotundifolia_, 504.
  Crataegus coccinioides, 503.
  Crataegus Cocksii, 411.
  Crataegus collina, 425.
  Crataegus consanguinea, 519.
  _Crataegus cordata_, 531.
  Crataegus corusca, 474.
  Crataegus crocina, 420.
  Crataegus Crus-galli, 399, 402.
  Crataegus Crus-galli var. capillata, 402.
  Crataegus Crus-galli var. oblongata, 402.
  Crataegus Crus-galli var. pyracanthifolia, 402.
  Crataegus Crus-galli var. salicifolia, 402.
  Crataegus dallasiana, 431.
  _Crataegus Davisii_, 438.
  Crataegus delecta, 497.
  Crataegus denaria, 415.
  Crataegus depilis, 461.
  Crataegus Deweyana, 539.
  Crataegus diffusa, 454.
  Crataegus dilatata, 500.
  Crataegus Dilatatae, 399.
  Crataegus disjuncta, 452.
  Crataegus dispar, 528.
  Crataegus Douglasianae, 400.
  Crataegus Douglasii, 545.
  Crataegus Douglasii f. badia, 546.
  Crataegus Douglasii var. Suksdorfii, 546.
  Crataegus drymophila, 453.
  Crataegus Eamesii, 498.
  Crataegus edita, 416.
  Crataegus edura, 419.
  Crataegus Ellwangeriana, 484.
  Crataegus Engelmanii, 413.
  Crataegus erecta, 408.
  Crataegus fastosa, 427.
  Crataegus fecunda, 404.
  Crataegus fera, 420.
  Crataegus flava, 516.
  Crataegus Flavae, 400.
  Crataegus floridana, 521.
  Crataegus Gaultii, 537.
  Crataegus gemmosa, 541.
  Crataegus georgiana, 450.
  Crataegus glabriuscula, 441.
  Crataegus gravida, 467.
  Crataegus Harbisonii, 513.
  Crataegus Hillii, 490.
  Crataegus Holmesiana, 495.
  Crataegus Holmesiana var. tardipes, 496.
  Crataegus Holmesiana var. villipes, 496.
  Crataegus hudsonica, 502.
  Crataegus ignava, 518.
  Crataegus illinoiensis, 542.
  Crataegus induta, 476.
  Crataegus ingens, 447.
  Crataegus integra, 526.
  Crataegus integriloba, 543.
  Crataegus Intricatae, 400.
  Crataegus invisa, 468.
  Crataegus Jonesae, 505.
  Crataegus Kelloggii, 475.
  Crataegus lacera, 460.
  Crataegus lacrimata, 522.
  Crataegus lanuginosa, 480.
  Crataegus Lettermanii, 432.
  Crataegus limaria, 469.
  Crataegus lobulata, 493.
  Crataegus lucorum, 459.
  Crataegus luxuriosa, 455.
  _Crataegus Mackensenii_, 469.
  Crataegus macracantha, 544.
  Crataegus Macracanthae, 400.
  Crataegus Margaretta, 506.
  _Crataegus Medioximae_, 453.
  Crataegus meridionalis, 472.
  Crataegus micracantha, 448.
  Crataegus Microcarpae, 400.
  Crataegus mitis, 445.
  Crataegus Mohrii, 421.
  Crataegus Molles, 399.
  Crataegus mollis, 464.
  _Crataegus mollita_, 537.
  Crataegus monogyna, 398.
  Crataegus montivaga, 414.
  Crataegus neo-londinensis, 489.
  Crataegus nitida, 444.
  Crataegus noelensis, 487.
  Crataegus opaca, 436.
  Crataegus opima, 512.
  Crataegus ovata, 439.
  Crataegus Oxyacantha, 398.
  Crataegus Palmeri, 408.
  Crataegus panda, 525.
  Crataegus paucispina, 458.
  Crataegus pausiaca, 424.
  Crataegus pedicellata, 494.
  Crataegus pedicellata var. gloriosa, 495.
  Crataegus penita, 447.
  Crataegus pennsylvanica, 483.
  Crataegus pentandra, 458.
  Crataegus peoriensis, 403.
  Crataegus Phaenopyrum, 531.
  Crataegus pratensis, 433.
  Crataegus Pringlei, 492.
  Crataegus pruinosa, 449.
  Crataegus Pruinosae, 399.
  Crataegus Pulcherrimae, 400.
  Crataegus punctata, 423.
  Crataegus punctata var. aurea, 423.
  Crataegus punctata var. canescens, 424.
  Crataegus punctata var. microphylla, 424.
  Crataegus Punctatae, 399.
  Crataegus pyriformis, 479.
  Crataegus quercina, 478.
  Crataegus Ravenelii, 523.
  Crataegus recurva, 527.
  Crataegus regalis, 405.
  Crataegus rivularis, 546.
  _Crataegus Robbinsiana_, 454.
  Crataegus Robesoniana, 485.
  Crataegus robur, 512.
  Crataegus rotundifolia, 504.
  Crataegus rotundifolia var. pubera, 505.
  Crataegus Rotundifoliae, 399.
  Crataegus rufula, 435.
  Crataegus saligna, 534.
  Crataegus Sargentii, 510.
  Crataegus scabrida, 547.
  Crataegus senta, 523.
  Crataegus sera, 465.
  Crataegus sertata, 499.
  Crataegus signata, 415.
  Crataegus silvestris, 427.
  _Crataegus silvicola_, 453.
  Crataegus Silvicolae, 399.
  Crataegus sordida, 429.
  Crataegus spathulata, 532.
  _Crataegus spathulata_ var. _flavanthera_, 532.
  _Crataegus spissiflora_, 485.
  Crataegus submollis, 484.
  Crataegus suborbiculata, 501.
  Crataegus succulenta, 540.
  Crataegus Tenuifoliae, 399.
  Crataegus tersa, 417.
  Crataegus texana, 477.
  Crataegus tomentosa, 536.
  Crataegus Treleasei, 472.
  Crataegus tristis, 520.
  Crataegus uniqua, 412.
  Crataegus vegeta, 538.
  Crataegus velutina, 442.
  Crataegus venusta, 510.
  Crataegus verruculosa, 428.
  Crataegus viburnifolia, 470.
  Crataegus Virides, 399.
  Crataegus viridis, 438.
  Crataegus virilis, 548.
  Crataegus visenda, 517.
  Crataegus vulsa, 440.
  Crescentia _cucurbitina_, 873.
  Cucumber-tree, 343.
  Cucumber-tree, Large-leaved, 348.
  Cucumber-tree, Long-leaved, 349.
  Cupressus, 69.
  Cupressus arizonica, 73, 75.
  Cupressus arizonica var. bonita, 74.
  _Cupressus Bakeri_, 72.
  _Cupressus glabra_, 74.
  Cupressus Goveniana, 70, 71.
  Cupressus guadaloupensis, 73.
  _Cupressus Lawsoniana_, 77.
  Cupressus Macnabiana, 72.
  Cupressus macrocarpa, 70.
  _Cupressus nevadensis_, 72.
  _Cupressus nootkatensis_, 76.
  _Cupressus pygmaea_, 70.
  Cupressus Sargentii, 71.
  Cupressus sempervirens, 69.
  _Cupressus thyoides_, 75.
  Cypress, 69, 72, 73.
  Cypress, Bald, 63, 64.
  Cypress, Deciduous, 64.
  Cypress, Lawson, 77.
  Cypress, Monterey, 70.
  Cypress, Sargent's, 71.
  Cypress, Sitka, 76.
  Cypress, Tecate, 73.
  Cypress, Yellow, 76.
  Cyrilla, 666.
  Cyrilla racemiflora, 666.
  Cyrilla racemiflora var. parviflora, 667.
  Cyrilla racemiflora var. racemifera, 667.
  Cyrillaceae, 665.


                                    D
  Dagger, Spanish, 112, 113, 114, 115, 117.
  Dahoon, 670.
  Dalea, 621.
  Dalea spinosa, 621.
  Darling Plum, 720.
  Davidia, 779.
  Deciduous Cypress, 64.
  Desert Palm, 104.
  Desert White Cedar, 82.
  Desert Willow, 869.
  Devil Wood, 857.
  Dicotyledons, 118.
  Digger Pine, 20.
  Dilly, Wild, 819.
  Diospyros, 820.
  Diospyros texana, 823.
  Diospyros virginiana, 821.
  Diospyros virginiana var. Mosieri, 823.
  Diospyros virginiana var. platycarpa, 822.
  Diospyros virginiana var. platycarpa f. atra, 822.
  Dipholis, 810.
  Dipholis salicifolia, 811.
  Dipteronia, 681.
  Dogwood, 787, 788, 789.
  Dogwood, Flowering, 785.
  Dogwood, Jamaica, 629.
  Dogwood, Poison, 663.
  Douglas Spruce, 48.
  Downward Plum, 816.
  Drypetes, 650.
  Drypetes diversifolia, 650.
  _Drypetes keyensis_, 650.
  Drypetes lateriflora, 651.
  Dwarf Maple, 682.


                                    E
  Ebenaceae, 820.
  Ebony, 588.
  Ehretia, 862.
  Ehretia elliptica, 862.
  Elder, 882.
  Elder, Box, 699.
  Elkwood, 347.
  Elliottia, 791.
  Elliottia racemosa, 791.
  Elm, 308.
  Elm, Cedar, 314.
  Elm, Cork, 311.
  Elm, English, 309.
  Elm, Red, 313, 315.
  Elm, Rock, 311.
  Elm, Scotch, 309.
  Elm, Slippery, 313, 750.
  Elm, Water, 317.
  Elm, White, 309.
  Elm, Winged, 312.
  Enallagma, 873.
  Enallagma cucurbitina, 873.
  Encina, 269.
  Endothia parisitica, 230.
  Engelmann Spruce, 38.
  English Elm, 309.
  Ericaceae, 790.
  Erythrina, 627.
  Erythrina herbacea, 628.
  Erythrina herbacea var. arborea, 628.
  Eucalypti, Australian, 768.
  Eugenia, 770.
  Eugenia aromatica, 771.
  Eugenia axillaris, 772.
  Eugenia buxifolia, 771.
  Eugenia confusa, 774.
  Eugenia dicrana, 774.
  Eugenia Jambos, 771.
  Eugenia rhombea, 773.
  Eugenia Simpsonii, 775.
  Euphorbiaceae, 649.
  European Mountain Ash, 390.
  Evergreen Oak, 282.
  Evonymus, 675.
  Evonymus atropurpureus, 675.
  Exostema, 877.
  Exostema caribaeum, 877.
  Exothea, 714.
  Exothea paniculata, 715.
  Eysenhardtia, 620.
  Eysenhardtia orthocarpa, 620.
  Eysenhardtia polystachya, 620.


                                    F
  Fagaceae, 227.
  _Fagara clava-Herculis_, 635.
  Fagara coriacea, 637.
  _Fagara Fagara_, 634.
  _Fagara flava_, 636.
  Fagus, 228.
  _Fagus americana_, 228.
  Fagus grandifolia, 228.
  Fagus grandifolia var. caroliniana, 229.
  Fagus grandifolia var. caroliniana f. mollis, 230.
  Fagus sylvatica, 228.
  Fan Palm, 104.
  Farkleberry, 802.
  Feltleaf Willow, 157.
  Fetid Buckeye, 703.
  Ficus, 333.
  Ficus aurea, 334.
  Ficus brevifolia, 335.
  Ficus Carica, 333.
  _Ficus populnea_, 335.
  Fiddle Wood, 864.
  Fig, 333, 335.
  Fig, Wild, 334, 335.
  Fir, 50.
  Fir, Balsam, 51, 52, 53.
  Fir, Red, 48, 57, 58, 59.
  Fir, Silver, 60.
  Fir, White, 54, 55, 56.
  Firmiana simplex, 749.
  Flowering Dogwood, 785.
  Forestiera, 853.
  Forestiera acuminata, 854.
  Foxtail Pine, 7, 8.
  Franklinia, 752.
  Fraxinus, 833.
  Fraxinus americana, 841.
  Fraxinus americana f. iodocarpa, 841.
  Fraxinus americana var. crassifolia, 841.
  Fraxinus americana var. microcarpa, 841.
  Fraxinus anomala, 837.
  Fraxinus Berlandieriana, 847.
  Fraxinus biltmoreana, 843.
  Fraxinus caroliniana, 838.
  Fraxinus chinensis, 833.
  Fraxinus cuspidata, 834.
  Fraxinus cuspidata var. macropetala, 834.
  Fraxinus cuspidata var. serrata, 834.
  Fraxinus dipetala, 833.
  _Fraxinus floridana_, 839.
  Fraxinus Greggii, 835.
  Fraxinus Lowellii, 836.
  Fraxinus nigra, 852.
  Fraxinus oregona, 850.
  Fraxinus Ornus, 833.
  Fraxinus papilosa, 840.
  Fraxinus pauciflora, 839.
  Fraxinus pennsylvanica, 845.
  Fraxinus pennsylvanica var. lanceolata, 846.
  Fraxinus profunda, 844.
  Fraxinus quadrangulata, 851.
  Fraxinus Smallii, 842.
  Fraxinus Standleyi, 840.
  Fraxinus texensis, 842.
  _Fraxinus Toumeyi_, 849.
  Fraxinus velutina, 848.
  Fraxinus velutina var. Toumeyi, 849.
  Fremontia, 749.
  Fremontia californica, 750.
  _Fremontodendron californicum_, 750.
  Frijolito, 616.
  Fringe-tree, 855.


                                    G
  Galloway Nut, 181.
  Garland Tree, 382.
  Geiger-tree, 859.
  Georgia Bark, 876.
  Glaucous Willow, 159.
  Gleditsia, 607.
  Gleditsia aquatica, 610.
  Gleditsia texana, 609.
  Gleditsia triacanthos, 608.
  Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis, 608.
  _Glyptostrobus sinensis_, 65.
  Golden-leaved Chestnut, 234.
  Gordonia, 750.
  Gordonia alatamaha, 752.
  Gordonia Lasianthus, 751.
  Grape, Sea, 339.
  Gray Birch, 207, 210.
  Gray Pine, 24.
  Great Laurel, 792.
  Green Ash, 846.
  Green-barked Acacia, 614, 615.
  Guaiacum, 630.
  Guaiacum officinale, 630.
  Guaiacum sanctum, 630, 631.
  Guava, 768.
  Guettarda, 879.
  Guettarda elliptica, 880.
  Guettarda scabra, 881.
  Guiana Plum, 651.
  Gum, Cotton, 783.
  Gum Elastic, 813.
  Gum, Hog, 659.
  Gum, Sour, 780.
  Gum, Sweet, 367.
  Gum, Tupelo, 783.
  Gumbo filet, 363.
  Gumbo Limbo, 646.
  Gurgeon Stopper, 771.
  Gyminda, 678.
  _Gyminda Grisebachii_, 679.
  Gyminda latifolia, 679.
  Gyminda latifolia var. glaucescens, 679.
  Gymnanthes, 654.
  Gymnanthes lucida, 654.
  Gymnocladus, 605.
  Gymnocladus dioicus, 606.
  Gymnospermae, 1.


                                    H
  Hackberry, 319, 320, 321, 323.
  Halesia, 824.
  Halesia carolina, 825.
  Halesia carolina var. mollis, 825.
  Halesia diptera, 828.
  Halesia Meehanii, 826.
  Halesia monticola, 826.
  Halesia monticola var. vestita, 827.
  Halesia monticola var. vestita f. rosea, 827.
  Halesia parviflora, 827.
  Hamamelidaceae, 366.
  Hamamelis, 368.
  Hamamelis macrophylla, 370.
  Hamamelis vernalis, 369.
  Hamamelis virginiana, 369.
  Haw, Apple, 434.
  Haw, Black, 812, 889, 890.
  Haw, May, 434.
  Haw, Parsley, 530.
  Haw, Purple, 719.
  Haw, Red, 464, 493.
  Hawthorn, 397.
  Helietta, 637.
  Helietta parvifolia, 638.
  Hemlock, 42, 43, 44, 45, 49.
  Hemlock, Black, 46.
  Hemlock, Mountain, 46.
  Hercules' Club, 778.
  Heteromeles, 392.
  Heteromeles arbutifolia, 392.
  Hickory, 176, 188.
  Hickory, Nutmeg, 182.
  Hickory, Shagbark, 183, 185.
  Hickory, Shellbark, 183.
  Hickory, Water, 181.
  Hickory Pine, 8, 29.
  _Hicoria_, 176.
  _Hicoria borealis_, 195.
  _Hicoria glabra_, 195.
  Hicoria glabra var. hirsuta, 195.
  _Hicoria glabra_ var. _odorata_, 195.
  _Hicoria glabra_, var. _villosa_, 199.
  _Hicoria microcarpa_, 194, 195.
  _Hicoria villosa_, 199.
  Hippocastanaceae, 702.
  Hippomane, 652.
  Hippomane Mancinella, 653.
  Hog Gum, 659.
  Holly, 669.
  Honey Locust, 600, 608.
  Hop Hornbeam, 202, 203.
  Hop-tree, 639.
  Hornbeam, 201.
  Hornbeam, Hop, 202, 203.
  Horse Bean, 611.
  Horse Sugar, 831.
  Huajillo, 587.
  Huisache, 592.
  Hypelate, 716.
  Hypelate trifoliata, 716.


                                    I
  _Icacorea paniculata_, 806.
  Ichthyomethia, 628.
  Ichthyomethia piscipula, 629.
  Ilex, 668.
  Ilex Aquifolium, 668.
  Ilex Cassine, 670.
  Ilex Cassine var. angustifolia, 671.
  Ilex Cassine var. latifolia, 671.
  Ilex decidua, 673.
  Ilex decidua var. Curtissii, 673.
  Ilex Krugiana, 672.
  Ilex monticola, 673.
  Ilex monticola var. mollis, 674.
  Ilex opaca, 669.
  Ilex paraguariensis, 668.
  Ilex vomitoria, 671.
  Incense Cedar, 65.
  Indian Bean, 871.
  Indian Cherry, 724.
  Ink Wood, 715.
  Ironwood, 203, 204, 378, 626, 660, 666, 667, 715, 812, 815.
  Ironwood, Black, 721.
  Ironwood, Red, 720.
  Ironwood, White, 716.
  Islay, 581.
  Jack Oak, 258.
  Jack Pine, 24.
  Jacquinia, 804.
  Jacquinia keyensis, 804.
  Jamaica Dogwood, 629.
  Jersey Pine, 26.
  Joe Wood, 804.
  Joshua Tree, 116.
  Judas-tree, 604.
  Juglandaceae, 168.
  Juglans, 169.
  Juglans californica, 174.
  _Juglans californica_, 175.
  _Juglans californica_ var. _Hindsii_, 175.
  Juglans californica var. quercina, 175.
  Juglans cinerea, 169.
  Juglans Hindsii, 175.
  Juglans intermedia, 172.
  Juglans major, 172.
  Juglans nigra, 171.
  Juglans "Paradox," 176.
  Juglans quadrangulata, 171.
  Juglans regia, 169, 172.
  Juglans rupestris, 173.
  _Juglans rupestris_, 172.
  _Juglans rupestris var. major_, 172.
  _Juglans subrupestris_, 173.
  Juniper, 78, 80, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86.
  Juniper, Checkered-bark, 84.
  Juniperus, 78.
  _Juniperus barbadensis_, 89.
  Juniperus californica, 82.
  Juniperus chinensis, 79.
  Juniperus communis, 79, 80.
  Juniperus communis var. depressa, 80.
  Juniperus communis var. Jackii, 80.
  Juniperus communis var. montana, 80.
  Juniperus flaccida, 83.
  _Juniperus Knightii_, 83.
  Juniperus lucayana, 89.
  Juniperus mexicana, 87.
  Juniperus monosperma, 86.
  Juniperus occidentalis, 85.
  Juniperus pachyphlaea, 84.
  Juniperus Pinchotii, 81.
  Juniperus Sabina, 79.
  _Juniperus sabinoides_, 87.
  Juniperus scopulorum, 90.
  Juniperus utahensis, 82.
  Juniperus utahensis var. megalanocarpa, 83.
  Juniperus virginiana, 88.


                                    K
  Kalmia, 794.
  Kalmia latifolia, 794.
  Kalmia latifolia f. alba, 794.
  Kalmia latifolia f. fuscata, 795.
  Kalmia latifolia f. polypetala, 796.
  Kalmia latifolia f. rubra, 795.
  Kalmia latifolia var. myrtifolia, 795.
  Kentucky Coffee-tree, 606.
  King Nut, 186.
  Knackaway, 862.
  Knob-cone Pine, 19.
  Koeberlinia, 754.
  Koeberlinia spinosa, 754.
  Koeberliniacae, 754.
  Krugiodendron, 721.
  Krugiodendron ferreum, 721.


                                    L
  Laguncularia, 767.
  Laguncularia racemosa, 767.
  Larch, 31.
  Large-leaved Cucumber-tree, 348.
  Larix, 31.
  _Larix alaskensis_, 32.
  _Larix americana_, 31.
  Larix decidua, 31.
  Larix Kaempferi, 31.
  Larix laricina, 31.
  Larix Lyallii, 33.
  Larix occidentalis, 32.
  Lauraceae, 356.
  Laurel, 794.
  Laurel, California, 361.
  Laurel, Great, 792.
  Laurel, Mountain, 794.
  Laurel Oak, 264, 266.
  Lawson Cypress, 77.
  Leaf, Sweet, 831.
  Leather Wood, 666.
  Leguminosae, 585.
  Leitneria floridana, 167.
  Leitneriaceae, 167.
  Leucaena, 596.
  Leucaena glauca, 596.
  Leucaena Greggii, 597.
  Leucaena pulverulenta, 598.
  Leucaena retusa, 598.
  Libocedrus, 65.
  Libocedrus decurrens, 65.
  Lignum-vitae, 630.
  Lilac, 728.
  Lilac, California, 727.
  Liliaceae, 110.
  Lime, Ogeechee, 782.
  Lime, Wild, 634.
  Linden, 732, 733.
  Liquidambar, 367.
  Liquidambar orientalis, 367.
  Liquidambar Styraciflua, 367.
  Liriodendron, 351.
  Liriodendron chinensis, 352.
  Liriodendron Tulipifera, 352.
  Lithocarpus, 236.
  Lithocarpus densiflora, 236.
  Lithocarpus densiflora f. lanceolata, 236.
  Lithocarpus densiflora var. montana, 237.
  Live Oak, 269, 270, 272, 276.
  Loblolly Bay, 751.
  Loblolly Pine, 16.
  Locust, 609, 622, 623, 624.
  Locust, Clammy, 625.
  Locust, Honey, 600, 608.
  Locust, Water, 610.
  Locust, Yellow, 623.
  Lodge Pole Pine, 23.
  Log Wood, 719.
  Lombardy Poplar, 120.
  Long-leaved Cucumber-tree, 349.
  Long-leaved Pine, 14.
  Lyonia, 797.
  Lyonia ferruginea, 798.
  Lyonothamnus, 378.
  Lyonothamnus floribundus, 378.
  Lysiloma, 589.
  Lysiloma bahamensis, 590.


                                    M
  Maclura, 331.
  Maclura pomifera, 332.
  Madrona, 799, 800, 801.
  Magnolia, 342, 345.
  Magnolia acuminata, 343.
  _Magnolia acuminata_ var. _cordata_, 344.
  _Magnolia acuminata_ var. _ludoviciana_, 344.
  Magnolia cordata, 344.
  _Magnolia foetida_, 345.
  Magnolia Fraseri, 349.
  _Magnolia glauca_, 346.
  Magnolia grandiflora, 345.
  Magnolia grandiflora var. exoniensis, 346.
  Magnolia macrophylla, 348.
  Magnolia major, 347.
  Magnolia, Mountain, 349.
  Magnolia pyramidata, 350.
  _Magnolia Thompsoniana_, 347.
  Magnolia tripetala, 347.
  Magnolia virginiana, 346.
  Magnolia virginiana var. australis, 347.
  Magnoliaceae, 342.
  Mahogany, 606, 648, 664.
  Mahogany, Mountain, 550.
  Malpigiaceae, 631.
  Malus, 379.
  Malus angustifolia, 385.
  Malus angustifolia var. pendula, 386.
  Malus bracteata, 386.
  Malus coronaria, 382.
  Malus coronaria var. dasycalyx, 382.
  Malus coronaria var. elongata, 383.
  Malus Dawsoniana, 389.
  _Malus elongata_, 383.
  Malus fusca, 389.
  Malus glabrata, 380.
  Malus glaucescens, 381.
  Malus ioensis, 387.
  Malus ioensis var. Bushii, 388.
  Malus ioensis var. creniserrata, 388.
  Malus ioensis var. Palmeri, 388.
  Malus ioensis var. plena, 388.
  Malus ioensis var. spinosa, 388.
  Malus ioensis var. texana, 388.
  Malus lancifolia, 384.
  Malus platycarpa, 383.
  Malus platycarpa var. Hoopesii, 384.
  Malus pumila, 379.
  _Malus rivularis_, 389.
  Malus Soulardii, 388.
  Manchineel, 653.
  Mangrove, 763.
  Mangrove, Black, 866.
  Mangrove, White, 767.
  Maple, 681.
  Maple, Ash-leaved, 699.
  Maple, Black, 693.
  Maple, Broad-leaved, 687.
  Maple, Dwarf, 682.
  Maple, Mountain, 685.
  Maple, Red, 696.
  Maple, Rock, 688.
  Maple, Scarlet, 696.
  Maple, Silver, 695.
  Maple, Soft, 695.
  Maple, Striped, 686.
  Maple, Sugar, 688, 691, 692, 694.
  Maple, Vine, 684.
  Marlberry, 806.
  Marsh Pine, 18.
  Mastic, 809.
  Maul Oak, 272.
  May Haw, 434.
  Maytenus, 676.
  Maytenus boaria, 676.
  Maytenus phyllanthoides, 677.
  Melastomaceae, 776.
  Melia Azedarach, 648.
  Meliaceae, 648.
  _Mespilus oestivalis_, 434, 435, 436.
  Mesquite, 599, 600.
  Mesquite, Screw Pod, 603.
  Metopium, 658.
  _Metopium Metopium_, 659.
  Metopium toxiferum, 659.
  Mexican Mulberry, 330.
  Mimosa, 598.
  Mimusops, 819.
  Mimusops emarginata, 819.
  _Mimusops Sieberi_, 819.
  Misanteca, 364.
  Misanteca triandra, 364.
  Mock Orange, 579.
  _Mohrodendron carolinum_, 825.
  _Mohrodendron dipterum_, 828.
  Monocotyledons, 96.
  Monterey Cypress, 70.
  Monterey Pine, 19.
  Moose Wood, 686.
  Moraceae, 328.
  Morus, 328.
  Morus alba, 329.
  _Morus celtidifolia_, 330.
  Morus microphylla, 330.
  Morus nigra, 329.
  Morus rubra, 329.
  Morus rubra var. tomentosa, 329.
  Mossy Cap Oak, 290.
  Mountain Ash, 390, 842.
  Mountain Ash, European, 390.
  Mountain Hemlock, 46.
  Mountain Laurel, 794.
  Mountain Magnolia, 343, 349.
  Mountain Mahogany, 550.
  Mountain Maple, 685.
  Mountain White Oak, 283.
  Mulberry, 328, 330.
  Mulberry, Mexican, 330.
  Mulberry, Paper, 328.
  Mulberry, Red, 329.
  Myrica californica, 166.
  Myrica cerifera, 164.
  Myrica cerifera var. pumila, 165.
  Myrica inodora, 165.
  Myrica inodora var. pumila, 165.
  Myrica rubra, 164.
  Myricaceae, 163.
  Myrsinaceae, 805.
  Myrtaceae, 768.
  Myrtle, 768.
  Myrtle, Blue, 727.
  Myrtle, Sea, 804.
  Myrtle, Wax, 164, 165, 166.


                                    N
  Naked Wood, 729, 774.
  Nannyberry, 888.
  Narrow-leaved Cottonwood, 127.
  Nogal, 172.
  Norway Pine, 22.
  Norway Spruce, 35.
  Nut, Galloway, 181.
  Nut, King, 186.
  Nut Pine, 8, 9, 10.
  Nutmeg, California, 92.
  Nutmeg Hickory, 182.
  Nyctaginaceae, 340.
  Nyssa, 779.
  Nyssa aquatica, 783.
  Nyssa biflora, 781.
  Nyssa ogeche, 782.
  Nyssa sylvatica, 780.
  Nyssaceae, 779.


                                    O
  Oak, 237.
  Oak, Basket, 304.
  Oak, Bear, 254.
  Oak, Black, 246, 250, 251, 274.
  Oak, Black Jack, 258.
  Oak, Blue, 283.
  Oak, Blue Jack, 265.
  Oak, Burr, 290.
  Oak, Chestnut, 236, 305, 306.
  Oak, Cow, 304.
  Oak, Evergreen, 282.
  Oak, Jack, 258.
  Oak, Laurel, 264, 266.
  Oak, Live, 269, 270, 272, 276.
  Oak, Maul, 272.
  Oak, Mossy Cap, 290.
  Oak, Mountain White, 283.
  Oak, Overcup, 292.
  Oak, Pin, 248.
  Oak, Post, 293.
  Oak, Red, 241, 242, 255.
  Oak, Rock Chestnut, 305.
  Oak, Scarlet, 247.
  Oak, Scrub, 254, 275.
  Oak, Shin, 285.
  Oak, Shingle, 266.
  Oak, Spanish, 247, 255.
  Oak, Swamp Spanish, 248, 256.
  Oak, Swamp White, 292, 303.
  Oak, Tan Bark, 236.
  Oak, Turkey, 253.
  Oak, Upland Willow, 265.
  Oak, Valley, 298.
  Oak, Vine, 297.
  Oak, Water, 260, 264.
  Oak, White, 280, 281, 296, 298, 300.
  Oak, Willow, 262.
  Oak, Yellow, 306.
  Oak, Yellow-bark, 250.
  Oaks, Black, 238.
  Oaks, Chestnut, 241.
  Oaks, White, 240.
  Oaks, Willow, 239.
  Ocotea, 359.
  Ocotea Catesbyana, 359.
  Ogeechee Lime, 782.
  Ohio Buckeye, 703.
  Olacaceae, 336.
  Old Field Pine, 16.
  Old Man's Beard, 855.
  Olea europaea, 832.
  Oleaceae, 832.
  Olive-tree, Black, 765.
  Olneya, 626.
  Olneya tesota, 626.
  Opuntia, 759.
  Opuntia fulgida, 760.
  Opuntia spinosior, 761.
  Opuntia versicolor, 762.
  Orange, Bitter-sweet, 633.
  Orange, Mock, 579.
  Orange, Osage, 332.
  Orange, Wild, 579.
  _Oreodoxa regia_, 108.
  Osage Orange, 332.
  Osmanthus, 856.
  Osmanthus americanus, 857.
  Osmanthus fragrans, 857.
  Ostrya, 202.
  Ostrya Knowltonii, 204.
  Ostrya virginiana, 203.
  Ostrya virginiana var. glandulosa, 203.
  Overcup Oak, 292.
  Oxycedrus, 79.
  Oxydendrum, 796.
  Oxydendrum arboreum, 796.


                                    P
  _Padus valida_, 575.
  Padus virens, 578.
  Palaquiuum gutta, 809.
  Palm, Desert, 104.
  Palm, Fan, 104.
  Palm, Royal, 107, 108.
  Palmae, 96.
  Palmetto, 101, 103.
  Palmetto, Cabbage, 102.
  Palmetto, Silvertop, 99.
  Palo Blanco, 322.
  Palo Verde, 615.
  Paper Birch, 212.
  Paper Mulberry, 328.
  Paradise-tree, 642.
  Parkinsonia, 611.
  Parkinsonia aculeata, 611.
  Parkinsonia microphylla, 612.
  Parsley Haw, 530.
  _Pasania_, 236.
  _Pasania densiflora_, 236.
  Pawpaw, 353, 756.
  Peach Willow, 144.
  Pear, Alligator, 357.
  Pecan, 177.
  Pecan, Bitter, 179.
  Pepperidge, 780.
  Persea, 356.
  Persea americana, 357.
  Persea Borbonia, 357.
  Persea palustris, 358.
  _Persea pubescens_, 358.
  Persimmon, 821.
  Persimmon, Black, 823.
  Picea, 34.
  Picea Abies, 35.
  Picea Breweriana, 40.
  _Picea canadensis_, 37.
  Picea Engelmannii, 38.
  Picea glauca, 37.
  Picea glauca var. albertiana, 38.
  Picea mariana, 35.
  Picea mariana var. brevifolia, 36.
  Picea orientalis, 35.
  _Picea Parryana_, 39.
  Picea pungens, 39.
  _Picea rubens_, 36.
  Picea rubra, 36.
  Picea sitchensis, 41.
  Picramnia, 643.
  Picramnia pentandra, 643.
  Pigeon Plum, 340.
  Pignut, 180, 191, 192, 194.
  Pinaceae, 1.
  Pinckneya, 875.
  Pinckneya pubens, 876.
  Pine, 2.
  Pine, Austrian, 2.
  Pine, Bull, 12, 20.
  Pine, Cedar, 25.
  Pine, Digger, 20.
  Pine, Foxtail, 7, 8.
  Pine, Gray, 24.
  Pine, Hickory, 8, 29.
  Pine, Jack, 24.
  Pine, Jersey, 26.
  Pine, Knob-cone, 19.
  Pine, Loblolly, 16.
  Pine, Lodge Pole, 23.
  Pine, Long-leaved, 14.
  Pine, Marsh, 18.
  Pine, Monterey, 19.
  Pine, Norway, 22.
  Pine, Nut, 8, 9, 10.
  Pine, Old Field, 16.
  Pine, Pitch, 17, 21.
  Pines, Pitch, 11, 21.
  Pine, Pond, 18.
  Pine, Prickle-cone, 28.
  Pine, Red, 22.
  Pine, Rocky Mountain White, 6.
  Pine, Sand, 27.
  Pine, Scotch, 2.
  Pine, Scrub, 23, 26.
  Pine, Short-leaved, 26.
  Pine, Slash, 15.
  Pines, Soft, 3.
  Pine, Southern, 14.
  Pine, Spruce, 25, 27.
  Pine, Sugar, 5.
  Pine, Swamp, 15.
  Pine, Swiss Stone, 2.
  Pine, Table Mountain, 29.
  Pine, Torrey, 30.
  Pine, White, 3, 4, 6.
  Pine, Yellow, 12, 14, 26.
  Pin Oak, 248.
  Pinon, 8, 9, 10.
  Pinus, 2.
  Pinus albicaulis, 6.
  Pinus aristata, 8.
  _Pinus arizonica_, 14.
  Pinus attenuata, 19.
  Pinus Balfouriana, 7.
  Pinus Banksiana, 24.
  Pinus caribaea, 15.
  Pinus cembra, 2.
  Pinus cembroides, 8.
  Pinus cembroides var. edulis, 9.
  Pinus cembroides var. monophylla, 10.
  Pinus cembroides var. Parryana, 9.
  _Pinus chihuahuana_, 12.
  Pinus clausa, 27.
  Pinus contorta, 23.
  Pinus contorta var. latifolia, 23.
  _Pinus contorta_ var. _Murrayana_, 23.
  Pinus Coulteri, 21.
  _Pinus divaricata_, 24.
  Pinus echinata, 26.
  _Pinus edulis_, 9.
  Pinus flexilis, 6.
  Pinus glabra, 25.
  _Pinus heterophylla_, 15.
  Pinus Lambertiana, 5.
  Pinus leiophylla, 12.
  _Pinus monophylla_, 10.
  Pinus monticola, 4.
  Pinus muricata, 28.
  Pinus nigra, 2.
  Pinus palustris, 14.
  Pinus Pinaster, 2.
  Pinus ponderosa, 12.
  Pinus ponderosa var. arizonica, 14.
  Pinus ponderosa var. Jeffreyi, 13.
  Pinus ponderosa var. scopulorum, 13.
  Pinus pungens, 29.
  _Pinus quadrifolia_, 9.
  Pinus radiata, 19.
  Pinus resinosa, 22.
  Pinus rigida, 17.
  Pinus rigida var. serotina, 18.
  Pinus Sabiniana, 20.
  _Pinus serotina_, 18.
  Pinus silvestris, 2.
  _Pinus strobiformis_, 6.
  Pinus Strobus, 3.
  Pinus taeda, 16.
  Pinus Torreyana, 30.
  Pinus virginiana, 26.
  Piscidia, 629.
  _Pisonia longifolia_, 341.
  Pistacia, 656.
  Pistacia texana, 656.
  Pistacia vera, 656.
  Pistacio-nuts, 656.
  Pitch Pine, 17, 21.
  Pitch Pines, 11.
  Pithecolobium, 586.
  Pithecolobium brevifolium, 587.
  Pithecolobium flexicaule, 588.
  Pithecolobium unguis-cati, 586.
  Planera, 316.
  Planera aquatica, 317.
  Plane-tree, 371.
  Platanaceae, 371.
  Platanus, 371.
  Platanus acerifolia, 372.
  _Platanus glabrata_, 373.
  Platanus occidentalis, 372.
  Platanus occidentalis var. attenuata, 372.
  Platanus occidentalis var. glabrata, 373.
  Platanus orientalis, 372.
  Platanus racemosa, 374.
  Platanus Wrightii, 375.
  Plum, 555.
  Plum, Big Tree, 565.
  Plum, Canada, 560.
  Plum, Chickasaw, 569.
  Plum, Cocoa, 583.
  Plum, Darling, 720.
  Plum, Downward, 816.
  Plum, Guiana, 651.
  Plum, Pigeon, 340.
  Plum, Red, 560.
  Plum, Wild, 557, 561, 567.
  Plum, Wild Goose, 569.
  Poison Dogwood, 663.
  Poison Sumach, 663.
  Poison Wood, 659.
  Polygonaceae, 338.
  Pomette Bleue, 533.
  Pond Apple, 355.
  Pond Pine, 18.
  Poplar, 119, 123.
  Poplar, Carolina, 137.
  Poplar, Lombardy, 120.
  Poplar, White, 120.
  Poplar, Yellow, 352.
  Populus, 119.
  Populus acuminata, 128.
  Populus acuminata var. Rehderi, 129.
  Populus alba, 120.
  Populus Andrewsii, 129.
  _Populus angulata_, 135.
  Populus angustifolia, 127.
  Populus arizonica, 131.
  Populus arizonica var. Jonesii, 132.
  _Populus balsamifera_, 125.
  Populus balsamifera, 135.
  Populus balsamifera var. virginiana, 136.
  Populus balsamifera var. virginiana f. pilosa, 137.
  Populus canadensis, 137.
  Populus canadensis var. Eugenie, 137.
  Populus candicans, 126.
  _Populus deltoidea_, 136.
  _Populus deltoides_ var. _occidentalis_, 134.
  _Populus fortissima_, 127.
  Populus Fremontii, 129.
  Populus Fremontii var. macrodisca, 131.
  Populus Fremontii var. pubescens, 131.
  Populus Fremontii var. Thornberii, 131.
  Populus Fremontii var. Toumeyi, 131.
  Populus grandidentata, 123.
  Populus grandidentata var. meridionalis, 124.
  Populus heterophylla, 124.
  Populus Jackii, 137.
  Populus McDougallii, 133.
  _Populus mexicana_, 131.
  _Populus nigra_, 120.
  _Populus nigra {b} virginiana_, 136.
  Populus Palmeri, 137.
  Populus Parryi, 131.
  Populus Sargentii, 134.
  Populus tacamahacca, 125.
  Populus tacamahacca var. Michauxii, 126.
  Populus texana, 132.
  Populus tremuloides, 121.
  Populus tremuloides var. aurea, 121.
  Populus tremuloides var. vancouveriana, 122.
  Populus trichocarpa, 126.
  Populus trichocarpa var. hastata, 127.
  _Populus vancouveriana_, 122.
  Populus Wislizenii, 133.
  Port Orford Cedar, 77.
  Post Oak, 293.
  Prickle-cone Pine, 28.
  Prickly Ash, 635.
  Pride of India, 648.
  Prince Wood, 877.
  Privet, Swamp, 853.
  Prosopis, 599.
  Prosopis juliflora, 600.
  Prosopis juliflora var. glandulosa, 601.
  Prosopis juliflora var. velutina, 601.
  Prosopis pubescens, 602.
  Prunus, 555.
  Prunus alabamensis, 576.
  Prunus alleghaniensis, 566.
  Prunus alleghaniensis var. Davisii, 567.
  Prunus americana, 561.
  Prunus americana var. floridana, 563.
  _Prunus americana lanata_, 563.
  Prunus angustifolia, 569.
  Prunus angustifolia var. varians, 570.
  _Prunus arkansana_, 565.
  Prunus australis, 577.
  Prunus caroliniana, 579.
  Prunus emarginata, 572.
  Prunus emarginata var. mollis, 572.
  _Prunus eximia_, 575.
  Prunus hortulana, 567.
  Prunus hortulana var. Mineri, 568.
  Prunus hortulana var. pubens, 568.
  Prunus ilicifolia, 581.
  Prunus integrifolia, 582.
  Prunus lanata, 563.
  Prunus Lyonii, 582.
  Prunus mexicana, 565.
  Prunus mexicana var. fultonensis, 566.
  Prunus mexicana var. polyandra, 566.
  Prunus mexicana var. reticulata, 566.
  _Prunus mitis_, 559.
  Prunus Munsoniana, 568.
  Prunus myrtifolia, 580.
  Prunus nigra, 560.
  _Prunus Palmeri_, 563.
  Prunus pennsylvanica, 571.
  Prunus pennsylvanica var. saximontana, 572.
  Prunus serotina, 575.
  Prunus serotina var. montana, 576.
  _Prunus sphaerocarpa_, 580.
  Prunus subcordata, 557.
  Prunus subcordata var. oregona, 558.
  _Prunus tarda_, 559.
  Prunus tenuifolia, 564.
  Prunus umbellata, 558.
  Prunus umbellata var. injucunda, 559.
  Prunus umbellata var. tarda, 559.
  Prunus virens, 578.
  Prunus virginiana, 573.
  Prunus virginiana var. demissa, 574.
  Prunus virginiana var. demissa f. pachyrrachis, 575.
  Prunus virginiana var. leucocarpa, 573.
  Prunus virginiana var. melanocarpa, 574.
  Prunus virginiana var. melanocarpa f. xanthocarpa, 574.
  Pseudophoenix, 109.
  Pseudophoenix vinifera, 109.
  _Pseudosassafras_, 362.
  Pseudotsuga, 47.
  _Pseudotsuga glauca_, 49.
  Pseudotsuga macrocarpa, 49.
  _Pseudotsuga mucronata_, 48.
  Pseudotsuga taxifolia, 48.
  Ptelea, 639.
  Ptelea trifoliata, 639.
  Ptelea trifoliata var. mollis, 640.
  Pumpkin Ash, 844.
  Purple Haw, 719.
  _Pyrus americana_ var. _decora_, 391.
  _Pyrus sambucifolia_, 391.
  _Pyrus sitchensis_, 391.


                                    Q
  Quaking Asp, 121.
  Quasin, 642.
  Quercus, 237.
  _Querus acuminata_, 306.
  Quercus agrifolia, 269.
  Quercus alba, 300.
  Quercus alba var. latiloba, 302.
  Quercus alba var. repanda, 302.
  Quercus Andrewsii, 291.
  Quercus annulata, 287.
  Quercus arizonica, 280.
  Quercus arkansana, 259.
  Quercus Ashei, 254.
  Quercus austrina, 300.
  Quercus Beadlei, 302.
  Quercus beaumontiana, 262.
  Quercus Bebbiana, 302.
  Quercus Benderi, 248.
  Quercus bicolor, 303.
  Quercus blufftonensis, 254.
  Quercus borealis, 241.
  Quercus borealis var. maxima, 242.
  _Quercus brevifolia_, 265.
  _Quercus breviloba_, 287, 288.
  Quercus Brittonii, 255.
  Quercus Bushii, 259.
  Quercus caduca, 266.
  _Quercus californica_, 251.
  Quercus carolinensis, 266.
  Quercus Catesbaei, 253.
  Quercus Chapmanii, 289.
  Quercus chrysolepis, 272.
  Quercus chrysolepis var. Palmeri, 273.
  Quercus cinerea, 265.
  Quercus cinerea {b} dentatolobata, 265.
  Quercus coccinea, 247.
  Quercus coccinea var. tuberculata, 247.
  Quercus Cocksii, 262.
  Quercus Comptonae, 293.
  Quercus Deamii, 302.
  _Quercus densiflora_, 236.
  _Quercus digitata_, 255.
  Quercus Douglasii, 283.
  Quercus dubia, 266.
  Quercus dumosa, 275.
  Quercus dumosa var. Alvordiana, 276.
  Quercus Durandii, 288.
  Quercus ellipsoidalis, 246.
  Quercus Emoryi, 274.
  Quercus Engelmannii, 282.
  Quercus exacta, 268.
  Quercus Faxonii, 302.
  Quercus Fernowii, 302.
  Quercus Garryana, 296.
  _Quercus geminata_, 277.
  Quercus georgiana, 249.
  Quercus Giffordii, 255.
  Quercus guadalupensis, 291.
  Quercus Harbisonii, 295.
  Quercus Hastingsii, 259.
  Quercus heterophylla, 263.
  Quercus Hillii, 292.
  Quercus hypoleuca, 268.
  Quercus ilicifolia, 254.
  Quercus imbricaria, 266.
  Quercus Jackiana, 302.
  Quercus jolonensis, 284.
  Quercus Kelloggii, 251.
  Quercus Laceyi, 286.
  Quercus laurifolia, 264.
  Quercus laurifolia var. hybrida, 264.
  Quercus laurifolia var. tridentata, 264.
  Quercus Leana, 268.
  Quercus leptophylla, 299.
  Quercus lobata, 298.
  Quercus Lowellii, 243.
  Quercus ludoviciana, 264.
  Quercus lyrata, 292.
  Quercus MacDonaldii, 276.
  Quercus macrocarpa, 290.
  _Quercus Margaretta_, 295.
  Quercus marilandica, 258.
  Quercus Mellichampii, 254.
  _Quercus Michauxii_, 304.
  _Quercus microcarya_, 261.
  _Quercus minor_, 293.
  Quercus Mohriana, 285.
  Quercus montana, 305.
  Quercus morehus, 271.
  Quercus Muehlenbergii, 306.
  Quercus Muehlenbergii var. Brayi, 308.
  Quercus myrtifolia, 271.
  _Quercus nana_, 254.
  Quercus nigra, 260.
  Quercus nigra var. tridentifera, 260.
  Quercus nigra var. tridentifera f. microcarya, 261.
  Quercus oblongifolia, 281.
  Quercus oviedoensis, 266.
  _Quercus pagoda_, 256.
  _Quercus pagodaefolia_, 256.
  Quercus palustris, 248.
  Quercus Phellos, 262.
  _Quercus platanoides_, 303.
  Quercus Porteri, 243.
  Quercus Prinus, 304.
  _Quercus Prinus_, 305.
  Quercus Rehderi, 255.
  Quercus reticulata, 279.
  Quercus rhombica, 261.
  Quercus Robbinsii, 248.
  Quercus Robur, 238.
  _Quercus rubra_, 242.
  Quercus rubra, 255.
  Quercus rubra var. leucophylla, 257.
  Quercus rubra var. pagodaefolia, 256.
  Quercus rubra var. triloba, 255.
  Quercus Rudkinii, 259.
  Quercus runcinata, 243.
  Quercus Sargentii, 306.
  Quercus Saulei, 302.
  _Quercus Schneckii_, 245.
  Quercus Schuettii, 304.
  Quercus sessiliflora, 238.
  Quercus Shumardii, 243.
  Quercus Shumardii var. Schneckii, 244.
  Quercus Smallii, 250.
  Quercus stellata, 293.
  Quercus stellata var. anomala, 294.
  Quercus stellata var. araniosa, 294.
  Quercus stellata var. attenuata, 294.
  Quercus stellata var. Boyntonii, 295.
  Quercus stellata var. Margaretta, 295.
  Quercus stellata var. Margaretta f. stonolifera, 295.
  Quercus stellata var. Palmeri, 294.
  Quercus stellata var. paludosa, 294.
  Quercus stellata var. parviloba, 294.
  Quercus stellata var. rufescens, 295.
  Quercus sterilis, 259.
  Quercus subfalcata, 264.
  Quercus subfalcata var. microcarpa, 264.
  Quercus subintegra, 266.
  Quercus sublaurifolia, 266.
  _Quercus succulenta_, 278.
  Quercus texana, 245.
  _Quercus texana_, 243, 244.
  Quercus texana var. chesosensis, 246.
  Quercus texana var. stellapila, 246.
  Quercus tomentella, 273.
  Quercus Toumeyi, 280.
  Quercus tridentata, 268.
  _Quercus undulata var. Vaseyana_, 285.
  Quercus utahensis, 297.
  Quercus utahensis var. mollis, 297.
  Quercus Vaseyana, 285.
  Quercus velutina, 250.
  Quercus velutina var. missouriensis, 251.
  Quercus virginiana, 276.
  Quercus virginiana var. dentata, 277, 278.
  Quercus virginiana van eximea, 278.
  Quercus virginiana var. fusiformis, 278.
  Quercus virginiana var. geminata, 277.
  Quercus virginiana var. geminata f. grandifolia, 278.
  Quercus virginiana var. macrophylla, 278.
  Quercus virginiana var. maritima, 277, 278.
  Quercus virginiana var. pygmaea, 279.
  Quercus virginiana var. virescens, 278.
  Quercus Walteriana, 254.
  _Quercus Wilcoxii_, 273.
  Quercus Willdenoviana, 257.
  Quercus Wislizenii, 270.


                                    R
  Rapanea, 807.
  Rapanea guianensis, 807.
  Red Ash, 845.
  Red Bay, 357.
  Red Birch, 208, 216.
  Redbud, 604.
  Red Cedar, 68, 88, 89, 90.
  Red Elm, 313, 315.
  Red Fir, 48, 57, 58, 59.
  Red Haw, 464, 493.
  Red Ironwood, 720.
  Red Maple, 696.
  Red Mulberry, 329.
  Red Oak, 241, 242, 255.
  Red Pine, 22.
  Red Plum, 560.
  Red Spruce, 36.
  Red Stopper, 774.
  Red Willow, 146.
  Red-flowered Buckeye, 707.
  Redwood, 61.
  Retama, 611.
  Retinosporas, 75.
  Reynosia, 720.
  Reynosia septentrionalis, 720.
  Rhamnaceae, 718.
  Rhamnus, 722.
  Rhamnus caroliniana, 724.
  Rhamnus cathartica, 722.
  Rhamnus crocea, 723.
  Rhamnus crocea var. ilicifolia, 723.
  Rhamnus crocea var. insularis, 724.
  Rhamnus crocea var. insularis f. pilosa, 724.
  Rhamnus Purshiana, 725.
  Rhizophora, 763.
  Rhizophora Mangle, 764.
  Rhizophoraceae, 763.
  Rhododendron, 792.
  Rhododendron maximum, 792.
  Rhus copallina, 662.
  Rhus copallina var. lanceolata, 663.
  _Rhus hirta_, 660.
  Rhus hybrida, 662.
  Rhus integrifolia, 664.
  Rhus integrifolia var. serrata, 664.
  Rhus typhina, 660.
  Rhus vernicifera, 660.
  Rhus vernix, 663.
  River Birch, 208, 218.
  Robinia, 622.
  Robinia Holdtii, 625.
  Robinia neo-mexicana, 624.
  Robinia neo-mexicana var. luxurians, 624.
  Robinia neo-mexicana var. luxurians f. albiflora, 625.
  Robinia Pseudoacacia, 623.
  Robinia viscosa, 625.
  Rock Cedar, 87.
  Rock Chestnut Oak, 305.
  Rock Elm, 311.
  Rock Maple, 688.
  Rocky Mountain White Pine, 6.
  Rosaceae, 376.
  Rose Bay, 792.
  Rowan-tree, 390.
  Royal Palm, 107, 108.
  "Royal" Walnut, 172.
  Roystonea, 107.
  Roystonea regia, 108.
  Rubiaceae, 875.
  Rum Cherry, 575.
  Rutaceae, 633.


                                    S
  Sabal, 101.
  _Sabal mexicana_, 103.
  Sabal Palmetto, 102.
  Sabal texana, 103.
  Sabina, 79.
  Salicaceae, 119.
  Salix, 138.
  Salix alaxensis, 157.
  Salix alba, 139.
  _Salix amphibia_, 147.
  Salix amplifolia, 157.
  Salix amygdaloides, 144.
  Salix amygdaloides var. Wrightii, 145.
  _Salix balsamifera_, 156.
  Salix Bebbiana, 158.
  Salix Bonplandiana, 146.
  Salix Bonplandiana var. Toumeyi, 145.
  _Salix brachystachys_, 161.
  Salix discolor, 159.
  Salix discolor var. eriocephala, 160.
  Salix discolor var. prinoides, 169.
  Salix exigua, 151.
  _Salix fluviatalis_, 152.
  Salix fragilis, 139.
  Salix Gooddingii, 142.
  Salix Harbisonii, 143.
  Salix Hookeriana, 161.
  Salix laevigata, 146.
  Salix laevigata f. araquipa, 147.
  Salix lasiandra, 148.
  Salix lasiandra var. cordata, 149.
  Salix lasiandra var. lancifolia, 149.
  Salix lasiolepis, 153.
  Salix longifolia, 152.
  Salix longifolia var. angustissima, 153.
  Salix longifolia var. pedunculata, 153.
  Salix longifolia var. Wheeleri, 153.
  Salix longipes, 147.
  Salix longipes var. venulosa, 148.
  Salix longipes var. Wardii, 148.
  Salix lucida, 149.
  Salix lucida var. angustifolia, 149.
  Salix lucida var. intonsa, 150.
  Salix Mackenzieana, 154.
  Salix missouriensis, 155.
  Salix nigra, 140.
  Salix nigra var. altissima, 141.
  Salix nigra var. Lindheimeri, 141.
  _Salix Nuttallii_, 160.
  Salix pyrifolia, 156.
  Salix Scouleriana, 160.
  Salix Scouleriana var. crassijulis, 161.
  Salix Scouleriana var. flavescens, 161.
  Salix sessilifolia, 151.
  Salix sessilifolia var. Hindsiana, 151.
  Salix sessilifolia var. leucodendroides, 151.
  Salix sitchensis, 162.
  Salix sitchensis f. Ralphiana, 163.
  Salix taxifolia, 150.
  _Salix Toumeyi_, 145.
  _Salix vallicola_, 142.
  _Salix Wrightii_, 141, 145.
  Sambucus, 882.
  Sambucus callicarpa, 885.
  Sambucus callicarpa f. Piperi, 886.
  Sambucus coerulea, 883.
  Sambucus coerulea var. arizonica, 885.
  Sambucus coerulea var. velutina, 884.
  _Sambucus glauca_, 883.
  Sambucus mexicana, 885.
  _Sambucus neomexicana_, 883.
  Sambucus nigra, 882.
  Sambucus Simpsonii, 883.
  Sand Bar Willow, 152.
  Sand Pine, 27.
  Sapindaceae, 711.
  Sapindus, 711.
  Sapindus Drummondii, 714.
  Sapindus manatensis, 713.
  _Sapindus marginatus_, 713.
  Sapindus saponaria, 712.
  Sapotaceae, 808.
  Sargent's Cypress, 71.
  Sassafras, 362.
  Sassafras officinale, 363.
  Sassafras officinale var. albidum, 364.
  Sassafras randaiense, 363.
  _Sassafras Sassafras_, 363.
  Sassafras tzumu, 363.
  Satin-leaf, 818.
  Satinwood, 636.
  Savin, 88.
  Scarlet Maple, 696.
  Scarlet Oak, 247.
  Schaefferia, 679.
  Schaefferia frutescens, 680.
  Schoepfia, 336.
  Schoepfia chrysophylloides, 336.
  _Schoepfia Schreberi_, 336.
  Scotch Elm, 309.
  Scotch Pine, 2.
  Screw Bean, 602.
  Screw Pod Mesquite, 602.
  Scrub Oak, 254, 275.
  Scrub Pine, 23, 26.
  Sea Grape, 339.
  Sea Myrtle, 804.
  Sequoia, 61.
  Sequoia gigantea, 62.
  Sequoia sempervirens, 61.
  _Sequoia Wellingtonia_, 62.
  _Serenoa arborescens_, 106.
  Service Berry, 394, 395, 396.
  Shad Bush, 394.
  Shagbark Hickory, 183, 185.
  She Balsam, 51.
  Sheepberry, 888.
  Shellbark, Big, 186.
  Shellbark Hickory, 183.
  Shingle Oak, 266.
  Shining Willow, 149.
  Shin Oak, 285.
  Short-leaved Pine, 26.
  Siberian Crabs, 379.
  Sideroxylum, 809.
  Sideroxylum foetidissimum, 809.
  _Sideroxylum Mastichodendron_, 809.
  Silver Bell Tree, 824.
  Silver Fir, 60.
  Silver Maple, 695.
  Silvertop Palmetto, 99.
  Simarouba, 642.
  Simarouba glauca, 642.
  Simaroubaceae, 641.
  Sitka Cypress, 76.
  Sitka Spruce, 41.
  Slash Pine, 15.
  Slippery Elm, 313, 750.
  Sloe, 558, 566.
  Sloe, Black, 558.
  Smoke-tree, 621, 657.
  Soapberry, 711.
  Soft Maple, 695.
  Soft Pines, 3.
  Solanaceae, 867.
  Solanum, 867.
  Solanum verbascifolium, 867.
  Sophora, 615.
  Sophora affinis, 617.
  Sophora japonica, 616.
  Sophora secundiflora, 616.
  Sorbomalus, 380.
  Sorbus, 390.
  Sorbus americana, 390.
  Sorbus americana var. decora, 391.
  Sorbus Aucuparia, 390.
  _Sorbus decora_, 391.
  _Sorbus scopulina_, 391.
  Sorrel-tree, 796.
  Sour Gum, 780.
  Sour Tupelo, 782.
  Sour Wood, 796.
  Southern Pine, 14.
  Spanish Bayonet, 111, 112.
  Spanish Buckeye, 717.
  Spanish Dagger, 112, 113, 114, 115, 117.
  Spanish Oak, 247, 255.
  Spanish Stopper, 771.
  Sparkleberry, 802.
  Spice-tree, 361.
  Spiraeoideae, 376.
  Spruce, 34.
  Spruce, Black, 35.
  Spruce, Blue, 39.
  Spruce, Colorado, 39.
  Spruce, Douglas, 48.
  Spruce, Engelmann, 38.
  Spruce, Norway, 35.
  Spruce Pine, 25, 27.
  Spruce, Red, 36.
  Spruce, Sitka, 41.
  Spruce, Tideland, 41.
  Spruce, Weeping, 40.
  Spruce, White, 37, 38.
  Stag Bush, 889.
  Staghorn Sumach, 660.
  Sterculiaceae, 749.
  Stinking Cedar, 91.
  Stopper, 772, 773.
  Stopper, Gurgeon, 771.
  Stopper, Red, 774.
  Stopper, Spanish, 771.
  Stopper, White, 772.
  Striped Maple, 686.
  Styraceae, 824.
  Styrax, 829.
  Styrax Benzoin, 829.
  Styrax grandiflora, 829.
  Sugarberry, 319, 323.
  Sugar, Horse, 831.
  Sugar Maple, 688, 691, 692, 694.
  Sugar Pine, 5.
  Sumach, 662.
  Sumach, Poison, 663.
  Sumach, Staghorn, 660.
  Suwarro, 758.
  Swamp Ash, 838.
  Swamp Bay, 346, 358.
  Swamp Cottonwood, 124.
  Swamp Pine, 15.
  Swamp Privet, 853.
  Swamp Spanish Oak, 248, 256.
  Swamp White Oak, 292, 303.
  Sweet Bay, 346.
  Sweet-berried Cedar, 82.
  Sweet Buckeye, 704.
  Sweet Gum, 367.
  Sweet Leaf, 831.
  Swietenia, 648.
  Swietenia Mahagoni, 648.
  Swiss Stone Pine, 2.
  Sycamore, 372, 374, 375.
  Symplocaceae, 830.
  Symplocos, 831.
  Symplocos tinctoria, 831.


                                    T
  Table Mountain Pine, 29.
  Tacamahac, 125.
  Tamarack, 31, 32, 33.
  Tamarind, Wild, 590.
  Tan Bark Oak, 236.
  Tassajo, 761.
  Taxaceae, 90.
  Taxodium, 63.
  Taxodium distichum, 64.
  Taxodium distichum var. imbricarium, 65.
  Taxus, 93.
  Taxus baccata, 93.
  Taxus brevifolia, 93.
  Taxus canadensis, 93.
  Taxus cuspidata, 93.
  Taxus floridana, 94.
  Tecate Cypress, 73.
  Tectoria grandis, 864.
  Tetrazygia, 776.
  Thatch, 97, 98, 99.
  Thatch, Brittle, 99, 100.
  Theaceae, 750.
  Theobroma Cacao, 749.
  Theophrastaceae, 804.
  Thorn, Cock-spur, 402.
  Thorn, Washington, 531.
  Thrinax, 96.
  Thrinax floridana, 97.
  Thrinax keyensis, 99.
  Thrinax microcarpa, 99.
  Thrinax Wendlandiana, 98.
  Thuja, 67.
  Thuja occidentalis, 67.
  Thuja orientalis, 67.
  Thuja plicata, 68.
  Tideland Spruce, 41.
  Tilia, 732.
  _Tilia americana_, 733.
  Tilia caroliniana, 740.
  Tilia caroliniana var. rhoophila, 741.
  Tilia Cocksii, 738.
  Tilia crenoserrata, 737.
  Tilia floridana, 737.
  _Tilia floridana_, 737.
  Tilia floridana var. australis, 738.
  Tilia floridana var. oblongifolia, 738.
  Tilia georgiana, 747.
  Tilia georgiana var. crinita, 748.
  Tilia glabra, 733.
  Tilia heterophylla, 745.
  _Tilia heterophylla_, 747.
  Tilia heterophylla var. amphiloba, 745.
  Tilia heterophylla var. Michauxii, 746.
  Tilia heterophylla var. nivea, 745.
  Tilia lasioclada, 744.
  Tilia littoralis, 736.
  Tilia littoralis var. discolor, 736.
  _Tilia Michauxii_, 739, 746.
  Tilia monticola, 747.
  Tilia neglecta, 739.
  Tilia nuda, 734.
  Tilia nuda var. brevipedunculata, 735.
  Tilia phanera, 743.
  Tilia phanera var. scabrida, 743.
  _Tilia pubescens_, 748.
  Tilia texana, 742.
  Tilia venulosa, 735.
  Tilia venulosa var. multinervis, 736.
  Tiliaceae, 732.
  Titi, 667.
  Tollon, 392.
  Toothache-tree, 635.
  Torch Wood, 640.
  Torrey Pine, 30.
  Torreya, 91.
  Torreya californica, 92.
  Torreya nucifera, 91.
  Torreya taxifolia, 91.
  Torrubia, 341.
  Torrubia longifolia, 341.
  _Toxylon_, 331.
  _Toxylon (Ioxylon) pomiferum_, 332.
  Toyon, 392.
  Tree, Cabbage, 102.
  Tree, Garland, 382.
  Tree, Joshua, 116.
  Tree, Silver Bell, 824.
  Tree, Smoke, 621.
  Trema, 326.
  _Trema floridana_, 327.
  Trema mollis, 327.
  Tsuga, 42.
  Tsuga canadensis, 43.
  Tsuga caroliniana, 44.
  Tsuga heterophylla, 45.
  Tsuga Mertensiana, 46.
  Tulip-tree, 352.
  _Tumion_, 91.
  _Tumion californicum_, 92.
  _Tumion taxifolium_, 91.
  Tupelo, 780.
  Tupelo Gum, 783.
  Tupelo, Sour, 782.
  Turkey Apple, 476.
  Turkey Oak, 253.


                                    U
  Ulmaceae, 308.
  Ulmus, 308.
  Ulmus alata, 312.
  Ulmus americana, 309.
  Ulmus crassifolia, 314.
  Ulmus fulva, 313.
  Ulmus glabra, 309.
  Ulmus procera, 309.
  Ulmus racemosa, 311.
  Ulmus serotina, 315.
  _Ulmus Thomasii_, 311.
  Umbellularia, 360.
  Umbellularia californica, 361.
  Umbellularia californica var. pendula, 361.
  Umbrella-tree, 347.
  Una de Gato, 595.
  Ungnadia, 717.
  Ungnadia speciosa, 717.
  Upland Willow Oak, 265.


                                    V
  Vaccinium, 802.
  Vaccinium arboreum, 802.
  Vaccinium arboreum var. glaucescens, 803.
  Vaccinium macrocarpum, 802.
  Valley Oak, 298.
  Vauquelinia, 377.
  Vauquelinia californica, 377.
  Verbenaceae, 864.
  Viburnum, 886.
  Viburnum Jackii, 889.
  Viburnum Lentago, 888.
  Viburnum Lentago var. sphaerocarpum, 889.
  Viburnum nudum, 887.
  Viburnum nudum var. angustifolium, 887.
  Viburnum prunifolium, 889.
  Viburnum rufidulum, 890.
  Vine Maple, 684.
  Vine Oak, 297.
  Virgilia, 619.


                                    W
  Wafer Ash, 639.
  Wahoo, 312, 675.
  Walnut, 169, 173.
  Walnut, Black, 171.
  Walnut, "Royal," 172.
  Washington Thorn, 531.
  Washingtonia, 104.
  Washingtonia filamentosa, 104.
  Water Ash, 838, 839.
  Water Elm, 317.
  Water Hickory, 181.
  Water Locust, 610.
  Water Oak, 260, 264.
  Wax Myrtle, 164, 165, 166.
  Weeping Spruce, 40.
  Western Catalpa, 872.
  West Indian Birch, 646.
  White Alder, 224.
  White Ash, 841.
  White Birch, 210, 217.
  White Cedar, 67, 75.
  White Cedar, Desert, 82.
  White Elm, 309.
  White Fir, 54, 55, 56.
  White Ironwood, 716.
  White Mangrove, 767.
  White Oak, 280, 281, 296, 298, 300.
  White Oaks, 240.
  White Pine, 3, 4, 6.
  White Poplar, 120.
  White Spruce, 37, 38.
  White Stopper, 772.
  White Wood, 650, 753.
  Wild Black Cherry, 575.
  Wild Cherry, 572, 576, 577, 578.
  Wild China-tree, 714.
  Wild Cinnamon, 753.
  Wild Dilly, 819.
  Wild Fig, 334, 335.
  Wild Goose Plum, 569.
  Wild Lime, 634.
  Wild Orange, 579.
  Wild Plum, 557, 561, 567.
  Wild Red Cherry, 571.
  Wild Tamarind, 590.
  Willow, 138.
  Willow, Almond, 144.
  Willow, Arroyo, 153.
  Willow, Black, 140, 160.
  Willow, Desert, 869.
  Willow, Feltleaf, 157.
  Willow, Glaucous, 159.
  Willow Oak, 262.
  Willow Oaks, 239.
  Willow, Peach, 144.
  Willow, Red, 146.
  Willow, Sand Bar, 152.
  Willow, Shining, 149.
  Willow, Yellow, 148.
  Winged Elm, 312.
  Witch Hazel, 368.
  Wood, Ant's, 816.
  Wood, Bass, 732, 733.
  Wood, Bow, 332.
  Wood, Box, 680.
  Wood, Chittam, 657, 813.
  Wood, Cork, 167.
  Wood, Crab, 654.
  Wood, Devil, 857.
  Wood, Fiddle, 864.
  Wood, Ink, 715.
  Wood, Joe, 804.
  Wood, Leather, 666.
  Wood, Moose, 686.
  Wood, Naked, 729, 774.
  Wood, Poison, 659.
  Wood, Prince, 877.
  Wood, Sour, 796.
  Wood, Torch, 640.
  Wood, White, 650, 753.
  Wood, Yellow, 619, 680.


                                    X
  Xanthoxylum, 633.
  Xanthoxylum clava-Herculis, 635.
  Xanthoxylum clava-Herculis var. fruticosum, 636.
  Xanthoxylum coriaceum, 637.
  Xanthoxylum Fagara, 634.
  Xanthoxylum flavum, 636.
  Ximenia, 337.
  Ximenia americana, 337.
  _Xolisma ferruginea_, 798.


                                    Y
  Yaupon, 671.
  Yellow-bark Oak, 250.
  Yellow Birch, 207.
  Yellow Cypress, 76.
  Yellow Locust, 623.
  Yellow Oak, 306.
  Yellow Pine, 12, 14, 26.
  Yellow Poplar, 352.
  Yellow Willow, 148.
  Yellow Wood, 619, 680.
  Yew, 93, 94.
  Yucca, 110.
  Yucca aloifolia, 111.
  Yucca aloifolia var. yucatana, 112.
  _Yucca arborescens_, 116.
  Yucca brevifolia, 116.
  Yucca elata, 117.
  Yucca Faxoniana, 115.
  Yucca gloriosa, 117.
  Yucca gloriosa var. recurvifolia, 117.
  Yucca macrocarpa, 113.
  Yucca mohavensis, 113.
  _Yucca radiosa_, 117.
  Yucca Schottii, 114.
  Yucca Treculeana, 112.
  Yuccae, 110.


                                    Z
  _Zolisma ferruginea_, 798.
  Zygia brevifolia, 587.
  _Zygia flexicaulis_, 588.
  _Zygia Unguis-Cati_, 586.
  Zygophyllaceae, 630.


                          _The Riverside Press_
                         CAMBRIDGE. MASSACHUSETTS
                                  U.S.A.