Bleaching continued to be practised with no essential change of its
principles until the discovery of chlorine, to which we shall presently
refer. In the last century Holland obtained the best name for bleaching.
The process passed then to Ireland and Scotland, and thence into England.
It was even customary to send goods from this country to be bleached in
Holland. The first attempt to vie with Holland was made, in Scotland, in
1749.

The first steps towards the modern or chemical system of bleaching were
the investigations of Berthollet on chlorine, in 1784, but which were not
communicated to the French Academy until the year 1787. The knowledge of
the use of chlorine as a bleacher was soon afterwards brought to this
country by the Duke of Gordon, and by Prof. Copeland of Aberdeen, and
through them was practically applied by Messrs Milnes of that place. About
the same time James Watt, a correspondent of Berthollet, successfully
introduced its use in the neighbourhood of Glasgow, and then generously
laid a statement of the results before the Manchester manufacturers. In
enforcing the importance of the new substance and process on these
gentlemen, he was ably followed and seconded by Dr Henry. In 1798, Mr
Charles Tennant, of Glasgow, obtained a patent for a new bleaching liquor
prepared by saturating lime water with chlorine; and another, in 1799, for
dry chloride of lime, a substance which is still preferred as a bleacher
to all other preparations of chlorine. The new or continuous process of
bleaching, as it is called, and that which is at present in general use in
all the chief bleach-works of Lancashire, was introduced by Mr David
Bentley, of Pendleton, and patented by him in 1828.

_Proc._ Bleaching is commonly said to be natural when exposure to light,
air, and moisture forms the leading part of the process; and to be
chemical when chlorine, chloride of lime, sulphurous acid, or other like
substances are employed. In some cases, as with linen, the two processes
are combined. The subject requires to be noticed under separate heads,
depending on the material operated on:--

I. BLEACHING of =Cotton=:--Cotton is more easily bleached, and appears to
suffer less from the process than most other textile substances. On the
old plan it was first (1) thoroughly washed in warm water, to remove the
weaver's paste or dressing; then (2) 'bucked' or 'bowked' (boiled) in a
weak alkaline lye, or in milk of lime, to remove colouring, fatty, and
resinous matters, insoluble in simple water; and after being (3) again
well washed, was (4) spread out upon the grass, or bleaching ground, and
freely exposed to the joint action of light, air, and moisture
(technically called 'crofting'). The operation of 'bucking' in an alkaline
lye, washing, and exposure was repeated as often as necessary, when the
goods were (5) 'soured' or immersed in water acidulated with sulphuric
acid, after which they (6) received a final thorough washing in clean
water, and were (7) dried, finished, and folded for the market. From the
length of the exposure upon the bleaching ground this method is apt to
injure the texture of the cloth; and from the number of operations
required is necessarily expensive and tedious. It is therefore now very
generally superseded by the system of chemical bleaching briefly described
below.

In the CHEMICAL SYSTEM of bleaching the goods are 'washed' and 'bucked' as
on the old plan, then submitted to the action of a weak solution of
chloride of lime, and afterwards passed through water soured with
hydrochloric or sulphuric acid, when they have only to be thoroughly
washed, and to be dried and finished, for the entire completion of the
process.

The new or continuous process, before referred to,[211] is the method of
chemical bleaching at present in the most general use; and, indeed, it has
nearly superseded all other methods. In this system the pieces, previously
tacked together endwise so as to form a chain, are drawn, by the motion of
rollers, in any direction, and any number of times, through every solution
to the action of which it is desired to expose them, and this entirely and
completely under the control of the operator.

[Footnote 211: See 'Hist.' (_ante_).]

The following _Table_ exhibits an outline of the several operations in the
improved form of the continuous process as practised by Messrs McNaughten,
Barton, and Thom, at Chorley, and in most other large bleach-works:--

1. Preliminary operations:--_a_. The 'pieces'[212] are separately stamped
with the printer's name, a solution of silver, or sometimes coal-tar,
being employed for the purpose.

[Footnote 212: Usually about 30 yards each.]

_b._ They are tacked together endwise either by hand or a machine, so as
to form one continuous piece of 300 to 350 yards in length, according to
the weight of the cloth.

_c._ They are singed.[213]

[Footnote 213: Generally on one side only; but for goods to be
subsequently finely printed, on both sides. For very fine printing the nap
is sometimes removed by shearing instead of 'singeing,' an ingenious and
effective machine being employed for the purpose.]

_d._ They are crushed into a rope-like form by drawing them through a
smooth aperture,[214] the surface of which is generally of glass or
porcelain--the rope-form being given them to enable the water and other
liquids to penetrate the goods more easily, and to allow them to be laid
in loose coils in the kiers.

[Footnote 214: Such apertures are also used instead of pulleys, in the
transfer of the rope from place to place.]

2. The pieces are bucked or boiled in milk of lime[215] for 12 to 14
hours,[216] followed by rinsing or cleansing in the washing-machine.

[Footnote 215: The common proportions are about 1 lb. of quick-lime slaked
and reduced to milk, with 2 galls. of water, for every 14 or 15 lbs. of
cloth.]

[Footnote 216: This is done in a large iron boiler furnished with a
perforated false bottom of wood, and technically termed a 'kier.']

3. They are soured in water acidulated with hydrochloric acid,[217] and
again washed; similar machines being employed for each.

[Footnote 217: This dilute acid or acidulated water has usually the sp.
gr. 1.010 or 2 deg. Twaddle.]

4. They are bucked or boiled for 15 or 16 hours in a solution of resinate
of soda,[218] and then washed as before.

[Footnote 218: Made with about 17 _lbs._ of soda-ash and 3 _lbs._ of
resin, with water, 50 galls., to every 20 or 21 _lbs._ of cloth.]

5. They are chemicked by being laid in a wooden, stone, or slate cistern,
when a solution of chloride of lime[219] is pumped over them, so as to run
through the 'goods' into a vessel below, from which it is returned on them
by continued pumping, so that the cloth lies in it for 1 or 2 hours; it is
then washed.

[Footnote 219: Technically called 'chemick.' The strength of the solution
is usually of the sp. gr. 1.0025, or 1/2 deg. Twaddle.]

6. They are bucked or boiled, for 4 or 5 hours, in a solution of 1 _lb._
of crystallised carbonate of soda, dissolved in 5 galls. of water, to
every 35 _lbs._ of cloth; and washed.

7. They are again 'chemicked,' as before; and washed.

8. They are soured in very dilute hydrochloric acid;[220] and then left on
'stillages'[221] for 5 or 6 hours.

[Footnote 220: Sp. gr. 1.0125, or 2-1/2 deg. Twaddle.]

[Footnote 221: Low stools or props to keep them from the ground.]

9. They are, finally, thoroughly washed, well squeezed between rollers,
dried over steam-heated tin-cylinders, starched or dressed, and finished.

This is the usual process for good calicos, Muslins, and other light
goods, are handled rather more carefully; whilst for commoner ones the
sixth and seventh operations are generally omitted. The whole usually
occupies 5 days; but by using Mr Barlow's high-pressure steam kiers, it
may be performed in two days. Yarns, &c., may be bleached in a similar
manner by first looping the skeins together.

_Obs._ According to the most reliable authorities, the strength of
cotton-fibre is not impaired by its being boiled for two hours in milk of
lime, under ordinary pressure, out of contact with the air; nor, according
to the bleachers, even by sixteen hours boiling at the strength of 40
_lbs._ per 100 galls. It is said that lime is less injurious than 'soda.'

Solution of caustic soda, sp. gr. 1.030, does not injure it, even by
boiling under high pressure; but, in practice, soda-ash, or carbonate of
soda, is used, and this only in the second bucking, and in the third, if
there be one. The strength now never exceeds 25 _lbs._ of the crystals to
the 100 _galls._, and is usually less.

Experiments have shown that immersion for 8 hours in a solution of
chloride of lime containing 3 _lbs._ to the 100 galls., followed by
souring in sulphuric acid of the sp. gr. 1.067, or for 18 hours in acid of
1.035, does not injure it.

By the improved method of previously treating the goods with lime or
alkalies, little chloride of lime is required. Indeed, it is said that
where 300 _lbs._ were formerly employed, 30 to 40 _lbs._ only are now
used. At the same time it is right to mention, that though a solution at
1/2 deg. Twaddle is usually regarded as the best and safest strength, yet in
some bleach works, particularly for inferior and less tender goods, this
is greatly increased, even up to 5 deg., the period of immersion being
proportionately reduced, as it is not safe to expose the goods long to the
action of such powerful solutions. With the higher strengths they are
passed rapidly through the liquid with the calender, sufficient time only
being allowed to soak them thoroughly; then immediately through the acid
or souring, followed by washing as before.

In Scotland and Ireland the washing is generally performed by wash-stocks;
whilst in Lancashire, dash-wheels, or washing machines with squeezers, are
almost always used for the purpose.

Cotton loses about 1-20th of its weight by bleaching.

II. BLEACHING of =Linen=:--Linen may be bleached in a similar way to
'cotton,' but the process is much more troublesome and tedious, owing to
its greater affinity for the colouring matter existing in it in the raw
state. Under the old system, several alternate buckings with pearlash or
potash and lengthened exposure on the field, with one or two sourings, and
a final scrubbing with a strong lather of soft soap, constituted the chief
details of the process. In this way a high degree of whiteness, though not
an absolutely pure or snow white, was ultimately produced. Grass-bleaching
or crofting is still extensively used for linen; but it is more generally
employed only for a limited time, and in combination with a modification
of the system at present almost universally adopted for cotton goods;
whilst, in some cases, crofting is omitted altogether, and the bleaching
conducted wholly by the latter process. The following _Tables_ exhibit the
outlines of the new system as at present practised in Ireland and
Scotland:--

_a._ For plain sheetings:--

1. They are bucked for 12 or 15 hours in a lye made with about 1 _lb._ of
pearlash (or soda-ash) to every 56 _lbs._ of cloth, and washed.

2. Crofted for about 2 days.

3. Bucked in milk of lime.

4. Turned, and the bucking continued, some fresh lime and water being
added; and washed.

5. Soured in dilute sulphuric acid at 2 deg. Twaddle.

6. Bucked with soda-ash for about 10 hours, and washed.

7. Crofted, as before.

8. Bucked again with soda-ash, as before.

9. Crofted for about 3 days.

10. Examined, the white ones taken out, and the others again bucked and
crofted.

11. Scalded or simmered in a lye of soda-ash of about only 2-3rds the
former strength, and washed.

12. Chemicked, for 2 hours, at 1/2 deg. Twaddle, washed, and scalded.

13. Again chemicked, as before.

14. Soured for 4 hours, as in No. 5; washed, and finished.

This occupies 13 to 15 days, according to the weather.

_b._ For shirtings, &c.:--As the preceding, but with somewhat weaker
solutions.

_c._ For goods to be subsequently printed:--

1. Bucked in milk of lime for 10 or 12 hours.

2. Soured in dilute hydrochloric acid of 2 deg. Tw., for 3 to 5 hours, and
washed.

3. Bucked with resinate of soda for about 12 hours.

4. Goods turned, reboiled as before, and washed.

5. Chemicked at 1/2 deg. Tw., for 4 hours.

6. Soured at 2 deg. Tw., for 2 hours, and washed.

7. Bucked with soda-ash for about 10 hours, and washed.

8. Chemicked as in No. 5.

9. Soured, as at No. 6, for 3 hours; washed, and dried.[222]

[Footnote 222: The strengths of the solutions, when not otherwise stated,
are about the same as those given under COTTON (_ante_).]

_Obs._ The chief difficulty in bleaching linen arises from the fact that
its colouring matter is insoluble in acid or alkaline solutions until it
has been long acted upon by light, air, and moisture, as in the common
process of grass-bleaching. Chlorine hastens the operation; but,
unfortunately, it can only be employed towards the end of the process; as
when earlier used, the colour of the raw cloth becomes set, and
irremovable. To obviate this difficulty Mr F. M. Jennings, of Cork, has
lately[223] introduced the joint use of an alkali and an alkaline
hypochlorite (chloride) in the place of the ordinary chloride of lime. He
prepares a bath of solution of soda at 5 deg. Twaddle, which he raises by the
addition of chloride of soda (or of potash) to 6 or 7 deg., and in this he
steeps the cloth (after the first bucking and souring) for some hours,
heat, or constant squeezing between rollers, being had recourse to, to
facilitate the action. Souring and washing follow, when the goods are
again put into the alkaline and chloride bath, as before; after which they
are soured, and bucked again with soda. These last three operations are
repeated until the cloth is almost white, when crofting for one half to
one fourth the time required by the usual method renders it fit for the
final bucking, and finishing. Indeed, it is said that if the process be
very carefully managed it renders crofting unnecessary.

[Footnote 223: Patent dated 1859.]

Raw linen loses about 1-3rd of its weight in bleaching.

III. =Silk=:--Silk is usually bleached by first steeping it, and then
boiling it in solutions of white soap in water, after which it is
subjected to repeated rinsings, a little indigo-blue, or archil, being
added to the last water to give it a pearly appearance. When required to
be very white (as for gloves, stockings, &c.), the goods are cautiously
submitted, for 2 or 3 hours, to the action of the fumes of burning
sulphur, and then finished by rinsing, as before.

_Obs._ Boiling or sulphuring is not required for the white silk of China.
Raw silk loses from 4 to 5 _oz._ per _lb._ by bleaching.

IV. =Wool=:--In bleaching raw wool it is first deprived of the yolk or
peculiar natural varnish with which it is covered. For this purpose it is
steeped and stirred for about 20 minutes in rather warm water (135 deg.--140 deg.
Fahr.), either with or without the addition of 1-4th part of stale urine;
after which it is placed in baskets to drain, and soon afterwards
thoroughly rinsed in a stream of water, when it is again allowed to drain,
and it is hung up to dry. The further operations depend on circumstances,
wool being sometimes whitened in the fleece, or in the yarn, but still
more frequently and extensively not till woven. When it is intended to
send it in the first two forms white to market, it is hung up or spread
out, whilst still wet, and sulphured (see _below_); after which it is
either at once rinsed for some time in cold water, or is previously
treated with a very weak bath of soft soap.

In the case of woollen fabrics the operations of purifying or whitening
the wool, beyond the removal of the yolk, are, for the most part, mixed up
with the weaving and working of it. The pieces leave the hands of the
weaver of a dingy grey colour, loaded with oil, dirt, and dressing. They
then pass to the fulling-mill, where they are treated with fuller's earth
and soap, often preceded with ammonia or stale urine, after each of which
they are well washed out or scoured with cold water, and are then ready
for the dyer. When it is intended to obtain them very white, or to dye
them of a very delicate shade, they are commonly sulphured; after which
they are washed or milled in cold water for some hours, a little finely
ground indigo being added towards the end, to increase their whiteness; an
addition also made when the cloth is sufficiently white without the
sulphuring process.

The usual mode of SULPHURING woollen goods is to hang them up on pegs or
rails, or, in the case of fleece-wool, to spread it about, at the upper
part of a close, lofty room or chamber, called a sulphur-stove. In each
corner of this room is set a cast-iron pot containing sulphur, which,
after the introduction of the goods, is set on fire, when the door at the
lower part of the chamber is shut tight and clayed. This is commonly done
over-night; and by the morning, the bleaching being finished, the goods
are removed, washed, and azured.

Sulphuring, unless very skilfully managed, imparts a harsh feel to woollen
goods, which is best removed by a very weak bath of soap-and-water
(lukewarm); but the action of soap in part reproduces the previous
yellowish-white tinge. Milling with cold, or lukewarm water, tinged with
indigo, is the best substitute.

_Obs._ Raw wool loses from 35 to 45% of its weight by scouring, and 1 to
2% more in the subsequent operations of the bleacher; the loss being in
direct proportion to the fineness of the staple.

[asterism]The above are the four principal applications of the art of
bleaching; but, in technical language, the words bleaching, bleacher,
bleachery, bleach-works, &c., when employed alone, are understood to have
reference only to cotton and linen. This has arisen from the enormous
extent of these manufactures, and from the process of bleaching them
forming a business entirely distinct from that of weaving, dyeing, or
printing them. The following, with the exception of the first, are of
comparatively minor importance and interest:--

V. =Materials for Paper=:--Old rags for the manufacture of paper, and
paper-pulp, are now almost universally bleached with chlorine or chloride
of lime; the former being generally used in France, and the latter in
England. The process usually consists in (1) boiling in an alkaline lye to
remove grease and dirt, (2) washing, (3) pressing, (4) deviling or
tearing up the pressed cake into fine shreds or pulp, (5) chemicking, with
agitation, for about an hour, in a clear solution of chloride of
lime,[224] followed by (6) washing, (7) souring with dilute hydrochloric
acid at 1 or 2 deg. Tw., or treatment with a solution of some antichlor, or
both, and (8) a final washing and pressing. For the common kinds of paper,
the operations included in No. 7 are omitted; but unless the whole of the
lime-salt be removed from the pulp, the paper made of it is liable to turn
brown and become rotten by age. In some cases rags are bleached before
being divided and pulped. Cotton-waste is bleached in a similar way to
rags.

[Footnote 224: The 'strength' varies with the colour and quality of the
rags. From 2 to 4 _lbs._ per _cwt._ of rags is a common proportion; but
for dyed and printed rags as much as 7 or even 8 _lbs._ per _cwt._ are
often employed. It is better, however, to prolong the process with a
weaker solution, than to hasten it by using the chloride in excess. Large
rectangular cisterns of wood, or of slate, are commonly employed as the
bleach-vessels. Cisterns of wood, or brick-work lined with gutta percha or
with asphalto-bitumen, are employed in some paper-mills, and answer
admirably.]

In France, the chlorine, in a gaseous form, is passed from the generators
into the bleach-cisterns containing the pulp, which in this case must be
fitted with close covers.

=VI. Printed Paper=, as Books, Engravings, Maps, &c.--These when stained
or discoloured may be whitened by (1) wetting them with pure clean water,
(2) plunging them into a dilute solution of chloride of lime, (3) passing
them through water soured with hydrochloric acid, and then (4) through
pure water until every trace of acid be removed. This process may be
further improved by further dipping them into a weak solution of some
antichlor, and again washing them, before finally drying them. It is only
rare and valuable original works or specimens of art that are worth this
treatment, which, owing to the very nature of paper, requires considerable
address to manage. In many cases a sufficient degree of renovation may be
effected by simply exposing the articles, previously slightly moistened,
to the fumes of burning sulphur, followed by passing them through a vessel
of pure water.

=VII. Straw, Straw-plait=, and articles made of them, are, on the large
scale, usually bleached by (1) a hot steep or boil in a weak solution of
caustic soda, or a stronger one of soda-ash, followed (2) by washing and
(3) by exposure to the fumes of burning sulphur. To effect the last, the
goods are suspended in a close chamber connected with a small stove, in
which brimstone is kept burning. On the small scale, a large chest or box
is commonly employed. A piece of brick, or an old box-iron heater, heated
to dull redness, is placed at the bottom of an iron crock or earthen pan,
a few fragments of roll sulphur thrown on, the lid instantly closed, and
the whole left for some hours. Care should be taken to avoid inhaling the
fumes, which are very deleterious as well as disagreeable and annoying.
Straw goods are now also frequently bleached by the use of a weak solution
of chloride of lime, or of water strongly soured with oxalic acid or even
oil of vitriol, followed by very careful rinsing in clean water; but here,
as in the former case, the natural varnish, dirt, grease, &c., must be
first removed by alkalies or soap, to enable the chlorine or acid to act
on the fibres.

=VIII. Wax.= Wax is bleached by first melting it at a low temperature in a
cauldron, from whence it is allowed to run out by a pipe at the bottom
into a capacious vessel filled with cold water.

This vessel is fitted with a large wooden cylinder, which turns upon its
axis; and the melted wax falls upon this cylinder. The surface of the
cylinder being always wet, the wax does not adhere to it, but becomes
solid, assuming the form of ribbons as it does so, and in this shape
becoming distributed through water in the tub. The wax is then removed and
placed upon large frames stretched upon linen cloth, which are supported
about 18 inches above the ground, and erected in a situation exposed to
the air, dew, and sun. The several ribbons thus placed on the frame should
not exceed an inch and a half, and they ought to be so moved about from
time to time as that each part may be equally exposed. If the weather be
favorable the wax will become white in a few days. It is again remelted,
formed into ribbons, and exposed as before. These operations are continued
in until the wax is completely bleached, after which it is melted and run
into moulds.

_Concluding Remarks._ The theory of bleaching, notwithstanding the giant
strides of chemistry during the last 20 years, remains still unsettled;
and hence the processes employed are still, for the most part, empirical.
It appears probable that chlorine acts by uniting with the hydrogen of the
water, or of other compounds present, or probably with that of both, and
that it is the oxygen thus liberated, and whilst in the nascent state,
that is the true operative agent. Hence bleaching by chlorine, or by the
hypochlorites, may be regarded as an oxidation of the colouring matter;
but whether the chlorine or the oxygen effects this oxidation is of little
practical importance--the result being the same--the destruction of the
compound, and the removal of the colour that depends on its existence. It
is doubtful whether the bleaching power of sulphurous acid is due to it as
an oxidising or a deoxidising agent; but the last is probably the case,
with a like destruction of the compound constituting the colouring matter.
It may, however, be supposed that sulphurous acid acts as an oxidiser, as
it appears to do when it decomposes sulphuretted hydrogen; or it may act
by simply altering the compound by inserting itself, a view receiving some
support from the fact that wool whitened by sulphuring may be restored to
nearly its previous colour by merely treating it with soap or alkalies.

The bleaching power of light depends on its actinic or chemical rays,
which, like chlorine, appear to act as an oxidising agent.

Chlorates, chromates, chromic acid, manganates, &c., have been proposed as
bleaching agents for textile filaments and fabrics, but without success or
practical advantage. Immersion in water more or less strongly impregnated
with sulphurous acid has, however, been successfully substituted for the
common sulphuring process, particularly for silk.

To avoid the injury of the goods by sparks, and by drops of water highly
saturated with sulphurous acid falling from the roof, Mr Thom has invented
a method of passing them rapidly through, or keeping them in constant
motion in the sulphuring chamber. His apparatus is constructed on the
principle of the washing-machine, the fumes of burning sulphur being used
instead of water.

M. Tessie du Motay has proposed a new method for bleaching. He takes about
equal parts of permanganate of soda and sulphate of magnesia, and
dissolves them in lukewarm water. The tissues, previously freed from
grease, are to be plunged into this bath until they are covered with a
brown coating. They are then to be placed in a bath of sulphuric acid at 4
per cent., and rinsed after the brown matter is removed. They may be
finally passed through sulphurous acid. Mr Ramsay's method consists in
sprinkling with water equal parts of chloride of lime and sulphate of
magnesia, when hydrochlorate of magnesia is formed. It may be remarked
that none of the more modern methods of bleaching have been found, when
reduced to practice, to be cheaper, better, or more advantageous to work
than those sanctioned by long experience and use.

[Further information in connection with bleaching will be found under the
heads ACTINISM, BLANCHING, CALICO-PRINTING, CHARCOAL, CHLORIDES
(Bleaching), CHROMATES, CHROMIC ACID, HYPOCHLORITES, HYPOCHLOROUS ACID,
LIGHT, RINSING, SPOTS and STAINS, SULPHURATION, WASHING, &c.; also under
BONES, ENGRAVINGS, FAT, FEATHERS, HORN, IVORY, OIL, PAPER, PRINTED BOOKS,
RAGS, SPONGE, STRAW-PLAIT, TALLOW, WAX, &c.[225]]

[Footnote 225: An accurate description of the apparatus and machinery
employed in bleach-works, with numerous engravings, will be found in Ure's
'Dict. of Arts, Manuf. & Mines,' 5th ed., i, 318-351, &c.]

=Bleaching Liq'uid.= Solution of chloride of lime.

=Bleaching Pow'der.= Chloride of lime.

=Bleaching Salts.= The commercial hypochlorites.

=BLEAR'-EYE= (bl[=e]re'-[=i]). _Syn._ LIPPITU'DO, L.; CHASSIE, LIPPITUDE,
Fr. An exudation of a puriform matter from the margins of the eyelids,
which are red, tumid, and painful; and frequently, during the night, glued
together by the discharge.

_Treatm._ Mild astringent collyria, as those of sulphate of zinc or alum
(6 or 8 gr. to 1 oz. of water). An ointment formed of 1 part of the
ointment of nitrate of mercury (Ph. L.), diluted with 11 parts of sweet
washed lard, may be advantageously applied nightly, by means of a
camel-hair pencil, the smallest quantity possible only being used. Excess
in eating and drinking should be avoided, and some aperient medicine
taken.

=BLEAK= (bl[=e]ke). _Syn._ BLAY[double-dagger], BLEY[double-dagger],
(bl[=a]). The _cypri'nus albur'nus_ (Linn.), a small river-fish, the
scales of which are used in making artificial pearls (which _see_).

=BLEB.= A vesicle or blister. In some states of general derangement of
health this arises spontaneously. It should be treated in the same way as
scalds.

=BLEED'ING= (bl[=e]de'-). In the sense of a flow or loss of blood, see
HAEMORRHAGE; in that of bloodletting, see CUPPING, LEECHING, VENESECTION,
&c.

=Bleeding Piles.= Take every morning aperient doses of milk of sulphur,
then a small teaspoonful of confection of black pepper every day. Wash
externally with a sponge and cold water. Apply compound gall. ointment to
the piles if external.

=Bleeding from the Air Passages and Lungs.= Let the patient at once go to
bed, and keep perfectly quiet, avoiding movement of any kind as much as
possible. Administer dilute acids in frequently repeated doses, with five
drops of tincture of digitalis. The bowels should be kept open by means of
Epsom salts in infusion of roses. Give iced drinks and let solid ice be
sucked. Mustard plasters may be applied to the chest. A morphia lozenge
may now and then be sucked gradually away, as well as a small piece of sal
prunella. The cough must be allayed by the administration of small doses
of morphia in gum water or barley water. All food should be taken cold.

The treatment that we have indicated in the last two forms of haemorrhage
is intended for the exclusive guidance of emigrants or of others so placed
as to be unable to summon prompt medical aid. Wherever this can be
obtained no time should be lost in at once seeking it.

=Bleeding from the Nose.= Apply cold water containing ice, if obtainable.
It should be so applied to the nose as to cause a shock. A cold piece of
metal, such as a key, placed on the naked back sometimes stops the
haemorrhage. If neither of the above means succeed inject with a syringe a
solution of alum or sulphate of zinc (ten grains to the ounce), or snuff
up the nostrils some gallic acid, powder of pomegranate, kino, or catechu,
mixed with starch. A plug of lint may also be dipped in either of the
above solutions, or rolled in the powders, and pushed up the nostrils, or
some tincture of perchloride of iron, properly diluted and applied on a
piece of lint, may be tried.

=Bleeding from the Stomach.= _Syn._ HEMATEMESIS. In this case the blood is
vomited usually in clots of a dark colour. It should be noticed whether it
comes from the back of the nose or throat. The treatment consists in
perfect repose in bed, and in the administration of dilute sulphuric acid
in infusion of roses, with saline aperients. If these fail to give relief,
tannin and krameria may be tried, and small doses of laudanum or five
grains of alum may be given every four hours. If in pain, add to it 1/4
grain of acetate of morphia. All food and drinks should be taken cold, the
latter iced. Pernitrate of iron in from 10 to 30 minim doses is a valuable
remedy.

=BLENDE= (bl[)e]nd). A name applied to several minerals; appr.,
zinc-blend, or native sulphuret of zinc--the black jack of miners.

=BLIGHT= (bl[=i]te). See MILDEW, and PLANTS (Diseases of).

=BLIND'NESS= (bl[=i]nd'-). _Syn._ ABLEP'SIA, CAE'CITAS, &c., L.;
AVEUGLEMENT, CECITE, Fr.; BLINDHEIT, Ger. Deprivation or want of sight.

Blindness may be congenital, or born with a person; or it may arise from
accident, external violence, or disease. In the latter it may frequently
be relieved by medical and surgical treatment. See AMAUROSIS, CATARACT,
EYES, OPHTHALMIA, VISION, &c.

=Blindness, Day.= _Syn._ NIGHT'-SIGHT; N[)Y]CTALO'PIA, L. A disease of the
eye in which vision is painfully acute or more or less extinct in a strong
light, as that of day; but clear and pleasant in the dusk of evening and
at night. Its chief causes are excessive exposure of the eyes to the
direct influence of very strong or glaring light, or to heat, or both of
them together; and is often one of the sequelae of ophthalmia (which
_see_).

=Blindness, Night.= _Syn._ DAY'-SIGHT; HEMERALO'PIA, L. An affection of
the eye, the reverse of the preceding, in which objects are clearly seen
only in broad daylight. In the beginning of the complaint the patient
continues to be able to see, though less clearly, for a short time after
sunset, and even by moonlight, and perhaps distinctly by bright candle
light; but after a short time this power is lost. It most frequently
occurs in hot climates, and low latitudes at sea. Its chief causes are
fatigue and exposure of the eyes to the glare of the tropical sun,
probably coupled with gastric derangement. In some cases it is congenital,
and is then generally incurable. The treatment consists in avoiding
exciting causes, and endeavouring to restore the tone of the stomach, and
the general health, by the usual methods. The eyes at the same time should
be topically medicated by the frequent use of cold water, or mild
astringent collyria. See OPHTHALMIA (Chronic).

=BLIS'TER.= _Syn._ PAP'ULA, PUS'TULA, L.; PUSTULE, VESSIE, &c., Fr.;
BLASE, BLATTER, Ger. A bladder or vesicle caused by the deposition of
serous fluid between the cuticle and the derma or true skin, occasioned by
the application of a vesicant, or by a burn, scald, or friction.

=Blister.= _Syn._ VESICATO''RIUM, L.; EPISPASTIQUE, VESICATOIRE, Fr.;
BLASEN-PFLASTER, B.-STOFF, Ger. A substance which vesicates or raises
blisters; in pop. lang., a vesicating plaster or similar application.

The use of blisters is very ancient, and appears to date back long prior
to the time of Hippocrates. Indeed, their value as cutaneous stimulants
and counter-irritants appears to have been recognised by the medical
faculty of all nations down to the present time. It is a principle
sufficiently established with regard to the living system, that where a
morbid action exists, it may often be removed by inducing an action of a
different kind, as a state of excitement or irritation, in the same or a
neighbouring part. In this way is explained the utility of blisters in
local inflammation and spasmodic action, and it is this principle which
regulates their application in pneumonia, gastritis, hepatitis, phrenitis,
angina, rheumatism, colic, spasmodic affections of the stomach,
&c.--diseases in which they are employed with the most marked advantage. A
similar principle exists with respect to pain; exciting one pain often
relieves another. Hence blisters frequently give relief in neuralgia,
toothache, and other like painful affections. Lastly, blisters, by their
operation, communicate a stimulus to the whole system, and raise the
vigour of the circulation. Hence, in part, their utility in fevers of the
typhoid kind, though in such cases they are used with still more advantage
to obviate or remove local inflammation.

Blisters are commonly prepared with cantharides plaster, or with some
other preparation of cantharides; and, in the former case, usually have
their surface sprinkled over with powdered Spanish fly; whilst the
blistering surface is surrounded with a margin spread with common adhesive
plaster, for the purpose of causing them to adhere to the part to which
they are applied. In order to prevent the action of the cantharides upon
the mucous membrane of the bladder, or urinary organs, they are also often
sprinkled with a little powdered camphor, or better still, are moistened
with camphorated ether, which, on its evaporation, leaves a thin layer of
camphor on the surface; but care must be taken that the layer be not too
thick, as in that case the plaster would not take effect. With a like
object, a piece of thin book-muslin or tissue-paper (silver-paper) is
frequently placed between the blistering surface of the plaster and the
skin; the efficacy of which may be still further heightened by first
soaking the muslin or paper in olive or almond oil.

The usual time an ordinary blister of cantharides plaster is allowed to
remain in contact with the skin is from 10 to 12 hours. It is then gently
removed. The subsequent treatment depends on the object in view. When it
is not wished to maintain a discharge from the blistered surface, the
vesicle is cut with the point of a pair of scissors at its most depending
part, to let out the fluid which it contains, followed by a dressing of
spermaceti or other simple ointment; but when the case requires the
blister to be kept open, or to be converted into a perpetual blister, as
it is sometimes called, the whole of the detached cuticle is carefully
removed with the scissors, and the part is dressed with either the
ointment of cantharides or of savine, at first more or less diluted with
lard or simple ointment, with an occasional dressing of resin cerate.
According to Mr Crowther, the blistered surface is best kept clean by
daily fomentation with warm water.

Of late years, to obviate the unpleasant effects occasionally arising from
the common blister, various compounds having cantharides for their base,
as well as fabrics spread with them, have been brought before the public.
These are noticed hereafter. See PLASTER, VESICANTS, &c.

=Blisters, Extempora''neous.= Among the best of these may be mentioned the
following:--

1. A piece of lint dipped in the strongest vinegar of cantharides, and
immediately after its application to the skin, covered over with a piece
of strapping, or preferably a piece of sheet gutta percha or oiled silk,
to prevent evaporation. Raises a blister in from 5 to 8 minutes.

2. Concentrated acetic acid, applied in the same way, has a similar
effect.

3. (Dr Darcq.) Into a flat watch glass pour from 8 to 10 drops of highly
concentrated liquor of ammonia; cover the liquid with a small piece of
linen of rather less diameter than that of the glass, and at once apply
this little apparatus to the previously shaved skin. The whole must be
kept in its place by means of moderate pressure with the fingers, until a
red ring, about 2 centimetres in breadth, is observed round the glass,
when it is certain that vesication is effected. Sometimes scarcely 30
seconds are necessary for obtaining the result. The apparatus may then be
removed, and the blistered part treated in the usual manner; the dressing
being according to the object in view.

4. (Trousseau.) Bibulous paper slightly wetted with a little of the
ethereal extract of cancharides, and instantly applied to the skin, the
whole being covered with a piece of common adhesive plaster to prevent
evaporation.

5. Boiling water applied by means of a suitably shaped tube, the adjacent
parts being at the same time protected from injury. Instantaneous.

=Blister, Horse.= See VETERINARY MEDICINES.

=Blister*, Perpet'ual.= See BLISTER (_ante_).

=BLIS'TERING.= _Syn._ VES'ICANS, VESICATO''RIUS, L.; EPISPASTIQUE,
VESICANT, VESICATOIRE, Fr.; BLASENZIEHEND, &c., Ger. In _medicine_, &c.,
that vesicates or raises blisters when applied to the skin.

=Blistering Pa'per, Plas'ter, Tis''sue= (t[)i]sh-[=u]), &c. See PLASTERS,
VESICANTS, &c.

=BLOAT'ER.= See BLOTE.

=BLONDE.= [Fr.] _Syn._ BLOND'-LACE. Silk-lace. The name is now also
applied to cotton-lace edged with silk. For the mode of cleaning it and
getting it up, see LACE and MUSLIN.

=BLOOD= (bl[)u]d). _Syn._ SAN''GUIS, L.; SANG, Fr.; BLUT, Ger. The general
circulating fluid of animals, and that on which the nourishment and growth
of their bodies depend, and from which all the secretions are formed. It
is warm and red in vertebrated animals; and, for the most part, cold and
white in the invertebrata. In man and all other mammals, and in birds--the
two highest classes of the animal kingdom--the blood, though collectively
forming but one circulating stream, varies considerably in appearance
according to the part or vessels in which it is found. That contained in
the left side of the heart, and in the arteries, possesses a very
brilliant scarlet colour, and is called arte''rial blood; whilst that
found in the right side of the heart, and in the veins, has a darkish
purple colour, and is called ve'nous blood. The two, however, differ
little from each other in their chemical properties and composition; the
most marked point of difference being that venous blood holds carbonic
acid in solution, whilst oxygen predominates in the blood of the arteries.
The fibrine of venous blood is also soluble in a solution of nitrate of
potassa; whilst that of arterial blood is insoluble in that menstruum.

_Comp._ Blood consists of a transparent and nearly colourless fluid
(plas'ma, se''rum, s[)e]ralbu'men), in which float about a countless
multitude of microscopic round red bodies (blood-discs, blood-corpuscles),
to which its colour is due, accompanied by a few colourless globules
(white blood-corpuscles) of a somewhat larger size. The red corpuscles are
found, on more minute examination, to consist of an envelope containing a
solution of haematosin.

_Prop._ These are, for the most part, well known. It has an alkaline
reaction, a saline and rather disagreeable sweetish taste, and when newly
drawn evolves a peculiar odour or halitus, which almost immediately
disappears. As it cools and on repose it coagulates, owing, according to
some, to the spontaneous solidification of the fibrine.

The following table, based upon the observations of Schmidt and the
analysis of Lehmann, is given by the latter, as representing the average
quantitative relation of the principal constituents of normal blood. It
will be noticed that the blood is here regarded as composed of two
portions, one consisting solely of the red particles, and the other of
the liquid, in which these red corpuscles are suspended, termed the
_liquor sanguinis_, which consists of the serum holding fibre in
solution:--

        _Sp. gr. of Blood-corpuscles, 1.0885._

  1000 parts blood-corpuscles contain--

  Water                           688.00
  Solid constituents              312.00
    consisting of--
  Haematin (with iron)              16.75
  Globulin and cell membrane      282.22
  Fat                               2.31
  Extractive matters                2.60
  Mineral substances (without
    iron)                           8.12
  Chlorine                          1.686
  Sulphuric anhydride (SO_{3})      0.066
  Phosphoric anhydride (P_{2}O_{5}) 1.134
  Potassium                         3.328
  Sodium                            1.052
  Oxygen                            0.667
  Calcium phosphate                 0.114
  Magnesium phosphate               0.073

        _Sp. gr. of Liquor Sanguinis, 1.028._

  1000 parts of liquor sanguinis contain--

  Water                           902.90
  Solid constituents               97.10
    consisting of--
  Fibrin                            4.05
  Albumen                          78.84
  Fat                               1.72
  Extractive matters                3.94
  Mineral substances                8.55
  Chlorine                          3.644
  Sulphuric anhydride (SO_{3})      0.115
  Phosphoric anhydride (P_{2}O_{5}) 0.191
  Potassium                         0.323
  Sodium                            3.341
  Oxygen                            0.403
  Calcium phosphate                 0.311
  Magnesium phosphate               0.222

The ash of blood contains about 6.84 per cent. of ferric oxide. (Lehmann.)

The following table gives the results of the average composition of human
blood in man and woman, according to the analyses of Becquerel and Rodie:

                                              Male.      Female.
  Specific gravity of defibrinated blood      1.0600        1.0575
     "        "    of serum                   1.0280        1.0274
  Water                                     779.00        791.00
  Fibrin                                      2.20          2.20
                 { Serolin          }       { 0.02 }      { 0.02
                 { Phosphorised fat }       { 0.49 }      { 0.46
  Fatty Matters  {                  } 1.60  {      } 1.62 {
                 { Cholesterin      }       { 0.09 }      { 0.09
                 { Saponified fat   }       { 1.00 }      { 1.05
  Albumen                                    69.40         70.50
  Blood-corpuscles                          141.10        127.20
  Extractive matters                          6.80          7.40

                                           1000.10       1000.02

           { Sodium chloride                  3.10          3.90
  Salts    { Other soluble salts              2.50          2.90
           { Earthy phosphates                0.33          0.35
  Metallic iron                               0.57          0.54

                                              6.50          7.69

The blood also contains, in solution, oxygen, nitrogen, carbonic acid, as
well as a free alkaline carbonate, urea, and small traces of alcohol have
also been detected in normal blood.

The following report of a commission composed of MM. Mialhe, Mayel,
Lefort, and Cornil, appointed to devise the best method for the
examination of blood stains, was published in 1873. The following
translation of the report appeared in the 'Chemical News' of December 5th,
1873.

1st. When the stain is of recent date, or supposed to be so, the red
corpuscles should be particularly examined, and every care taken to
preserve them without change. The stains must not be washed with water, so
that the haematin may not be altered. After insisting on the microscopic
characters of the blood stains, isolated or compared with those of various
animals, the commission enumerates with care the fluids which are
destructive or preservative of blood-corpuscles. Among the first, water,
and particularly hot water, acetic, gallic, hydrochloric, and sulphuric
acids; and of alkalies, potash and soda, even in weak solution, and ether
and chloroform, also many other reagents, so alter the blood-corpuscles as
to cause them to entirely disappear. Alcohol, chromic and picric acids,
and bichromate of potash, preserve the corpuscles, though they alter their
form. The preservative fluids are those whose composition approaches
nearest to serum, such as the iodised serum of Schultze, an excellent
preparation made with amniotic fluid, to which are added a few drops of
the tincture of iodine, so as to give it the colour of white wine; or,
better, a fluid composed thus; white of egg, 30 grams; distilled water,
270 grams; and chloride of sodium, 40 grams; or even a fluid containing
0.5 per cent. of chloride of sodium, or 5 or 6 per cent. of sulphate of
sodium. If the stains be wetted and softened by these fluids, and then
examined, white and red corpuscles and fibroid particles will be observed.

2nd. In more difficult cases, when the microscope, owing to the
alterations which time has effected in the haematin, can give but vague
information, examination by the spectroscope and chemical analysis enables
us to arrive at precise results. The use of these means being less known,
and also more delicate, requires special study.

1. _Spectrum analysis._ Colouring matters have the power of absorbing
certain coloured rays of white light--the same always for the same
substance. This is the principle upon which spectroscopic examination is
based. If into any analysing tube filled with water a few drops of
solution of haemoglobin be introduced, till it has the colour of
peach-blossoms, the luminous rays of the spectrum passing through this
fluid present two bands of absorption, in the lines D and E of
Frauenhofer, in the yellow and the green. The same fact would be observed
if a few drops of blood were substituted for haemoglobin in the analysis.

In a case of doubt the haemoglobin of the blood could be reduced by adding
to this latter a reducing body. Destroyed haemoglobin has a different
spectrum from oxygenated haemoglobin, a single absorption band as large as
the two former bands united, and a little to the left of Frauenhofer's
line D.

2. In blood in a state of decomposition, or which has been treated with
acids or caustic alkalies, haemoglobin is changed into a new substance;
haematin is formed, which, combined with hydrochloric acid, gives definite
crystals.

In order to obtain them we must proceed thus:--A small fragment of dried
blood is placed on a glass slide; it is dissolved in a drop of water, and
a minute portion of sea-salt added. It is covered with a thin slide, and
pure acetic acid is made to pass between the two slides, and it is heated
over a spirit-lamp to boiling-point; acetic acid is again added, and it is
heated afresh; and this is repeated till the crystals are obtained.

They are rhomboidal, of a dirty brown colour, quite characteristic, and
require to be seen with a magnifying power of three hundred or four
hundred diameters. With the smallest quantity of blood these two reactions
can always be produced--the spectrum examination and the crystals of
hydrochlorate of haematin; and they are so certain that the existence of
one alone enables one to affirm the presence of blood.

3. The third process, though not so exact as the preceding, ought,
nevertheless, never to be neglected. If to a very small quantity of blood
dissolved in a little water be added a few drops of tincture of guaiacum
and of binoxide of hydrogen, a persistent blue colour is immediately
produced; but this very sensitive reaction can be obtained with other
organic matter, such as nasal mucus, saliva, &c.; it therefore only gives
a probability. We must proceed in the following manner:--A tincture of
guaiacum is prepared with alcohol at 83 degrees, and guaiacum resin; a
mixture of sulphuric ether and binoxide of hydrogen is also made, and
enclosed in a stoppered bottle, and kept under water in the dark. This
preparation is less liable to change than pure oxygenated waters. The
object stained with blood, if it be white, is put into a little cup, then
moistened with water to dissolve out the blood stain, and washed in
distilled water; this water is then submitted to the action of these
reagents.

If the thing stained be coloured, and the stain little or not at all
visible, it must be moistened, and then pressed between two or three
sheets of white blotting-paper, and tried first with the guaiacum. If the
stain be of blood a reddish or brown spot will form on the paper.

One of the sheets should be treated with ammonia, and the stain will
become crimson or green. A second sheet treated with tincture of guaiacum
and ozonised ether will give a blue colour more or less intense, according
to the quantity of the blood.

To recapitulate:--1. If the stains or scales of blood appear recent, the
corpuscles may, after the necessary precautions, be examined under the
microscope, and their presence, diameter, &c. observed, which will enable
one to diagnose the origin of the blood, whether human or animal. 2. If
the stains be old and the blood changed, the reaction with the tincture of
guaiacum would make the presence of blood probable; but its actual
presence cannot be affirmed without spectrum examination or the production
of crystals of hydrochlorate of haematin; one of the two is sufficient. It
is unnecessary to add that these reactions do not show whether the blood
is human or animal.

Bullocks' blood has of late years, more especially in France, come into
use as a remedy for anaemia and pulmonary phthisis. A correspondent,
writing from Paris to the 'Medical Times and Gazette' in 1872, says: "It
is a curious sight to see the number of patients of both sexes and of all
ranks and ages, who flock to the slaughter-house every morning to drink of
the still fuming blood of the oxen slaughtered for the table. I was struck
with the facility with which young ladies take to it, and I have heard
many say that they prefer it to cod-liver oil."

In a paper read in 1872 before the Academy of Sciences in Paris by M.
Boussingault, detailing his researches into the composition of blood, the
author expressed his surprise that bullock's blood was not more generally
used as a food, as it contains all the constituents of a perfect aliment.
According to the above chemist, of all nutritive substances the blood of
animals contains the largest amount of iron. In man, Boussingault found in
100 grammes of blood 51 milligrammes of iron; in that of the ox, 55
milligrammes; of the pig, 59 milligrammes; and in that of the frog, 42
milligrammes. But it was not only in red blood that iron was found,
Boussingault detected it in white blood also; and he found the blood of
snails to contain as much iron as that of the ox or calf.

A simple and ingenious method for the therapeutic administration of the
serum of the blood of sheep and oxen has been lately devised by Dr Francis
Vacher, the medical officer of Birkenhead. Dr Vacher takes the blood of
these animals, allows it to stand until it clots, removes the clot, and
dries it at a gentle heat in a hot-air chamber. By this means he obtains a
nearly odourless and comparatively tasteless powder, which is ten times
the strength of fresh serum. To this preparation he gives the name "_serum
sanguinis exsiccatum_." He believes that his dried serum will prove a
valuable nutrient in consumption, scrofula, diabetes, and loss of flesh.

_Uses, &c._ That of bullocks is employed for the clarification of wines
and syrups; also in the preparation of adhesive cements, as the vehicle in
coarse paint for outdoor work, as a manure, as a bleaching powder, to make
pure animal charcoal, and for several other purposes. The blood of sheep,
pigs, and bullocks, mixed with flour or oatmeal, and seasoned, is eaten by
the common people, but it is rather indigestible, and apt to induce
disease. Gut-skins stuffed with this mixture form "black puddings."

Bullock's blood, dried by exposure in thin layers to a current of air, at
a heat under 125 deg., and then reduced to powder, is exported in large
quantities to the colonies, where it is used, as a 'clarifier,' in the
sugar-works. Dried at a temperature ranging between 212 deg. to 220 deg., then
coarsely powdered, and the dusty portion sifted off, it is much used by
fraudulent dealers to adulterate grain-musk. See CHARCOAL (ANIMAL),
GLOBULIN, HAEMATOSIN, PLASMA, SERUM, STAINS, VISION, &c.

=Blood-purifying Tea, Gout and Rheumatic= (Franz Wilhelm, Neunkirchen).
Equal parts of senna leaves, sarsaparilla root, liquorice, rad. tritici,
red sandalwood, bittersweet stalks, cut small and mixed. (Hager.)

=Blood-purifying Tea= (F. Koeller, Graz). Senna leaves, 32 parts; guaiacum
wood, 10 parts; juniper wood, restharrow root, rad. tritici, dandelion
root, chicory root, of each 8 parts; alder bark, 3 parts; sassafras, 2
parts; star-anise, 5 parts, dirty and worm-eaten, roughly chopped, and
mixed. (Hager.)

=Blood, Spit'ting of.= See HAEMOPTYSIS.

=Blood, Vom'iting of.= See STOMACH DISEASES.

=BLOOD'-ROOT.= _Syn._ RED'-ROOT, PUCCOON'; SANGUINA''RIA, L. The
_sanguin[=a]r'ia Canaden'sis_ (Linn.), a papaveraceous plant of North
America; also its root (SANGUINA''RIA, Ph. U. S.), which is the part used
in medicine. Juice, blood-red, used in dyeing. In small doses (3 to 5 gr.)
it is stimulant, diaphoretic, and expectorant; in large ones (10 to 20
gr.), narcotic, emetic, and purgative. The powder is sometimes used as an
escharotic. See SANGUINARINE.

=BLOOD'STONE.= A hard compact variety of haematite used to form burnishers.
The name is also applied by lapidaries to the heliotrope.

=BLOOM.= In _perfumery_, &c., a name given to several calorific
skin-cosmetics, of which the following are examples:--

=Bloom of Almonds= (ah'-m[)u]ndz). _Syn._ AL'MOND-BLOOM. _Prop._ Boil 1
_oz._ of ground Brazil-wood in 2-1/2 _pints_ of soft water for 30 minutes,
adding the juice of two lemons towards the end; strain, and add 3/4 _oz._
of isinglass, 1/4 _oz._ of powdered cochineal, 1 _oz._ of alum, and 1/2
_oz._ of borax; boil again for 4 or 5 minutes, and strain through muslin.
Glass or earthenware vessels must be used, as metals injure its colour.

=Bloom of Roses.= _Prep._ 1. Dried red rose leaves, 1-1/2 _oz._; boiling
water, 1 _pint_; infuse in glass or earthenware for 2 hours, press out the
liquor, and add the juice of 3 large lemons; the next day filter, or
decant the clear portion. Both the above should be kept in a cool place,
otherwise they soon spoil. A little spirit of wine (3 or 4 _fl. oz._ to
the pint) is sometimes added to them to remove this objection. They are
greatly inferior to the following:--

2. Carmine, 1/4 _oz._; strong liquor of ammonia (not weaker than .900), 1
_oz._; put them into a stoppered bottle, set it in a cool place, and
occasionally agitate it for two or three days, to effect a solution; then
add of rose-water, 1 pint; and, after admixture, further add of esprit de
rose, 1/2 _fl. oz._; pure rectified spirit, 1 _fl. oz._; again well
agitate, and set the whole aside for a week; lastly, decant the clear
portion from the dregs (if any), for use or sale. Very fine. A cheaper
article is made by omitting a portion of the carmine, and the whole of the
esprit and spirit; and a still inferior one by substituting 1-1/2 _oz._ of
silver-grain cochineal (in powder) for the carmine, with digestion for a
week in the ammonia previously diluted with one half of the water.

=Bloom of Youth, or Liquid Pearl= (G. W. Laird, New York). A colourless
liquid holding in suspension 34 per cent. of zinc oxide entirely free from
lead. (Chandler.)

=BLOTE.= To prepare or cure by drying and smoking; now only applied to
fish.

=BLO'TER.= _Syn._ BLOAT'ER. A bloted fish; appr., a herring slightly
salted, and only very slightly dried and smoked.

=BLOW'PIPE= (bl[=o]'-). _Syn._ CHALUMEAU, Fr.; LOeTHROHR, Ger. An
instrument by means of which the flame of a candle or lamp, or a gas-jet,
is directed upon any substance placed to receive it, which is thus
subjected to an intense heat. The blowpipe is to the artist and the
experimentalist what the wind-furnace is to the artisan; but it is
proportionately more powerful, convenient, and economical.

Beginners are usually unable to maintain a continued stream of air from
the jet of this instrument, although the doing so is really a very simple
affair. The operation merely depends on a little artifice in using it,
which is more difficult to describe than to acquire. The effect intended
to be produced is a continual stream of air for many minutes, if
necessary, without interruption, even for an instant. This is done by
simply applying the tongue to the roof of the mouth, so as to interrupt
the communication between the mouth and the passage of the nostrils; by
which means the operator is at liberty to breathe through the nose, at the
same time that by the muscles of the lips he forces a continued stream of
air from the anterior part of the mouth through the blowpipe. When the
mouth begins to be empty it is replenished by the lungs in an instant,
while the tongue is withdrawn from the roof of the mouth, and replaced
again in the same manner as in pronouncing the monosyllable tut. In this
way the stream of air may be continued for a long time without fatigue,
provided the flame be not urged too impetuously; and even should it be so
urged no other inconvenience will be felt than that of slight fatigue of
the muscles of the lips.

The hottest portion of the flame produced by the action of the blowpipe is
at the tip of the outer white flame, which has also the property of
rapidly burning or oxidising substances placed in it which are susceptible
of such a change; and it is hence commonly called the OXIDISING FLAME. The
interior blue flame is, for a like reason, called the DEOXIDISING or
REDUCING FLAME, as it possesses the property of extracting oxygen from
most bodies capable of being so affected.

Substances to be submitted to the action of the blowpipe-flame are placed
on a support, which is either a piece of charcoal, or a wire or small
spoon of platinum, gold, or silver, as the case may require. Sometimes a
plate of cyanite is used. Pine-wood charcoal is preferred for this
purpose; and the sides, not the ends of the fibres, are presented to the
flame. When a very intense heat is required, the substance operated on
should not exceed the size of half a peppercorn.

Several characteristic colour reactions may often be obtained in the
examination of a substance for analysis, by fusing a small portion of it,
with a bead of microcosmic salt, and exposing it for some time to the
outer flame of the blowpipe. If the substance dissolve readily in the salt
and rather copiously to a clear bead _whilst hot_, and is of a blue colour
by candle light inclining to violet, it denotes COBALT. If it be green,
upon cooling blue; in the reducing flame after cooling, red--COPPER. If
green, particularly fine on cooling, unaltered in the reducing flame,
CHROMIUM. If brownish red, on cooling light yellow or colourless; in this
reducing flame, red whilst hot, yellow whilst cooling, then
greenish--IRON. If reddish to brownish red, on cooling yellow to reddish
yellow or colourless; in the reducing flame unaltered--NICKEL. If
yellowish-brown, on cooling light yellow or colourless; in the reducing
flame almost colourless, and blackish-grey on cooling--BISMUTH. If light
yellowish to opal, when cold, rather dull; in the reducing flame
whitish-grey--SILVER. If amethyst-red, especially on cooling; colourless
in the reducing flame, not quite clear--MANGANESE. If the bead remains
clear on cooling, ANTIMONY, ALUMINA, ZINC, CADMIUM, LEAD, LIME, and
MAGNESIA are indicated, the latter five when added in somewhat large
proportion to the microcosmic salt, give enamel white beads. The bead of
oxide of LEAD saturated is yellowish. If the bead becomes enamel-white on
cooling, even where only a small portion of the powder has been added to
the microcosmic salt--BARYTA and STRONTIA are indicated.

If the substance dissolves in the microcosmic salt slowly and only in
small quantity, the bead being colourless and remaining so after cooling,
the undissolved portion looking semi-transparent, and if upon the addition
of a little sesquioxide of iron it acquires the characteristic colour of
an iron bead--this denotes SILICIC ACID.

For producing extreme degrees of heat the flame is blown with a jet of
oxygen gas, the instrument being then called an OXYGEN BLOWPIPE; or a
mixture of oxygen and hydrogen is burned, when it is called an
OXY-HYDROGEN BLOWPIPE. The heat produced by the last is so great that no
substance can stand exposure to it, even the most refractory native
compounds being immediately fused. Gold is volatilised, and iron is
rapidly consumed the instant it is placed in the flame.

[Illustration:

  1. Hemming's safety-jet for the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe.
    _a_, Pipe conveying oxygen gas.
    _b_,     "          hydrogen gas.
    _c_, Ball
        stuffed with fine wire-gauze.
    _e_, Jet (internal diameter 1-80th of an
        inch).
  2. Black's blowpipe.
  3. Bergman's   "
  4. Pepy's      "
  5. Wollaston's "
  6. Oxy-hydrogen blowpipe.]

The principal varieties of the blowpipe in general use are figured in the
engravings above.

Beside the above there are several other varieties of the blowpipe
occasionally employed; one in which the air is expelled by the pressure of
a column of water, and hence called the HYDROSTATIC BLOWPIPE; another, in
which the flame is blown with the vapour of boiling alcohol, is named the
SPIRIT-BLOWPIPE.

=Blowpipe, Herapath.= For sealing and bending glass tubes and constructing
glass apparatus of various forms, it is convenient to have the blowpipe
mounted on a fixed support, and when a flame of considerable power is
required, the blast must be supplied by bellows worked with the foot. A
very convenient form of blowpipe for these purposes is that invented by
Herapath, and represented in the following figure, _a_ is a flexible tube
attached to a stop-cock (_b_), which communicates with a tube (_c d_),
bent at right angles at _d_, where a T-shaped tube (_e f g_) slips on by
means of the piece _f_. The blow-pipe jet (_h i_) passes into the longer
arm of the T-piece, and fits somewhat tightly; _k l_ is a second piece of
flexible tube, terminating in a mouthpiece, or connected with a blowing
apparatus. On turning on the gas, it passes in the direction marked by the
arrows, and is to be inflamed at _e_. On blowing with the mouth, or by
means of a pair of bellows, into the tube _k l_, the ignited gas takes the
form of a blow-pipe flame of great power, the nature of which is entirely
under control by means of the stop-cock _b_, and also by regulating the
quantity of air supplied through the tube (_k l_). The T-shaped piece is
movable at _f_, so that the jet may be directed to any position. The
apparatus may be mounted on a heavy foot, and connected with the
gas-supply, by means of the flexible tube, so that it can be placed in any
required position on the laboratory table; or it may be permanently fixed
on a table specially devoted to the purpose, and having beneath it a pair
of bellows worked by a treadle.

[Illustration]

A simple and inexpensive apparatus for supplying a continuous blast of air
for blowpipe or other purpose is figured below.

It consists essentially of a tin tube (to which is fixed a branch tube
open to the air), through which water may be driven from a supply tap into
a properly fitted bottle. Air becomes thus entangled with the water in its
course through the tube, and carried with it into the bottle. The water is
then got rid of by means of a syphon, and the air is conducted by an
elastic tube to the blow-pipe.

[Illustration:

  _A_, _B_, Tin tube, eighteen inches long, half-inch diameter.
  _C_, _D_, Tin tube, three inches long, one third-inch diameter, inserted
      at right angles.
  _E_, _F_, Tin tube, long enough to reach the level of A, one third-inch
      diameter, inserted at an angle of 45 deg..
  _G_, _H_, _I_, Siphon, half-inch diameter.
  _K_, _L_, Air tube, one third-inch diameter.
  _M_, India-rubber tube to convey away the air.]

To set the apparatus in action, connect the tube C D with a water tap by
means of a piece of elastic tubing, and turn on the water; pinch the tube
M for a few moments between the thumb and finger until the syphon has
begun to act. A blast of air will at once be felt at the extremity of M.

=BLUB'BER.= _Syn._ AD'EPS BALAENA''RUM, L.; GRAISSE DE BALEINE, Fr. The
soft fat of whales, and of other large sea-animals, from which the oil
(TRAIN' OIL, WHALE' OIL) is obtained by heat.

=Blubber, Sea.= The popular name of several species of marine animals of
the genus _medusa_, having a body resembling a large mass of jelly. They
are very plentiful in some parts of the coast of England, and are said to
form a rich and cheap manure for pasture and arable land. They are used at
the rate of about 1 _ton_ to every 20 or 30 loads of mould, together with
a chaldron of lime, per acre. In 3 or 4 months the land is usually found
in prime condition. Pilchards, and other fish that swarm upon our coasts,
and for which there is not a ready market, may be used in the same way,
and are much richer, being, when properly managed, but little inferior to
guano.

=BLUE= (bl'[=o][=o]). _Syn._ CAERU'LEUS, L.; BLEU, Fr.; BLAU, Ger. Of the
colour of the clear sky, or of any shade of it, whether lighter or darker;
subst., a blue colour, blueness (COL'OR CAERU'LEUS, L.); or a blue,
colouring material or pigment (CAERU'LEUM, L.).

=Blue Dye=. _Syn._ TEINTE BLEUE, Fr.; BLAU FARBE, Ger. The most permanent
blue is that given by indigo, and particularly by what is called the
'indigo-vat.' A variety of shades, of great beauty, and considerable
permanence, may also be given by the 'Prussian-blue process.' Cheaper
blues are commonly dyed with logwood. Each of these is noticed at length
under their respective heads. The following are also employed, and are
well adapted for common goods, on the small scale and for domestic use.

1. Give the goods a mordant of alum, or of acetate of alumina ('red
liquor'), then rinse them well, and boil them in a bath of logwood, to
which a small quantity of blue vitriol has been added; lastly, rinse and
dry.

2. Boil the goods for a short time in a bath of logwood; then add to the
liquor tartar and verdigris, in the proportion of 1 oz. of each to every
lb. of logwood employed; and again boil for a short time.

3. Give the goods a mordant of tartar; lift, add a little chromate of
potash; again work for 15 or 20 minutes, and rinse; next boil in a bath of
logwood, adding towards the last a few grains more of the chromate; again
boil, and finish. The whole quantity of chromate used should not exceed
1/4 oz. to each lb. of logwood taken for the bath. Very dark.

4. Bilberries, elder-berries, mulberries, privet-berries, and several
other like vegetable substances, may be used to dye blue, as above,
instead of logwood.

_Obs._ By increasing the proportion of alum or red-liquor the colour
verges on purple; and by employing a little acetate of iron or green
copperas, the darker shades of blue are produced. Verdigris, blue vitriol,
and alkalies, turn it more on the blue; whilst a mordant of tin imparts a
violet cast. If much more chromate be used than that ordered the result is
a blue-black. See DYEING, INDIGO, LOGWOOD, MORDANTS, PRUSSIAN BLUE, &c.

=Blue Pig'ments=. _Syn._ CAERU'LEA, &c., L. The preparation of the
principal blue pigments of commerce is described under their respective
names. In the following list those for which directions are given are of a
miscellaneous and less usual character.

=Az'ure.= _Syn._ Azure Blue. A name frequently given to smalts. That of
the oil-painter is ultramarine; that of the ancients is noticed below. See
ULTRAMARINE, &c.

=Blue, Barth's=. See INDIGO, SULPHATE OF.

=Blue, Berlin.= Prussian blue.

=Blue, Bice.= Native blue carbonate of copper, prepared by grinding and
elutriation. That of the shops is generally a factitious compound made
from smalts.

=Blue, Carmine.= See CARMINE and INDIGO, SULPHATE OF.

=Blue, Char'coal.= Carbonised vine-stalks are triturated with an equal
weight of salt of tartar or pearlash, the mixture put into a crucible, and
heated over the fire until it ceases to swell, the mass being kept well
stirred all the time; when cold, it is dissolved in water, and the excess
of alkali saturated with dilute sulphuric acid. The liquid becomes blue,
and a dark precipitate falls down, which turns of a brilliant blue colour
when dried and cautiously heated.

=Blue, Chi'na.= _Syn._ Roy'al Smalts. The crude oxide of cobalt, or
zaffre, is ground with an equal weight of potash, and about eight times
its weight of felspar, the mixture submitted to fusion in a crucible, and
when cold reduced to an impalpable powder. Used to paint pottery, and as a
blue pigment.

=Blue, Co'balt.= _Syn._ Cobalt'ic Az'ure. This is commonly prepared by one
or other of the following formulae:--

1. Zaffre, 1 lb., is dissolved in nitric acid (diluted with an equal
weight of water), 3/4 lb., by digestion for some hours; the solution is
evaporated nearly to dryness, and the residuum redissolved in warm water;
to this solution, after filtration, a solution of phosphate of soda is
added as long as a precipitate forms; this last is collected on a filter,
washed with cold water, and mixed, whilst still moist, with 8 times its
weight of fresh-precipitated hydrate of alumina; the paste is then dried,
and exposed to a cherry-red heat in a crucible, after which the mass is
cooled and reduced to a very fine powder.

2. A solution of nitrate of cobalt is precipitated with ammonia-alum, and
the precipitate washed, dried, and exposed to a cherry-red heat, as
before. The products of the above formulae are very beautiful and
permanent. See COBALTO-ULTRAMARINE.

=Egyp'tian Az'ure.= Alexan'drian Frit, Azure of the Ancients. A mixture of
carbonate of soda, 1 _lb._; calcined flints, 1-1/2 _lb._; copper filings,
1/4 _lb._ (all in fine powder); fused together in a crucible for 2 or 3
hours, and when cold, reduced to an impalpable powder. A beautiful and
unchangeable sky-blue colour. Used in both oil and fresco painting; and as
a substitute for smalts, of which, indeed, it is a variety.

=In'digo= (which _see_).

=Blue, I'ron.= Fer'ric blue. Ordinary phosphate of iron prepared by
precipitating a solution of protosulphate of iron with another of
phosphate of soda, the resulting powder being washed, and dried at a
gentle heat. A lively sky-blue colour, but without much depth or body.

=Blue, Lake.= See LAKES and INDIGO, SULPHATE OF.

=Blue, Molybde'num.= From sulphuret of molybdenum, dissolved in nitric
acid, and some tin filings and a little muriatic acid added. After
digestion for some time the clear liquid is poured off, and evaporated to
dryness. The resulting powder is then mixed with moist hydrate of alumina
(as in making cobalt blue), heated to a very dull red, and when it has
again become cold, reduced to powder. Used both as a paint and an
enamel-colour.

=Blue, Moun'tain.= Native carbonate of copper, mixed with more or less
earthy matter, reduced to fine powder. That of the shops is often
factitious.

=Blue, Par'is.= Prussian blue.

=Blue, Pow'der.= Smalts.

=Blue, Prus''sian= (which _see_).

=Blue, Queen's.= See THUMB-BLUE (_below_).

=Blue, San'der's.= Ultramarine-ashes.

=Blue, Sax'on.= Saxon Az'ure. A compound of hydrate of alumina and
Prussian blue, prepared as follows:--

1. To sulphate of iron, 1 _oz._; and alum, 8 _oz._; dissolved in water, 1
gall.; add, simultaneously, separate solutions of prussiate of potash and
common pearlash, until they cease to produce a precipitate; after repose
collect the deposit, wash it well with water, and dry it.

2. A solution of sulphate of iron is precipitated with another of
prussiate of potash, and instantly mixed with the precipitate which has
just been obtained by treating a solution of alum with a solution of
pearlash; the mixed precipitates being finally treated as before.

=Smalts= (which _see_; also CHINA-BLUE and EGYPTIAN AZURE, _above_).

=Blue, Thenard's.= See ULTRAMARINE (Cobaltic).

=Blue, Thumb'.= Cake'-blue, Crown'-blue, Fig'-blue, Knob'-blue,
Mech'lenburg-blue, (m[=e]k'-), Queen's-blue, Stone-blue, &c. Names given
to the lump-blue used in laundries, which vary according to the quality
and the particular form given to it.

_Prep._ 1. A mixture of powdered starch with sufficient indigo (in
impalpable powder) to give the necessary colour, made into a stiff dough
with starch-paste, and then formed into lumps or cakes of the desired size
and shape, and dried. This forms the ordinary 'washerwoman's blue' of the
shops.

2. As the last, but substituting caeruleo-sulphate of potassa or blue
carmine[226] for the 'powdered indigo' ordered in the last formula. Very
fine.

[Footnote 226: See INDIGO (Sulphate of).]

3. As No. 1, but substituting whiting for the powdered starch and weak
size, or a decoction of Irish moss for the starch-paste. Inferior.

_Uses, &c._ Employed by laundresses to impart a faint blue tinge to linen,
in order to increase its apparent whiteness. The common forms given to it
are that of small balls of about 3/4 to 1 inch in diameter; the same, but
rather larger, and pinched with the thumb and finger in three directions,
so as to leave corresponding depressions (THUMB-BLUE); and cakes, which
are cut out of the mass, previously rolled into a sheet, by a suitably
shaped cutter.

=Blue, Turnbull's.= Ferridcyanide of iron (which _see_; also TURNBULL'S
BLUE).

=Blue Verditer.= See VERDITER.

=Ultramarine'= (-r[=e]ne'), _U.-blue._ See ULTRAMARINE.

=BLUSH'ING.= _Syn._ RU'BOR, RUBE'DO, L. In _physiology_, &c., the red glow
on the cheeks or face occasioned by confusion, bashfulness, surprise, or
shame.

Blushing is caused by a sudden increase in the quantity and velocity of
the blood in the capillaries, occasioning their turgescence; and,
consequently, a heightening of the natural pale-reddish hue of the skin.
It is referable to sudden mental emotions of an exciting character, such
as surprise, confusion, consciousness of slight, injury, or indignity, and
the like. Emotions of a depressing character frequently produce an
opposite effect. This is termed pallor, and depends on the rush of blood
from the skin and surface of the body upon the internal organs. The first,
though often unpleasant, is never dangerous; the last always so. The cure
of the habit of blushing consists in persisting efforts to maintain a
sufficient degree of presence of mind and self-confidence to permit of
reflection, or a calm view of the exciting circumstance, instead of
sinking into a state of temporary mental imbecility and helpless
confusion.

'=BLUTANDRANG UND LUFTROHREN-VERSCHLEIMUNG=' (remedy for congestion and
obstruction of the air-vessels), manufactured and sold by the inventor, C.
Taenzer, 18, Kesselstrasse, Berlin,' is the title of a twelve-page
pamphlet. For cold in the head, the apparatus, which consists of a small
linen cushion to bind over the mouth, is moistened with 10 to 15 drops of
the fluid. The fluid (150 grammes) is a mixture of spirit of wine and
acetic ether, in which some arnica, milfoil, &c., have been macerated.
(Hager.)

=BLUTHENHARZ--FLOWER RESIN= (Kwizda, Kornenburg). Against barrenness in
domestic animals. A mixture of 9 parts powdered Bergundy pitch with 1 part
pine pollen, 3/4 oz. (Hager.)

=BOARDS, to make White.= Boards may be rendered white and clean by
scrubbing them, instead of with soap, with a mixture composed of one part
of freshly slaked lime and three parts of white sand.

=BOCKBIERESSENZ=, for the artificial imitation of bockbier. A tincture of
1 part lupulin, 2 parts pyroligneous acid, and 8 parts spirit of wine.
(Hager.)

=BOG SPAVIN.= In horses, a distension of the bursa or sheath of the true
hock joint. Mr Finlay Dun prescribes rest; high-heeled shoe, fomentation,
cold water, spring truss, counter-irritation, firing-iron; seton.

=BOIL= (boyl). _Syn._ FURUN'CULUS, L.; FURONCLE, Fr.; BEULE, EITERSTOCK,
Ger. In _surgery_, a well-known inflammatory tumour, of a superficial and
more or less temporary character, which generally terminates by
suppuration.

Boils (_furun'culi_) generally attack the healthy and robust during the
period of youth and early manhood, and seldom trouble persons who have
arrived at the middle age of life.

_Treatm., &c._ When boils begin to appear, and exhibit persistency by
daily enlargement and increasing pain, suppuration should be promoted by
warm poultices of bread and linseed-meal, to which a little fat or oil may
be added, to prevent their getting hard. If poultices are inconvenient,
warm and stimulating embrocations, or exposure to the vapour of hot water,
or the application of stimulating plasters, may be adopted instead. When
the tumour is sufficiently 'ripe,' the matter should be evacuated by
gentle pressure, and the wound dressed with a little simple ointment
spread on a piece of clean lint or linen. The diet may be full and liberal
until the maturation of the tumour and the discharge of the matter, when
it should be lessened, and the bowels kept gently open by saline
purgatives, as Epsom-salt or cream of tartar. When there is a disposition
in the constitution to the formation of boils, the bowels should be kept
at all times regular, and tonics, as bark or steel, had recourse to, with
the frequent use of sea-bathing when possible. An occasional dose of the
Abernethy medicines (which _see_) also often prevents their recurrence. A
course of sarsaparilla may be likewise taken with advantage. See ABSCESS,
TUMOURS, &c.

Dr Sydney Ringer prescribes a 1/16th grain of sulphide of sodium, mixed
with sugar of milk, three or four times a day on the tongue; but this
should only be administered under medical supervision.

_Treatment_ for HORSES and CATTLE.--Fomentations; poultices containing
belladonna, cold water, carbolic acid dressing, counter-irritants,
laxatives, sulphites, and chlorates.

=BOIL'ERS.= See INCRUSTATION and STEAM.

=BOIL'ING.= In _cookery_, the operation of dressing food in water at the
point of ebullition, or one very closely approaching it. The practice of
cooking animal food by boiling, although exceedingly simple, and often
most convenient, is neither judicious nor economical when the broth or
liquid in which it has been dressed is to be rejected as waste; as in this
way the most nutritious portion of the flesh of animals, consisting of
soluble saline and other matter required for the formation of bone, and
the nutrition of the muscular tissues, &c., is to a great extent lost.
This particularly applies to small pieces so dressed, and to those
presenting a large surface to the action of the water in proportion to
their weight. Large pieces of meat suffer less in proportion than smaller
ones, for the same reason; but even with them the outside should be
rejected, as it is both insipid and innutritious compared with the
interior portion. To reduce the solvent and deteriorating action of the
water to the lowest possible point, the articles to be boiled should not
be put into the water until it is in a state of full ebullition, which
should be maintained for 5 or 6 minutes afterwards, by which time the
surface and the parts lying immediately beneath it will have become, to a
certain degree, hardened, and will then act as a protective shield to the
inner portion of the mass. The boiling being continued for 5 or 6 minutes
cold water is added, until the temperature becomes about 150 deg. F., and the
cooking of the joint is carried on at this heat until the meat is done:
meat loses nearly a fourth of its weight in boiling, salt meat, which is
intended to be eaten cold, should be allowed to cool in the water in which
it has been boiled. The practice of dressing meat by putting it into cold
water, which is then gradually raised to the boiling-point, cannot be too
much censured. A 1/4 of an hour per lb. for dressing young meat, poultry,
and small pieces, and 20 minutes per lb. for old, tough, and larger ones
are the usual times allowed by cooks for the purpose. See BOUILLI, FOOD,
&c.

=BOIL'ING-POINT.= See EBULLITION.

=BOIS DURCE= (bwah d[)u]r-s[=a]). [Fr.] The substance invented in France,
and to which this name is given, is made from sawdust, which, under the
influence of a high temperature and the enormous pressure of 600 tons,
acquires a degree of hardness very much exceeding that of ordinary wood.
It has a very fine grain, and is unaffected by atmospherical variations;
but its principal merit is its adaptation to moulding, so that by the most
economical processes forms and impressions are given to it which it would
require, in any other way, considerable labour and workmanship.

=BOLAS.= Sweet light cakes which, according to Mrs Rundell, are prepared
as follows:--Into flour, 2 lbs., pour of warm milk, 3/4 pint, a small
teacupful of yeast, and 6 eggs; make a dough, add of butter 1 lb. (by
degrees), and set it in a warm place to rise for an hour; then mix in of
powdered sugar 1 lb.; and make the mass into cakes; put these into cups or
tins previously well buttered, and ornament the top with candied orange or
lemon peel; lastly bake them. See CAKES.

=BOLDO= (nat. ord. Monimiaceae). A shrub growing in the Chilian Andes. The
bark is used in tanning, and the wood makes a good charcoal. It is
reported to be useful in affections of the liver and digestive organs. It
has been employed as a tonic in cases where quinine is inadmissible. In
large doses it provokes vomiting. The powder of the dried leaves is a
sternutatory. See a paper by M. Claude Verne, translated into the 'Pharm.
Journ.,' 3rd series, v, 405.

=BOLE.= _Syn._ BO'LUS, L.; TERRE BOLAIRE, &c., Fr. The name of several
argillaceous minerals, varying in colour from white to yellow, red, and
brown, which they owe chiefly to iron. See OCHRES and RED and BROWN
PIGMENTS.

=BOLOG''NA PHI'AL= (-lawn'-y[)a]). See PHIALS.

=BO'LUS=, [L., Eng.] _Syn._ BOL, Fr. Boluses, in _pharmacy_ and
_medicine_, are small, roundish masses of medicinal substances, which are
taken in the same manner as pills, which they resemble, except in their
larger size. Those persons who object to swallowing them in their common
state may wrap them in soft paper, or introduce them into the emptied
husks of raisins or grapes.

Boluses (bo'l[=i], L.) are prepared with the same ingredients, and in a
similar manner to pills (which _see_).

=Bolus, Guaiacum= (HORNE). Guaiacum resin 1/2 drachm, elder rob, enough to
make into a bolus. Formerly given in quinsy.

=Bolus for Ague.= (The _bolus ad quartanum_ of the French Hospital).
Peruvian bark 1 ounce; carbonate of potash 1 drachm; tartarised antimony
15 grains; syrup, a sufficient quantity, one to be taken every four hours
during the intermission.

=Bolus, Vermifuge= (Dr Campbell). Basilie powder one scruple, conserve of
wormwood, a sufficient quantity to make into one bolus for an adult.
(FOY.) Powdered pomegranate root 1 drachm, assaf[oe]tida half a drachm,
croton oil 3 or 4 drops, syrup sufficient. Divide into 15 boluses; 5 daily
for tapeworm. (FRENCH HOSPITAL.) Wormseed 1 scruple, calomel 5 grains,
camphor 15 grains, syrup sufficient. Make into 3 doses; one, two, or three
in the day.

=BON'-BON= (b[=o]n_g_'-b[=o]n_g_). [Fr.] A sugarplum. See CONFECTIONERY
and SUGARPLUMS.

=BONBONS VERMIFUGES OF GAROZ.= A bonbon containing 15 centigrammes of
scammony, and 2 centigrammes of santonin. (Reveil.)

=BONE.= _Syn._ Os, L., Fr.; BEIN, KNOCHEN, Ger.; BAN, Sax. The hard
substance forming the interior skeleton of animals, or any single part of
it.

  _Comp._ According to Berzelius:--

                        Human bones.  Ox bones.

  Animal matter soluble in
    boiling water            32.17}   33.30

  Vascular substance          1.13}

  Phosphate of calcium,
    with a little fluoride of
    calcium                  53.04    57.35

  Carbonate of calcium       11.30     3.85

  Phosphate of magnesium      1.16     2.05

  Chloride of sodium and
    other salts              1.20      3.45

                           100.      100.

The soluble animal matter is chiefly fat and gelatin.

_Uses, &c._ The bones of animals are employed for various purposes in the
arts, manufactures, and domestic economy. Those of good meat form most
excellent materials for making soups and gravies, as is well known to
every cook. In France, soup is extensively made by subjecting bruised
bones to a steam heat of 2 or 3 days' continuance. In England the same is
commonly effected in an iron Papin's digester. When the earthy matter of a
bone is dissolved out by digesting it in a large quantity of very dilute
hydrochloric acid, a lump of gelatine is obtained, which, after being well
washed with water, is equal to isinglass for all the purposes of making
soups and jellies. The following is the process recommended by Proust for
making the best of bones, in hospitals, gaols, and similar
establishments:--

The bones, crushed small, are to be boiled for 15 minutes in a kettle of
water, and the fat (which is fit for all common purposes) skimmed off as
soon as cold. The bones are then to be ground, and boiled in 8 to 10 times
their weight of water (of which that already used must form a part), until
half of it is wasted, when a very nutritious jelly will be obtained. Iron
vessels should alone be used in this process, as the jelly and soup act
upon copper, brass, and the other common metals. The bones of fresh meat
are the most productive; those of boiled meat come next, whilst those of
roasted meat scarcely afford any jelly. As 'boning' meat before cooking is
now a very general practice, a quantity of fresh bones may always be
obtained.

Bones are, for the most part, WROUGHT, TURNED, BLEACHED, and DYED in a
similar manner to ivory, but with less care, owing to their inexpensive
and coarser character. Before being submitted to any of these operations
they are, however, first submitted to long boiling, to deprive them of
grease.

The bones of living animals may be dyed by mixing madder with their food.
The bones of young pigeons may thus be tinged of a rose colour in 24
hours, and of a deep scarlet in 3 days; but the bones of adult animals
take a fortnight to acquire even a rose colour. The bones nearest the
heart become tinged the soonest. In the same way extract of logwood tinges
the bones of young pigeons purple. See BLEACHING, DYEING, IVORY, &c.

In all manufacturing processes in which bones are operated upon, foul
vapours, unless special precautions are observed, will be thrown off, to
the great annoyance and discomfort of those living near the building where
the operations are performed.

To avoid this the offensive vapours should always be carried by a flue
made for the purpose into the furnace-fire, and there consumed. But this
will not remedy another source of annoyance which arises from the
disgusting stench caused by the putrefaction of the flesh adhering to the
bones, which lie in heaps about the premises.

The trade of a bone-boiler comes under the head of offensive trades (see
'Public Health Acts,' s. 112-114), and is under the control and regulation
of an urban sanitary authority, which has also the power of preventing the
bone-boiling being carried on within its district if it thinks proper.

=BONE'-ASH.= Impure triphosphate of calcium, obtained by calcining bones
to whiteness, and reducing the ash to fine powder. Used to make pure
phosphate of calcium, to form cupels, &c.; also sold for burnt hartshorn.

=BONE'-DUST.= _Syn._ BONE-MANURE. Bones (previously boiled for their
grease) ground to different degrees of coarseness, in a mill. It is sown
along with the seed in a drill. Wheat thus treated is said to yield 30 to
50 per cent, more weight in straw and grain than by the common methods.
Turnip and other light soils it renders more than ordinarily productive.
Bone manure is much used in the west of Yorkshire, Holderness, and
Lincolnshire. The usual quantity per acre is 70 bushels, when used alone;
but when mixed with ashes or other common manure, 30 bushels per acre is
said to be enough. When coarse, and applied in the same manner as other
manures, it has been found to remain upwards of seven years in the ground,
the productiveness of which it has increased during the whole time.

=BONE'-GLUE.= See GELATIN.

=BONE'-GREASE.= From refuse bones, bruised, boiled in water, and the broth
skimmed when cold. _Prod._ 1/8th to 1/4th of the weight of the dry bones.
(Proust.) Used for making soap and candles. See CHARCOAL, ANIMAL.

=BONE'-PHOSPHATE.= See TRIBASIC PHOSPHATE OF LIME.

=BONE'-SHAVINGS.= _Syn._ BONE'-DUST (Turners'), BONE-TURNINGS. This, by
boiling with water, yields a beautiful jelly, which is nearly equal to
that produced from hartshorn and ivory shavings, for which it is very
frequently sold. Used to make jellies and blancmanges, to stiffen straw
bonnets, &c.

=BONE-SPAVIN.= A bony enlargement on the antero-internal parts of the hock
in horses. In recent cases it is best to apply cold applications, but in
protracted and chronic cases, hot fomentations will be found best. In case
of these failing, recourse should be had to blistering or firing, or if
need be to a seton.

=BOOK'BINDING= (-b[=i]nd-). Although a full description of the various
operations of this well-known art, or handicraft, does not properly fall
within the province of this work, a brief notice of them will probably, in
many cases, prove useful to the amateur and the emigrant:--

The process of binding books is divided into several distinct operations,
which, in large establishments, are usually performed by different
persons; such a method being found to produce greater expedition, and
better work, than when the whole is done by one person.

The sheets received from the hands of the printer are--

1. _Folded_, which is done correctly by observing the 'marks' or
'signatures' at the bottom of the pages. As the sheets are folded they are
laid upon each other in proper order, and are ready to undergo--

2. The operation of beating. This is performed by either laying them upon
a large stone and striking them with a heavy smoothed-faced hammer, or by
passing them through a rolling-press. The former method is usually adopted
in the small way, and the latter on the large scale.

[Illustration]

3. The sheets are next fastened to bands, which is done by taking them up
one by one, and sewing them to pieces of cord, stretched in a little frame
screwed or fastened to the counter or table, called the sewing press. (See
_engr._) The number of bands used is generally 6 for a folio, 5 for a
quarto, and so on proportionally, less than 4 being seldom employed even
for small sizes. The ends of the cords being cut off to within about 2
inches of the back, the sheets are ready for--

4. _Glueing._ The back being knocked into shape with a hammer, and the
sheets placed in the cutting-press, which is then slightly screwed up,
melted glue is thinly and evenly applied. After a short time, to permit it
to become sufficiently set and hard, the book is removed from the press,
and the back properly adjusted with a hammer, when it is again put into
the cutting-press, where it is screwed up very tight, and is then ready
for--

5. _Cutting._ The instrument employed for this purpose is of a peculiar
shape, and called a plough or plough-knife, which consists of a stout flat
knife, double-edged at the 'cutting point,' firmly set in a kind of frame,
in which it may be adjusted by screws.

6. _Affixing the boards._ The bands are now scraped out fine at the ends,
and fastened to the pasteboard intended to form the covers, which is then
properly adjusted, and further shaped, if necessary, with a large pair of
shears. The edges now undergo the operation of--

7. _Sprinkling_, _gilding_, or other adornment. The first is performed
with a stiff brush made of hog's bristles, dipped in the colour; the brush
being held in the one hand, and the hairs moved with the other, so as to
scatter the colour in minute drops equally over the surface.

8. The external covering of leather, fancy cloth, or paper, is now
applied, having been previously soaked in paste, to make it properly
adhere. One or more of the blank leaves of the book are next pasted
against the inside of the cover, to screen the ends that are turned over
when the book is finished; or for choice work, is handed to a 'finisher'
for--

9. _Lettering_, _gilding_, &c. Ordinary gold-leaf is applied by means of
white of egg, the pattern being given by pressure with heated brass tools,
having the design or letters on their surfaces. The whole is then glazed
over with white of egg and polished.

10. _Burnishing book edges._ This is performed with a wolf's or dog's
tooth, or a steel burnisher. Place the books in a screw press, with boards
on each side of them, and other boards distributed between each volume.
First rub the edges well with the tooth to give them a lustre. After
sprinkling, or staining, or when the edges have become dry, burnish the
front; then turning the press, burnish the edges at the top and bottom of
the volume. Burnish the gilt edges in the same manner, after having
applied the gold; but observe in gilding to put the gold first upon the
front, and allow it to dry; and on no account commence the burnishing
until the gold is quite dry.

The succession of the above operations sometimes slightly varies with the
workmen, and with the nature of the binding. The examination of a bound
book during their perusal will, however, render the whole quite familiar
to the reader.

There are several varieties of binding, of which only the following
deserve notice here:--

BOARDS. A book rather loosely done up, without cutting the edges, and
covered with coloured paper or cloth, is said to be in 'boards.'

CLOTH, CLOTH-BINDING. This is the style of binding in which the majority
of works are now issued. It admits of great neatness and even beauty, is
cheap, and when well executed is very durable.--The prepared cloth
(hard-glazed or varnished calico), cut by a pattern to the proper size, is
passed rapidly between the engraved cylinders of a rolling-press, by which
the design is given to it. Paste is now applied to each piece of cloth,
which is then placed over the volume previously prepared to receive it. In
many cases the covers are prepared separately before being embossed, and
are afterwards fastened in the finished state to the book by means of a
piece of canvas or calico previously affixed to its back for the purpose,
when all that is required is to paste the ends of it to the inside of the
boards, with the last blank leaf over it. Books in cloth are seldom cut at
the edges, unless they are otherwise highly finished.

HALF-BINDING. Books forwarded in boards, and finished with leather backs
and corners, are said to be 'half-bound.'

LEATHER-BINDING. A book is only said to be 'bound,' or 'fully-bound,' when
both its backs and sides are wholly covered with one piece of
leather.--The leather is wetted by immersion in water, wrung or squeezed,
stretched on a smooth board, cut to the proper size, pared thin on the
edges, and covered with paste. It is then applied to the book (previously
forwarded in boards, and cut), drawn tightly over it, turned down on the
inside, rubbed smooth with a folding-stick, and otherwise adjusted; after
which it is placed in some suitable situation, at a distance from a fire,
to dry.

Rough calf requires to be damped on the grain side with a sponge and water
before pasting and covering.

Russia-leather is well soaked in water for an hour, taken out, beaten, and
rubbed; after which the paste is well worked into the flesh side before
covering.

Morocco is first 'grained' by rubbing it on a board, with the grain side
inside, and, after being pasted, left to soak for about a quarter of an
hour; after which it is drawn on with a piece of woollen cloth, to
preserve the grain.

Roan is either soaked in water, or left to soak when pasted.

SCHOOL-BINDING. Originally applied to school-books strongly sewn and 'done
up' in sheep-skin, which was either left of a plain brown, or sprinkled or
marbled with copperas water. Similar works of a cheaper class are now
often 'done up' in canvas, brown-holland, and even coarse and strong
coloured glazed calico.

_Concluding Remarks._ Numerous patents for improvements in binding books,
several of which possess very great merit and usefulness, have been
obtained during the last 30 years. Among these, one known as 'Hancock's
Patent Binding,' from its extreme novelty, simplicity, durability, and
inexpensiveness, deserves a passing notice here. By Mr Wm. Hancock's
method the sheets are folded in double leaves, and by being properly
placed together and adjusted (by setting them vertically, with the edges
forming the back of the book downwards, in a concave mould so formed that
whilst giving shape it may leave the whole breadth, and nearly the whole
length exposed), and firmly secured by a few turns of packthread, the book
is subjected to the action of a press, and a strong and quick-drying
solution of india rubber is smeared over the back with the finger, when
the whole is left for 3 or 4 hours, or longer, to dry. The operation is
repeated as often as necessary, after which fillets of cloth are cemented
on with the same varnish, and the book is ready to have the boards
attached. The sheets of books that cannot be folded in 'double leaves' may
be strongly stitched through, separately, before adjusting them in the
mould. In this way several of the usual operations of binding are
dispensed with. We most willingly bear testimony to the strength and
durability of this method, as well as to the great convenience it affords
in allowing the books to open perfectly flat upon a table, or to be
distorted in any possible manner, without injury to their backs. It is,
undoubtedly, the best way of binding books for travellers. The Editor of
the last edition of this work once had a large trunk of books, among which
was a massive volume bound on Hancock's plan. All the rest were nearly
torn to pieces by a few months' journey, but this one remained uninjured
even after five years, during which time it accompanied him in his
travels, extending, collectively, to upwards of 23,000 miles. See GILDING,
MARBLING, SPRINKLES, STAINS, &c.

=BOONEKAMP OF MAAGBITTER.= Dried orange berries, 100 grammes; bitter
orange peel, 30 grammes; gentian root, 60 grammes; cascarilla bark, 30
grammes; turmeric, 15 grammes; cinnamon, 25 grammes; cloves, 15 grammes;
rhubarb, 7-1/2 grammes; 90 per cent. spirit, 750 grammes: water, 1650
grammes; star-anise oil, 40 drops; sugar, 250 grammes; digested,
expressed, and filtered. (Hager.)

=BOOTS and SHOES.= The cleaning of boots and shoes forms no unimportant
part of the domestic duties of a large establishment; as on it being
properly performed depend both their appearance and durability. A votary
of St Crispin, in whom we place considerable reliance, assures us that to
effect this object in the best style, all that is necessary is to employ
very little blacking (merely enough to moisten the surface of the
leather), and to brush it off whilst still damp. Never make the surface
wet, nor allow the blacking to dry before applying the polishing brush.
For this purpose a portion only of the boot or shoe should be attended to
at a time. The dirt is, of course, to be carefully brushed off before
applying the blacking. When it is desired to restore the shape of a boot
or shoe, as well as to clean it, boot trees may be used. Of the brushes,
we are told that there should be at least three--one (dirt brush) with
bristles stiff, but not wiry nor scratchy, to remove mud and dirt; another
(blacking-brush), with fine, flexible hair, and plenty of it, for applying
the blacking; and a third (polishing-brush), covered with long, fine,
springy, and slightly stiff hair, for giving the polish. The employment of
inferior or worn-out brushes is said to be false economy, and proves
particularly destructive to the lighter classes of leather.

The occasional use of a little oil or grease to the uppers of boots and
shoes increases their softness and durability, as well as the 'depth,' but
not the brilliancy of the polish, from common blacking. For this purpose
some good tallow or 'dubbing' may be used; the absorption being aided by a
very gentle heat. The soles or bottoms of new boots and shoes may be
thoroughly saturated with similar substances, by which means their
durability will be fully doubled. The common practice among the shoemakers
is to moisten the surface of the leather with a wet sponge before applying
the oil or grease; by which (they say) its pores are opened and its
absorbent powers increased.

_Varnish for Boots and Shoes._--1. Boil together in a pipkin one pint of
linseed oil; 1/2 _lb._ of mutton suet, the same quantity of beeswax, and a
small piece of resin; and when the mixture becomes milk-warm, apply it
with a hair brush. After two applications the articles will become
waterproof. Great caution must be exercised in melting the above
ingredients, lest the mixture boils over, and so give rise to a
conflagration.

2. Common tar may be made warm and brushed over the soles of boots or
shoes. These latter are then put near the fire so that the tar may be
absorbed. When the absorption has taken place, a second or third
application may be given with advantage. This application is not suitable
for the upper leathers.

3. India-rubber varnish will be found very useful for anointing the upper
leather of boots and shoes; but the lower parts, which are exposed to the
wear and tear caused by friction with the ground, are but little benefited
by its application.

Patent-leather boots and shoes are best cleaned with a little sweet oil or
milk (preferably the first), the dirt having been previously removed in
the usual way.

India-rubber goloshes and overshoes may be cleaned with a sponge or brush,
and water, care being taken not to wet the linings. The same applies to
gutta percha. See BLACKING, LEATHER, WATERPROOFING, &c.

The reasons why boots and shoes so commonly cause corns, and fatigue, and
give pain in wear, are explained in our article on the FEET (which _see_).

Paramount in importance to the appearance of boots or shoes on the wearer
is the desideratum, not only of having them so made as to ensure personal
comfort in walking, but additionally to have them so constructed as to
protect the feet from wet during damp and rainy weather. The evils arising
from getting the feet damp cannot be overstated; amongst them are to be
included--cold, cough, bronchitis, inflammation of the lungs, and
rheumatism. In those inheriting a constitutional consumptive taint, a cold
caught from wearing damp or leaky boots has very frequently been known to
have precipitated the disease, that has ended in more or less speedy
death. Hence arises not only the duty of changing damp boots or shoes as
soon as ever the opportunity offers, but the wisdom of adopting the
preventive precaution of wearing them of such stout construction as to be
impervious to water during rainy weather. If the dangers arising from a
neglect of this advice are visited with such serious consequences upon
adults and grown persons, they affect infants and children with even far
greater intensity, because of the much more tender and sensitive
organisation of the latter. It therefore behoves every mother not only to
see that her children are shod with good thick boots or shoes, but to take
especial care that whenever these are damp they are removed at once.

Mr Chavasse, in his excellent work, 'Counsel to a Mother,' recommends
"boots for walking out of doors and shoes for the house." He adds, "that
the constant wearing of boots in the house is weakening to the ankles, as
weakening as tight lacing is to the waist; indeed it acts much in the same
way, namely, by wasting away, by pressure, the ligaments of the ankles, as
stays waste away the muscles of the waist." In support of his argument he
quotes Dr Humphrey, who says, "The notion is in both instances fortified
by the fact that those persons who have been accustomed to the pressure
either upon the ankle or upon the waist, feel a want of it when it is
removed, and are uncomfortable without it. They forget, or are
unconscious, that the feeling of the want has been engendered by the
appliance, and that had they never resorted to the latter, they would
never have experienced the former. The deduction to be drawn from Dr
Hutchinson's opinion is that no more fertile source of weak ankles exists
than that of wearing laced boots during childhood. Boots with elastic
sides, as exerting much more equal pressure, and allowing full scope for
the ankles to play, are far preferable to tightly laced-up boots.

=BOOT-POW'DER.= French chalk reduced to powder by scraping or grating.
Used to facilitate the 'getting on' of new or tight boots, a little of it
being rubbed on the insides of the backs, heels, and insteps.

=BOOT-TOP LIQ'UID.= _Syn._ BOOT'-TOP COMPOSI''TION. There are numerous
articles of this class extant, but, with few exceptions, they are most
unchemical mixtures, not infrequently containing ingredients which are
either unnecessary, or opposed to the action of the rest. The following
are examples:--

_Prep._ _a._ WHITE-TOP:--1. Oxalic acid and white vitriol, of each 1
_oz._; water, 1-1/2 pint; dissolve. It is applied with a sponge, the
leather having been previously washed with water; after a short time it is
washed off with water, when the boot-tops are either dried in a current of
air or by a gentle heat; they are lastly either polished with a brush, so
as to appear like new leather, or they are left rough, as the case may
require.

2. Sour milk, 1 quart; butter of antimony, cream of tartar, tartaric acid,
and burnt alum, of each 2 oz.; mix.

3. Sour milk (skimmed), 3 pints; cream of tartar, 2 _oz._; alum and oxalic
acid, of each 1 _oz._

4. Alum, cream of tartar, magnesia, and oxalic acid, of each 1 _oz._; salt
of sorrel and sugar lead, of each 1/4 _oz._; water, 1 quart. The preceding
are for white tops.

_b._ BROWN-TOP:--Alum, annatto, and oxalic acid, of each 1 _oz._;
isinglass and sugar of lead, of each 1/2 _oz._; salt of sorrel, 1/4 _oz._;
water, 1 quart; boil for 10 minutes.

_c._ Saffron, 15 grains; boiling water, 2 _oz._; infuse and strain. Add
tincture of rhubarb 1-1/2 _oz._; concentrated infusion of rhubarb, to make
up to 4 _oz._

=BORACIC ACID= (-r[)a]s'-). H_{3}BO_{3}. _Syn._ BORIC ACID, SEDATIVE
SALT[dagger], S. S. OF VIT'RIOL[dagger]; ACIDUM BORACICUM (-r[)a]s'-), L.;
ACIDE BORACIQUE, A. BORIQUE, Fr.; BORAXSAeURE, &c., Ger. The pure acid is
obtained from common borax. That of commerce is extracted from the boracic
acid lagoons of Tuscany.

_Prep._ 1. Borax, 1 part; boiling water, 4 parts; dissolve, and add
sulphuric acid until the solution acquires a distinctly acid reaction, for
which purpose about 1/2 the weight of the borax will be required. As the
solution cools, crystals of BORACIC ACID will be deposited. These may be
purified by placing them on a filter, and washing them with a little very
cold water, followed by re-solution, in boiling water, and
recrystallisation. Nearly pure.

2. As the last, but substituting hydrochloric acid for the sulphuric acid,
there ordered. Very nearly pure.

3. By exposing the product of the first crystallisation of either of the
preceding formulae to heat in a platinum crucible, and redissolving and
recrystallising the residuum. Chemically pure. Used in analysis.

_Prop., &c._ Odourless; bitter-tasted; dissolves in 25 times its weight of
cold water, and in 3 times its weight of boiling water; very soluble in
alcohol, which then burns with a bright green flame; reddens litmus;
browns turmeric-paper (properties characteristic of this substance); when
strongly heated it forms a brittle glass (VITRIFIED BORACIC ACID) on
cooling. The crystallised acid contains 3 atoms, or 43.5% of water. Its
salts are called BO''RATES.

_Uses._ Boracic acid was once administered internally, in large doses, as
an anodyne, antispasmodic, and sedative, but is now scarcely ever employed
as a medicine. The crude acid is used in the manufacture of borax; the
pure acid in the manufacture of certain chemicals.

Boracic acid is extensively used in Sweden and other countries for the
preservation of milk. Meat which has been soaked in a solution of the acid
for a few seconds, and milk to which a small quantity has been added, will
keep much longer than they would otherwise do. In Sweden alone boracic
acid to the amount of 75,000_l._ was consumed in one year. It is said to
be a perfectly harmless antiseptic.

=BORACIC ANHYDRIDE.= See BORIC ANHYDRIDE.

=BORATE.= [Eng., Fr.] _Syn._ BO''RAS, L.; BORAXSAeURE SALZE, Ger. A salt in
which the hydrogen of boracic acid is replaced by a basic radical. The
borates may be formed by either digesting the hydrate of the base in a
solution of the acid, with the assistance of heat, or from a solution of
borax and a soluble salt of the base, by double decomposition. They are
all decomposed by the stronger acids.

_Tests._ The borates may be tested by digesting them in a slight excess of
oil of vitriol, evaporating the resulting solution to dryness, powdering
the residuum, and dissolving it in alcohol; the resulting solution
possesses the property of burning with a green flame if the sample
examined was a borate, or contained a notable quantity of one. See BORACIC
ACID.

=BORAX.= [Eng., Fr.; Ger., L., B. P.] 2NaBO_{2}.B_{2}O_{3}. _Syn._
BIBO''RATE OF SO'DA, BO''RATE OF S*, SUBBO''RATE OF S.[dagger], GOLD
SOLDER[dagger]*, REFINED' TINC'AL[dagger]*; SO'DAE BIBO''RAS, S. BO''RAS,
L.; CHRYSOCOLLE, &c., Fr.; BORAXSAURES NATRON, &c., Ger. COMmercial
biborate of soda. Borax is obtained either by purifying native borate of
soda (TINC'AL, TINC'AR), or by saturating crude boracic acid with the
alkali. It is never prepared on the small scale unless for chemical
analysis.

_Prop._ Crystals, six-sided prisms, which contain 10 equiv. of water, and
effloresce in dry air; soluble in 20 parts of cold, and in 6 parts of
boiling water; solution has an alkaline reaction on test-paper; by heat it
loses its water of crystallisation, and at a higher temperature fuses to a
glass-like substance (see _below_).

_Pur._ This may be ascertained by determining the quantity of sulphuric
acid required to neutralise a given weight of the sample under
examination, as indicated by litmus paper. Common salt and alum are
frequently mixed with borax to lower the value. The first may be detected
by a solution in hot water giving a curdy-white precipitate with nitrate
of silver, soluble in ammonia; the last, by water of ammonia, giving a
bulky-white pulverulent precipitate. The former must be distinguished from
the white pulverulent precipitate of borate of silver, which is thrown
down from pure borax.

_Uses, &c._ Borax is extensively employed as a flux for metals, for
soldering, and in medicine. Internally it is diuretic, sedative,
emmenagogue, and refrigerant, in doses of 15 to 40 gr.; externally, made
into a gargle for sore throat, and in powder as a detergent in aphthae, and
ulcerations of the month. Dissolved in rose-water, it is used as a
cosmetic; and mixed with about 8 times its weight of lard, forms a useful
ointment in piles and sore nipples.

The 'Comptes Rendus' (lxxx, 473) contains the results of some experiments
made by M. Schnetzler, with the view of testing the antifermentative and
anti-putrefactive properties of borax.

When the leaves of the _Elodea Canadensis_ were plunged into a
concentrated solution of borax, the living matter of the cell was killed,
and the same result followed with the fresh leaves and spores of the
_Vaucheria clavata_, the spores of the grape fungus (_Oidium sacchari_),
and of yeast moulds, &c. Infusoria, rotifera, and _entomostraca_, placed
in water containing borax, quickly ceased to move and then died. The larvae
of frogs placed in a solution of borax were killed in less than an hour
after immersion. M. Schnetzler thinks the deduction to be drawn from these
facts is that borax ought to act antagonistically to fermentation, if this
latter be a chemical phenomenon accomplished under the influence of the
life of the yeast. To test the correctness of this hypothesis experiments
were undertaken with a view of determining the action of borax upon
fermentable matters.

Ripe grapes and currants after being kept two years in a concentrated
solution of borax, in a closed vessel, presented no trace of fermentation,
although, however well preserved, they were not eatable. As a counter test
grapes were placed in a well-closed vessel filled with ordinary water,
when after a time, according to the temperature, fermentation took place,
with evolution of carbonic acid. Thirty cubic centimetres of fresh milk
were placed in a test tube with one gram of borax. The cream quickly
formed a rather thick layer on the upper portion. Although the test tube
was closed by a cork a mould was formed upon the cream, but the remainder
of the liquid underwent no acid fermentation, and retained during several
months the appearance of very clear creamed milk, and although afterwards
under the influence of summer heat the liquid became perfectly limpid, and
deposited the casein as a soft white matter, neither the deposit nor the
liquid had an acid taste, and after three months they still had the odour
of fresh milk. Fresh milk put into a well-closed tube without borax
underwent fermentation in two or three days. A piece of sheep's brain
treated with powdered borax, after eight days, although it evolved
sulphuretted hydrogen, gave no indications of putrefaction, and after
retaining a soft consistence during some months, became hard and almost
horny without any disagreeable smell.

A pound of beef was placed in a concentrated solution of borax, in a tin
case not hermetically sealed.

The liquid into which the colouring matter of the blood, and some of the
soluble nitrogenous substances of the meat had diffused, was three times
removed during a year and a half, and the meat washed with cold water; but
at the end of the above time it had not the least odour of putrefaction.
It was of a yellowish colour, but soft and tender as fresh meat. Removed
from the borax solution the meat remained in the same state in the air.
Beef, veal and portions of sheeps' brains were placed in a vessel which
was filled with solution of borax and hermetically sealed. The liquid soon
became clear red, and this colour remained during several months without
alteration. The meat presented not the least disagreeable smell as long
as excess of air was prevented. Meat placed in water in a flask
hermetically sealed became rotten in a few days.

The peculiar odour of the meat preserved in borax in contact with air the
author considers to be due to the decomposition of matters which result
from the metamorphosis of substances that constitute the muscular and
intermuscular fibre. Although probably the use of borax will not be
applicable to the preservation of meat for culinary purposes, the author
considers that it may be economically substituted for alcohol in the
preservation of anatomical specimens. Moreover, its power of suspending
life in the lower organisms would seem to indicate its probable
utilisation in the treatment of wounds, &c.

In support of the above views as to the antiseptic properties of borax, M.
Schnetzler refers to a letter from an English traveller in California, who
there observed that in a soil containing borax the carcass of a horse had,
for four months, remained without decomposition, the flesh continuing
perfectly fresh, and the eye retaining its clearness and brightness. For
most of the proposed applications of salicylic acid to the preservation of
milk, and the products derived from it, it is affirmed that borax is
equally efficacious, and has the advantage of being cheaper and more
convenient.

=Borax, Glass of.= Borax dried at a gentle heat, and then melted by
increasing the heat until it forms a vitreous mass on being cooled. Used
in soldering, and as a flux, particularly in blowpipe experiments.

=BO''RIC ACID.= See BORACIC ACID.

=BORIC ANHYDRIDE.= B_{2}O_{3}. _Syn._ ANHYDROUS BORACIC ACID, BORACIC
ANHYDRIDE, BORIC OXIDE. The only known oxide of boron. It can be produced
by burning boron in oxygen, in the air, or in nitrous oxide, but is most
easily and economically prepared by strongly heating boracic acid so as to
deprive it of water. It is a brittle vitreous solid, not volatilised by
heat except in the presence of water. Dissolves in water, forming boracic
acid. Its alcoholic solution burns with a green flame, like that of
boracic acid.

=BO'RON.= B. The base of boracic acid. It was discovered by Homberg in
1702; but, from attracting little notice, was soon forgotten. It was
rediscovered, almost simultaneously, by Sir H. Davy and by Gay-Lussac and
Thenard, in 1807-8.

_Prep._ Boron is prepared by a process similar to that employed to obtain
silicium:--Potassium and perfectly dry boracic acid, or, preferably,
boro-fluoride of potassium, intimately mixed together, are placed in a
glass adopter-tube, and submitted to a low red heat. When cold, the loose
cork that fastened its mouth is removed, and hot water poured in, in
successive portions, until the whole matter is detached and all its
soluble portion dissolved; the liquid is next allowed to settle, and the
precipitate washed first with a solution of sal-ammoniac, and afterwards
with alcohol; the residuum (boron) is lastly dried in a capsule, and put
into a well-stoppered phial.

_Prop., &c._ A solid, tasteless, and inodorous powder, of a dark
greyish-brown colour. With sulphur it unites at high temperatures, forming
sulphurets (sulphides of boron); and when placed in chlorine gas it
spontaneously inflames, and a gaseous chloride of boron is formed. The
compounds of boron with basic radicals are termed BORIDES.

_Obs._ Among the most remarkable of the recent discoveries in chemistry
are those of MM. Wohler and Deville, relative to silica and boron. Each of
these substances is now proved to exist in three very different states,
analogous to the three known states of carbon, namely, charcoal, graphite,
and diamond. The last of these states is, of course, the most interesting.
Crystallised boron possesses a hardness, brightness, and refractive power
comparable to those of the diamond; it burns in chlorine, without residue,
and with circumstances resembling those of the combustion of diamond in
oxygen; it is not acted on by any of the acids, and appears to be the
least alterable of all the simple bodies. Its powder is already used in
the arts, instead of diamond-dust; and it seems not improbable that, when
obtained by the chemist in crystals of a larger size, it may rival even
the diamond as a gem.

Some late experiments by Wohler and Deville seem to have established the
fact, that the so-called "graphitoidal" boron is really a boride of
aluminium. Its formation on fusing aluminium with amorphous boron or boric
oxide appears to take place more particularly when the heat applied is
neither very strong nor long continued.

=Boron, Terflu'oride of.= See FLUOBORIC ACID.

=BOTHRIOCEPHALUS CORDATUS.= Leuckart was the first to describe this
creature, which is a parasitic worm infesting the human intestines. It is,
however, much more commonly met with in dogs than in man. The annexed
engraving depicts--_b_, the head (back view), magnified five diameters;
_b'_, upper part of body and head, magnified two diameters; _a_ is a
portion of the worm, natural size. See BOTHRIOCEPHALUS LATUS.

[Illustration]

=BOTHRIOCEPHALUS LATUS.= A parasitic worm infesting the human intestines.
Although classed with the tapeworms, it differs essentially from _taenia_.
The head is of an elongated form, compressed with an anterior obtuse
prominence into which the mouth opens.

[Illustration]

The animal has the power of elongating and contracting the neck, so that
it appears sometimes short, sometimes long. The joints or segments
commence about three inches from the head; the anterior ones are nearly
square, but the remainder are much elongated transversely. Each segment
contains on its flat surface two orifices, the anterior connected with a
male, the posterior with a female organ of generation. The parasite is of
a brown colour, and from six to twenty feet in length.

Those who are affected by this worm never pass the single segments from
the bowels, but void them in chains of many links. The ova are also
frequently to be met with in the faeces; they are of an ovoid shape; the
capsule is perfectly translucent, and the yolk is distinguishable. The
yolk undergoes segmentation, and ultimately develops an embryo with six
hooks at the anterior extremity, cased in a mantle studded with vibratory
cilia, and the lid of the capsule then opens up; and the embryo escapes.
If they do not obtain access to the intestines of an animal within a week,
they lose their ciliated mantle and perish. Drinking-water is supposed to
be the chief if not the only medium through which the parasite gains
admissions to the intestines in man. It seems to be unknown in England,
except when imported; but is common in Russia, Sweden, Norway, Lapland,
Finland, Poland, and Switzerland.

=BOTS.= The larvae of the gad-fly. The eggs are deposited by the female fly
on the horse's shoulder and on parts of the body within reach of the
tongue, by which they are carried to the mouth and find their way to the
stomach. They usually resist all attempts to expel them. The most
promising treatment consists in rubbing down in hot water about 2 or 3
_drms._ each of aloes and assaf[oe]tida; and when the solution has cooled,
adding to it 1 _oz._ each of turpentine and ether. Repeat this dose two or
three times a week, omitting the aloes if necessary.

=BOT'TLES= (b[)o]t'lz). See GLASS, INFANCY, LACTATION, PHIALS, &c.

=BOTT'LING= (b[)o]t'l-[)i]ng.) See CORKS, MALT LIQUORS, WINE, &c.

=BOUGIE= (b[=o][=o]'-zh[=e]). [Fr.] _Syn._ CE'REUS, CERE'OLUS,[227]
CANDE'LA PROBATO''RIA*, L. In _surgery_, a long slender instrument,
originally of wax,[228] introduced into the urethra, [oe]sophagus, or
rectum, in stricture and other diseases of those organs.

[Footnote 227: Properly, a 'little bougie.']

[Footnote 228: Hence the name.]

_Prep._ 1. (Prof. Pickel's.) Amber (melted), 1 part; boiled oil, 3 parts;
mix, cool a little, and further add of oil of turpentine, 1 part; spread
the mixture, at 3 successive intervals, upon loose spun-silk cord or web;
dry in a heat of 150 deg. Fahr., and repeat the process until the instrument
has acquired the proper size; lastly, polish it, first with pumice-stone,
and afterwards with tripoli and oil. This is the original receipt of the
once celebrated French professor Pickel, and is still generally used,
slightly modified, on the Continent. At the present time, in Paris, a
little caoutchouc, equal to about 1/20th of the weight of the oil
employed, is generally added. For the best ELAS'TIC BOUGIES the process
usually occupies from 6 to 8 weeks, to allow full time for the drying and
hardening of the composition. When the bougie is required to be hollow, a
piece of polished metallic wire is introduced into the axis of the silk;
or tin-foil is rolled round the wire and the composition applied as
before. When dry and hard the wire is withdrawn.

2. (Hunter's.) Yellow wax, 2 parts; red lead, 3 parts; olive oil, 6 parts;
slowly boiled together until combination takes place; strips of soft linen
(rather wider at the one end than the other) are then dipped into the
composition, rolled up firmly, and finished off on a polished slab.

3. (Piderit's.) Olive oil, 1 part; wax, 6 parts; as before.

4. (Bell's.) Lead-plaster, 11 parts; yellow wax, 4 parts; olive oil, 1
part.

5. (St. B. Hosp.) Wax, 12 parts; Chio turpentine, 4 parts; red sulphide of
mercury, 1 part.

6. CAOU'TCHOUC BOUGIES:--In France, where ether is comparatively
inexpensive, these are made by applying an ethereal solution of india
rubber to the silk or foil prepared as before. In England, naphtha was,
until recently, employed instead of 'ether,' but it furnishes a very
inferior product. Now bisulphuret of carbon is generally used as the
solvent. Sometimes strips of india rubber, previously boiled in water, or
that have had their edges softened by moistening them with a little ether,
or bisulphuret of carbon, are wound round the 'wire or foil,' and kept in
their place by a piece of tape applied over them. They are afterwards
carefully smoothed off and polished.

7. GUTTA-PER'CHA BOUGIES:--These are formed of gutta percha (previously
softened by immersion in boiling water), by rolling it between plates of
polished glass or marble. When skilfully prepared from the best
(uncoloured) gutta percha, they are admirable instruments. A bougie of
this description, of moderate size, and slightly oiled, or wetted with
glycerin or gum-water, may be passed through the whole length of the
urethra of a healthy person without causing the slightest pain.
Gutta-percha catheters (hollow bougies) are still more flexible and easily
introduced, and may remain in the urethra for a long time without causing
irritation; an important advantage in such matters. The reader cannot,
however, be too careful to avoid those made of coloured gutta percha,
which, unfortunately, rapidly become very brittle by age. Those originally
manufactured in this material were coloured black, and were constantly
breaking whilst in use--a disaster from which several serious and even
fatal cases ensued. There is no such danger to be dreaded from those made
of the uncoloured material when of good quality.

=BOULES DE NANCY.= See BALLS (Martial).

=BOUILLI.= [Fr.] A name frequently applied by cooks to dishes of boiled or
stewed meat, as a refinement on its plain English synonymes. Thus, beef
bouilli, beef in bouilli, &c., mean stewed or boiled beef, &c. As,
however, the name is a la francais, so must be the 'accompaniments,' which
generally consist of herbs and vegetable seasoning in greater quantity and
variety than is usually deemed essential for an humble dish of English
boiled or stewed meat.

=BOUILLON= (b[=o][=o]l'-yon_g_). [Fr.] In _cookery_, broth, soup.

=BOUQUET'= (b[=o][=o]-k[=a]'). [Fr.] A nosegay. In _perfumery_, highly
scented spirits (esprits) adapted for the handkerchief are commonly called
bouquets. The following are examples:--

=Bouquet d'Amour.= _Prep._ From esprits de rose, jasmin, violette, and
cassie (flowers of _acacia farnesiana_), of each 2 parts; essences of musk
and ambergris, of each 1 part; mix, and filter.

=Bouquet de la Reine.= _Prep._ 1. Essence of bergamot, 1 dr.; English oil
of lavender, 25 drops; oil of cloves, aromatic vinegar, and essence of
musk, of each 10 drops; alcohol, 1 fl. oz.; mix.

2. Oils of bergamot and lavender, of each 30 drops; neroli, 15 drops; oils
of verbena and cloves, of each 5 drops; essences of musk, ambergris, and
jasmin, of each 1/2 dr.; rectified spirit of wine (strongest, scentless),
2 fl. oz.; mix. A much-esteemed perfume.

=BRA'GRAS.= Tar, black resin, and the dregs of strained resin, melted
together.

=BRAIN= (br[=a]ne). _Syn._ BRAINS[double-dagger]; CER'EBRUM, L.; CERVEAU,
Fr.; GEHIRN, HIRN, Ger. The soft whitish mass of nerve-matter contained in
the skulls of animals, and, in man, supposed to be the seat of the soul
and the mind.

=Brains.= (In _cookery_.) There appears to be scarcely anything which is
at all eatable that the ingenuity and taste of the modern cook does not
appropriate to his purposes, and clothe with delectability, or transform
into something execrable. We observe that our chef de cuisine--no
unimportant personage--has taxed every viscera and brought together every
novelty and dainty to humour and excite the appetite. Animals which were
guiltless of brains whilst living, are found by him to possess excellent
ones when dead, from which he prepares a variety of miniature dishes which
are truly novel and inviting. Let frugal housewives for the future
carefully value their brains, and apply them to useful purposes in a
double sense. When cleaned, washed, blanched, and flavoured with the
necessary seasoning, they may be formed into a variety of hors-d'[oe]uvres
creditable to any table. Mrs Rundell tells us that "beat up with a little
white pepper and salt, a sage-leaf or two (scalded and finely chopped),
and the yelk of an egg, and fried, they make excellent cakes, fritters,
&c."

=BRAMAELIXIR--GENUINE ASIATIC STOMACH BITTER= (Ch. Rama Ayen, Hamburg).
Cardamoms, cinnamon, cloves, of each 15 grammes; galangal, ginger,
zedoary, pepper, of each 30 grammes; wormwood oil, 15 drops; 90 per cent.
spirit, 830 grammes; water, 330 grammes; digest and filter. (Hager.)

=BRAN.= _Syn._ FUR'FUR, L.; BRAN, SON, Fr.; KLEIE, Ger. The inner husk or
proper coat of the cereal grains, sifted from the flour; appr., that of
wheat. _Comp._ 100 parts of bran contain albuminoid bodies, 13.80; oil,
5.56; starch, fibre, &c., 61.67; ash, 6.11; water, 12.85.

_Uses, &c._ The bran of wheat, diffused through hot water, is largely
employed by the calico-printers to remove the colouring matter from those
parts of their goods which are not mordanted. A handful mixed with a pail
of warm water forms an excellent emollient foot-bath. Infused in hot water
(bran-tea), and sweetened, it forms a popular demulcent, much used in
coughs and hoarseness, and which, taken in quantity, proves gently
laxative. It also forms an excellent manure, and, from containing the
ammonio-magnesian phosphate, is especially adapted as a 'dressing' for
potatoes. It is frequently mixed with flour, and made into bread
(bran-bread), which is eaten by the poorer orders for economy, and by the
higher classes because it is recommended by the faculty as being more
wholesome than white wheaten-bread.

=Bran Mash.= Put half a peck of bran or pollard into a bucket and pour on
to it enough scalding water to wet it thoroughly; stir well with a stick
or work with the hands; and let it stand, covered up, till new-milk warm.
If a horse is not in work on Sunday, it is a good custom to give it on
Saturday evening a bran mash in lieu of a feed of corn. Bran mash is
cooling and slightly laxative. The bran should always be freshly ground.
When intended to be nutritive, oats should be scalded with the bran.

=BRANDISH'S ALKALINE= (Liqueur de potasse des Anglais, Solutio Alkalina
Anglica), used in England to add to meat and vegetables about to be
cooked, to help in "drawing" tea and coffee, and as a medicine to
neutralise acidity of the stomach and lubricate the digestive passages
[die Verdanungswege schluepfriger zu machen]. Preparation:--Crude carbonate
of potash 3 parts, wood ashes 1 part, quicklime 1 part, warm water 40
parts. Add to the water the lime, carbonate, and ashes, digest one day,
and filter. (Hager.)

=BRANDRETH'S PILLS=, much used as a purging pill in North America, consist
of gamboge, podophyllin, the inspissated juice of pokeberries, saffron
adulterated with turmeric, powdered cloves, and peppermint oil. Gamboge is
stated to be present in Brandreth's pills on the authority of two American
druggists and one dealer. The action of the pills does not, however,
correspond with that ingredient, for in two persons five pills produced no
loose stools. (Hager.)

=BRAN'DY.= _Syn._ SPIR'ITUS GAL'LICUS, S. VI'NI GAL'LICI (-s[=i]; B. P.),
A'QUA VI'TAE[dagger]*, L.; EAU-DE-VIE, Fr.; BRANNTWEIN, COGNAC, Ger.;
BRAN'DYWINE[dagger]. A well-known spirituous liquor obtained by the
distillation of the wine of grapes. The name is also often, though
improperly, given to the spirit distilled from other liquors, and
particularly from the fermented juice of fruits; but in this case usually
with some qualifying epithet.

When first distilled, brandy, like other spirituous liquors, is colourless
(WHITE BRANDY), and continues so if kept in glass or stoneware; but if
stored in new oak casks, as is usually the case, it gradually acquires a
yellowish tint from the wood (PALE BRANDY). The deep colour that this
spirit frequently possesses when it reaches the consumer is imparted to it
by the addition of a little burnt sugar (caramel). Catechu, or terra
japonica, in powder or solution, is also sometimes added to give a
roughness to the spirit. The original intention was merely to imitate the
appearance acquired by brandy from great age, when kept in wood; but in
process of time the thing has come to be overdone. The natural colour
which the spirit receives from the cask, however long it may be kept in
it, never exceeds a light amber tint, about equal to that of pale Jamaica
rum. Nothing, however, will now please the public taste but a spirit of
lively and full 'brandy-colour,' as it is called. The consequence is that
more colouring is commonly added than is compatible with a rich appearance
or a very fine flavour.

The brandies most esteemed in England are imported from France, and are
those of Cognac and Armagnac, the preference being generally given to the
former. The brandies of Rochelle and Bordeaux come next in quality; while
those obtained from Portugal, Spain, and Italy are very inferior.

The constituents of pure brandy are alcohol and water, together with small
quantities of a volatile oil, acetic acid, acetic ether, [oe]nanthic
ether, colouring matter, and tannin. It is from the presence of the two
ethers that the spirit derives its characteristic smell and flavour. The
amount of absolute alcohol in brandy varies from 45 to 55 per cent. When
first imported it is generally 1 or 2 over-proof, but its strength
decreases by age, and by the time it is taken from the bonded store for
sale, it is seldom stronger than 3 or 4 under-proof. Pure brandies of the
best quality, even when new, seldom exceed proof, and are generally a
little below it. The reason of this is that they are but slightly
rectified, as redistillation tends to injure the ethereal oils, upon which
the flavour of the brandy depends.

The quality and flavour of the brandy imported from France vary, and often
considerably, from that which is drunk at the best tables on the
Continent; this principally arises from it being prepared, or, as it is
technically termed, 'made up,' for the London market; which means lowering
it by the addition of plain spirit, colouring, &c. This is done to any
extent desired by the English purchaser, and the quantity and prices of
the substances so added are regularly set out in the invoice. The strength
at which foreign brandy is sold in England varies from proof to 33
under-proof. In large quantities, and from bond, the strength, of course,
depends much upon the age and quality of the spirit; a fine old brandy
being, perhaps, 15 or 17 u. p., while one of the last year's vintage, of a
commoner quality, may be as strong as 2 u. p., or even 1 u. p. These
matters are familiar to every experienced brandy dealer.

In France there are several varieties of brandy, which are known by names
descriptive of their qualities, source, and strengths:--

"Eau-de-vie superieure" is obtained from pale white wines by skilful
distillation, and is remarkable for its rich and delicate flavour. It
forms the finest variety of COGNAC BRANDY, both 'white' and 'pale,' of the
English drinker, being seldom artificially coloured. Its deepest tint,
though long kept in wood, never exceeds a pale amber; and hence, even when
thus coloured, it is frequently called 'white brandy' by the uninitiated.

"Eau-de-vie ordinaire," or common brandy, is distilled from inferior or
spoilt white or red wines; average sp. gr. about 0.9476 (from 22 to 27 u.
p.). It forms the 'ordinary brandy' of the taverns and hotels; and, after
being 'made up' with plain spirit to 1 or 2 u. p., a very large portion of
that which is exported.

Of each of the above varieties there are numerous degrees of qualities,
which are further increased in number by their admixture, and by the
addition to them of plain spirit.

"Eau-de-vie de marc." From the lees of sour, damaged, and inferior red
wines, the marc or cake of grapes, &c., distilled by a quick fire, to
drive over as much essential oil and flavouring matter as possible. Coarse
flavoured and inferior. Used chiefly to mix with other brandy, or to
flavour plain spirit.

"Eau-de-vie seconde." The weak spirit that passes over, after the receiver
has been changed. Very weak and inferior.

"Eau-de-vie a preuve d'Hollande." Sp. gr. .941 to .942 (18 to 20 u. p.).
The common strength at which brandy is retailed in France, and that at
which it stands the 'proof' or 'bead.'

"Eau-de-vie a preuve d'huile." Sp. gr. .9185 (about 23 deg. Baume, or 1-1/4
o. p.); pure, olive oil just sinks in it. It is the strongest brandy kept
for retail sale in France.

"Eau-de-vie forte." From common brandy distilled at a low temperature. It
answers to our spirit of wine. Sp. gr. .839 (38 deg. Baume, or 55 deg. o. p.).

"Esprit de vin" is brandy or spirit, carefully rectified to .861 (28 deg.
Baume, or 42 o. p., and upwards).

_Pur., &c._ The method of determining the strength of brandy is explained
under 'ALCOHOLOMETRY,' Of the large quantity of this liquor consumed in
England, we can assure the reader that a small fraction only escapes
adulteration. Pure French brandy is indeed an article quite unattainable
by the small consumer. The brandy of our shops and taverns is not only
systematically 'lowered' a little (with spirit of wine or British brandy)
by the wholesale dealer, but it undergoes a like process, but to a much
greater extent, at the hands of the retailer. The only method to obtain
perfectly pure brandy is either to take it direct from the bond store, or
to buy it of some known respectable party, and to pay a price that offers
no inducement to dishonesty. When this cannot be done, British brandy had
better be at once purchased, by which money will be saved, and a more
wholesome article obtained.

French brandy, as already noticed, is commonly 'lowered' with water, malt
brandy, and spirit of wine, by which its original flavour is more or less
weakened and injured. This species of adulteration is best detected by the
palate. Another, and no very uncommon fraud practised by the retailers, is
to reduce their brandy with a large quantity of water. As a natural
consequence their liquor suffers so greatly in flavour, and its deficiency
in alcohol becomes so apparent, that they soon see the necessity of either
abandoning the nefarious practice, or resorting to others of a less
harmless character to disguise it. The latter alternative is commonly
adopted. An excess of burnt sugar is immediately introduced into the
spirit, followed by sundry portions of cayenne pepper, grains of paradise,
horse-radish, acetic ether, &c., to give it a pungency and 'make-believe
strength' that "passes muster" with the petty consumer. This fraud may be
detected by gently evaporating a little of the suspected liquor in a spoon
or glass capsule, when the acrid matter, colouring, and sugar will be left
behind, and may be readily detected by their flavour, sweetness,
glutinosity, &c. A little perfectly pure brandy evaporated in a similar
manner (on a watch-glass, for instance), merely leaves a trifling
discoloration on the surface of the glass. Genuine French brandy always
reddens blue litmus paper, from containing a little acetic acid; the old
coloured varieties are also blackened by a solution of a persalt of iron.
Another test for caramel (burnt sugar) is, let a small quantity of the
brandy be well shaken with one sixth of its volume of white of egg, and
the precipitate formed allowed to deposit, or be removed by filtration;
the clear liquid ought to be colourless. Should caramel be present,
however, it will retain its colour. Sometimes brandy is contaminated with
a small quantity of lead or copper derived from the apparatus or utensils
with which it has been prepared or measured. Sugar of lead has also
sometimes been used by the ignorant dealer to clarify it. The presence of
these highly deleterious substances may be detected in the following
manner:--

1. COPPER:--_a._ A small piece of clean polished iron or steel immersed in
the suspected liquid for a short time (with agitation) becomes coated with
a film of metallic copper, when that metal is present. To facilitate the
precipitation of the metal, the sample under examination may be slightly
acidulated with a few drops of pure acetic acid. Minute traces of copper
may sometimes be detected on the surface of the iron with a lens, which
would be passed over unnoticed by the naked eye.

_b._ (Boettger.) A little of the brandy is to be agitated with a few drops
of pure olive oil. The latter will acquire a green colour if copper be
present.

2. LEAD:--_a._ Hydrosulphuric acid and sulphide of ammonium produce a
black precipitate or discoloration in brandy containing lead.--_b._ A
solution of sulphate of soda (Glauber-salts), or water soured with
sulphuric acid, produces a heavy white precipitate, which turns black when
moistened with sulphide of ammonium.

3. Methylated spirit is detected by rubbing a little of the suspected
brandy on the hands, and then drawing a long breath with the hands over
the mouth. The peculiar odour of the methylated spirit, if present, then
becomes evident. This is a test, however, requiring practice and
experience.

4. TO DETERMINE THE ALCOHOLIC STRENGTH.--Put 100 c. c. of the brandy into
a small retort, or into a flask, with a lateral tube, and distil to
dryness, or nearly so, condensing the distillate by means of a suitable
receiver, and let the alcohol by means of the processes detailed under
ALCOHOLOMETRY. The brandy may be roughly tested for fusel oil by burning a
little of it in a dish, and depressing over the flame a saucer or other
cold piece of porcelain. If a black stain is left, some of the lower
alcohols are very probably present, and should be looked for by distilling
half a pint of the spirit, and examining the later for heavier products.
The vinic alcohol being the most volatile comes over first, the heavier
fusel oil remaining until the later stages.

_Concluding Remarks._ In the 'trade,' the addition of water ('liquor') to
spirit is technically called 'reducing,' whilst absolute adulteration is
known under the questionable name 'improving.' Both of these operations
have now been so long practised with impunity as to form the leading
qualifications demanded in a cellarman.

The following formulae for 'reducing' brandy are those of two large
wholesale dealers, who consider themselves much more honest than their
brethren in the same line:

1. Cognac brandy (10 u. p.), 20 galls.; British brandy (17 u. p.), 5
galls.; water, 4-1/2 galls. Strength of mixture, 25 u. p.

2. To 72 galls, of full-flavoured French brandy (5 u. p.) are added 10
galls, of spirit of wine (58 o. p.); 25 galls. of water, and 1 pint of
good colouring. The whole is then well 'rummaged up,' and allowed to stand
for two days, when it is fit for use. Strength of mixture, 22 u. p.

A liqueur, sold in London under the name of "brandy improver," or "brandy
essence," consists of a thin sugar syrup, flavoured with acetic ether and
essence of cayenne, and coloured with burnt sugar. It is said to heighten
the true Cognac flavour, and restore lost alcoholic strength.

=Brandy, British.= _Syn._ MALT BRANDY, &c. For a long time this liquor was
distilled from spoiled wine and the dregs of wine, both British and
foreign, mixed with beer-bottoms, spoiled raisins, and similar substances.
Malt and molasses spirit were afterwards employed, as at the present day,
for the purpose; but it was long considered as "an unpardonable and wicked
misuse of these articles." Modern experience, however, has proved that
pure malt spirit is, in this country, the most convenient, if not the best
kind, to form the basis of an imitation brandy.

_Prep._ 1. To 12 galls. of malt spirit (finest and flavourless) at proof,
add, of water, 5 galls.; crude red tartar or wine-stone, 3/4 lb.
(previously dissolved in 1 gall. of boiling water); acetic ether, 6 fl.
oz.; French wine-vinegar, 2 quarts; French plums (bruised), 5 lbs.; sherry
wine-bottoms, 1/2 gall.; mix in a sherry or French-brandy cask, and let
them stand for about a month, frequently 'rummaging up' the liquor with a
stick; next draw over 15 galls. of the mixture from a still furnished with
an agitator. Put the 'rectified spirit' into a clean, fresh-emptied
Cognac-brandy cask, and add of tincture of catechu, 1 pint; oak shavings,
1 lb.; and spirit colouring, 1/2 pint; agitate occasionally for a few
days, and then let it repose for a week, when it will be fit for use.
_Prod._, 15 galls, of BRANDY, 17 u. p. Age greatly improves it.

2. Malt spirit (as before), 99 galls.; red tartar (dissolved), 7 lbs.;
acetic ether, 1/2 gall.; wine-vinegar, 5 galls.; bruised raisins or French
plums, 14 lbs.; bitter-almond cake (bruised and steeped for twenty-four
hours in twice its weight of water, which must be used with it), 1/4 lb.;
water, q. s.; macerate as before, and draw over, with a quick fire, 120
galls. To the distilled spirit add a few lbs. of oak shavings; 2 lbs. of
powdered catechu (made into a paste with hot water), and spirit-colouring
q. s.; and 'finish' as in the last. _Prod._, 120 galls, of spirit, fully
17 u. p. Equal in quality to the last.

3. Clean spirit (17 u. p.), 100 galls; nitrous ether, 2 quarts; cassia
buds (ground) 4 oz.; bitter-almond meal, 5 oz.; orris-root (sliced), 6
oz,; powdered cloves, 1 oz.; capsicum, 1-1/2 oz.; good vinegar, 3 galls.;
brandy colouring, 3 pints; powdered catechu, 2 lbs.; full-flavoured
Jamaica rum, 2 galls. Mix in an empty Cognac 'piece,' and macerate for a
fortnight, with occasional stirring. _Prod._, 106 galls., at 21 or 22 u.
p.

4. Malt spirit (17 u. p.), 100 galls.; catechu, 2 lbs.; tincture of
vanilla, 1/2 pint; burnt sugar colouring, 1 quart; good rum, 3 galls.;
acetic or nitrous ether, 2 quarts. Mix as the last.

5. Clean spirit (17 u. p.), 89 galls.; high-flavoured Cognac, 10 galls.;
oil of cassia, 2 dr.; oil of bitter almonds, 3 dr.; powdered catechu, 1
lb.; cream of tartar (dissolved), 1-1/4 lbs.; Beaufoy's concentrated
acetic acid, 1/2 gall.; sugar colouring, 2 to 3 pints; good rum, 1 gall.
When the above mixtures are distilled, the French brandy, colouring, and
catechu, should be added to the distilled spirit.

6. To plain spirit (coloured), at 17 u. p., add a little tincture of
catechu, and a sufficient quantity of eau-de-vie de marc, or of the oil
distilled from wine-lees, to flavour it.

_Obs._ The oil referred to in the last formula is obtained by distillation
from the lees of wine, either dried and made up into cakes, or in their
wet state, mixed with about 7 or 8 times their weight of water. This oil
should be kept dissolved in alcohol, as it is otherwise apt to lose its
flavour. Brandy from any part of the world may be very closely imitated by
distilling the oil from the lees of the wines produced in that particular
district. Where black tea is cheap, as in the United States of America, it
is very commonly employed to impart the roughness of brandy to the
coloured spirit, and the subsequent addition of a little 'flavouring'
greatly improves it. A really good article of cider-spirit thus treated
forms a passable 'mock brandy.' In conclusion, we may remark that, as the
strength and quality of ingredients frequently vary, and success depends
greatly on skill in manipulation, much must be left to the experience,
judgment, and discretion of the operator. In all cases he must recollect
that a certain degree of 'age' is absolutely necessary to give a high
character to any spirit. Indeed, to age in the one case, and its absence
in the other, may be referred the reasons why French brandy and British
brandy, apart from mere shades of flavour, so materially differ.

The production of a flavoured British spirit closely resembling French
brandy is a subject well worthy of the attention of the ingenious chemist,
rectifier, and cellarman, as a matter of profit; and of the amateur, as
affording an interesting field for useful and amusing experiment.

=Brandy, Car'away.= A species of cordial commonly prepared as follows:--1.
Caraway-seeds (bruised), 4 oz.; lump sugar, 2 lbs.; British brandy, 1
gall.; macerate a fortnight, occasionally shaking the bottle.--2. Sugar, 1
lb.; caraways (bruised), 1 oz.; 3 bitter almonds (grated);
spirit-colouring, 1 oz.; plain spirit or gin (22 u. p.), 1/2 gall.; as
before. Some persons omit the colouring.

=Brandy, Cher'ry.= _Prep._ 1. Brandy and cherries (crushed), of each 1
gall.; let them lie together for 3 days, then express the liquor, and add
2 lbs. of lump sugar; in a week or two decant the clear portion for use.

2. To the last add 1 quart of raspberry juice, and 1/2 a pint of
orange-flower water. Both the above are excellent.

3. Treacle, 1 cwt.; spirit (45 u. p.), 41 galls.; bitter almonds
(bruised), 1 lb. (or more or less to taste); cloves, 1 oz.; cassia, 2 oz.;
macerate a month, frequently stirring. This is the article now commonly
vended in the shops and at stalls for cherry brandy.

4. German cherry juice 15 galls.; pure rect. spirits, 20 galls.; syrup, 5
galls.; oil of bitter almonds, 1 drachm.

_Obs._ Equal part of fully ripe Morello cherries and black cherries
produce the richest cordial. Some persons prick each cherry separately
with a needle instead of crushing them; in which case they retain them in
the liquor, and serve up a few of them in each glass. The plan named in
the first formula is, however, that usually adopted. On the small scale,
the fruit is commonly bruised between the fingers. A portion only (if any)
of the stones in the cherries should be crushed, to impart a nutty
flavour. See LIQUEURS.

=Brandy, Ci'der.= From cider and perry; also from the marc of apples and
pears fermented. It is very largely manufactured in the United States of
America and Canada, where it may be purchased for about 2_s._ 1_d._ a
gallon. See BRITISH BRANDY (_above_).

=Brandy, Dant'zic.= From rye, ground with the root of _calamus
aromaticus_. It has a mixed flavour of orris and cinnamon.

=Brandy, Guern'sey.= Beet-root spirit flavoured.

=Brandy, Lem'on.= _Prep._ 1. Fresh lemons (sliced), 1 dozen; brandy, 1
gall.; macerate for a week, press out the liquor, and add of lump sugar, 1
_lb._

2. Proof spirit, 7 galls.; essence of lemon, 3 dr.; sugar, 5 lbs.;
tartaric acid, 1 oz.; (dissolved in) water, 2 galls.; turmeric powder or
spirit-colouring, a dessert-spoonful; as before. Sometimes milk is added
to the above, in the proportion of 1 quart (boiling hot) to every gallon.

=Brandy, Malt.= See BRITISH BRANDY.

=Brandy, Or'ange.= As lemon brandy, but employing oranges.

=Brandy, Pale.= This article has been already referred to. (See p. 337.)
That of the gin-shops and publicans is generally a spurious article, made
by mixing together about equal parts of good brown French brandy, clean
spirit of wine, and soft water, and allowing the whole to stand until the
next day to 'fine down.' If the first is 9 u. p., and the second 58 o. p.,
the product will be 17 u. p. Any deficiency of strength is made up by
adding a little more spirit of wine.

=Brandy, Pat'ent.= The article so much bepuffed under this name, by
certain houses, is merely very clean malt-spirit mixed with about 1-7th of
its bulk (or less) of strong-flavoured Cognac, and a little colouring.

=Brandy, Peach.= From peaches, by fermentation and distillation. Much used
in the United States, where peaches are very plentiful, and consequently
cheap. A cordial spirit under the same name is prepared as follows:--

1. From peaches, sliced and steeped in twice their weight of British
brandy or malt-spirit, as in making cherry brandy.

2. Bitter almonds (bruised), 3 oz.; proof spirit (pale), 10 galls.; water,
3 galls.; sugar, 5 or 6 lbs.; orange-flower water, 1/2 a pint; macerate
for 14 days. Add brandy-colouring, if required darker.

=Brandy, Rais'in= (r[=a]'zn). See SPIRIT (Raisin).

=Brandy, Rasp'berry= (r[)a]z'-). From raspberries, as directed under
CHERRY BRANDY. Sometimes a little cinnamon and cloves are added. The only
addition, however, that really improves the flavour or bouquet is a little
orange-flower water, a very little essence of vanilla, or a single drop of
essence of ambergris.

=Brandy, White.= See BRANDY (p. 337) and PALE BRANDY (_ante_).

=BRASS.= _Syn._ AES, AE''RIS METAL'LUM, L.; AIRAIN, LAITON, CUIVRE JAUNE,
Fr.; ERZ, MESSING, Ger.; BRAES, Sax. A well-known alloy of copper and zinc.

_Prep._ Brass is now generally manufactured by plunging copper, in slips,
into zinc melted in the usual manner. The former metal rapidly combines
with the fluid mass, and the addition is continued until an alloy somewhat
difficult of fusion is formed, when the remainder of the copper is at once
added. The brass thus obtained is broken into pieces, and remelted under
charcoal, and a proper addition of either zinc or copper made, to bring it
up to the colour and quality desired. It is next poured into moulds of
granite. Before being submitted to the rolling-press for reduction to thin
plates it undergoes the operation of annealing.

The proportions of the metals forming this alloy are varied according to
the desired colour, and the purposes to which it is to be applied. The
following formulae are founded chiefly on analyses of standard brasses and
yellow metals, made expressly for this work. Small fractions are omitted;
the nearest whole numbers being generally taken:--

_a._ FINE BRASS:--1. Copper, 2 parts; zinc, 1 part; either combined, as
explained above, or the two metals separately melted, suddenly poured
together, and united by vigorous stirring.

2. Copper, 7 parts; zinc, 3 parts. Bright yellow; malleable.

3. Fine copper, 4 parts; zinc, 1 part. Deeper coloured than the last; an
excellent and very useful alloy.

_b._ MALLEABLE BRASS:--1. Copper, 33 parts; zinc, 25 parts; as before.

2. Copper, 3 parts; zinc, 2 parts. These alloys are malleable whilst hot.

_c._ RED BRASS. This name is commonly applied to all those alloys which do
not contain more than 18 to 20% of zinc. In the deeper-coloured foreign
varieties (RED TOM'BAC) the per-centage of copper occasionally amounts to
88, 90, or even 92%.

_d._ YELLOW BRASS. See FINE BRASS (_above_).

_e._ BUTTON-BRASS:--1. Copper, 8 parts; zinc, 5 parts. This is the
'PLATIN' of the Birmingham makers.

2. Yellow brass, 16 parts; zinc, 2 parts; tin, 1 part. Paler than the
last.

3. Copper, 25 parts; zinc, 20 parts; lead, 3 parts; tin, 2 parts. Pale;
used for common buttons.

_f._ FOR FINE CASTINGS:--1. As fine brass, according to the colour
desired. (See _above_.)

2. Copper, 62 parts; zinc, 35 parts; lead, 2 parts; tin, 1 part.

3. Copper, 60 parts; zinc, 36 parts; tin, 4 parts. Both the last two are
rather pale and brittle.

4. Copper, 90 parts; zinc, 7 parts; tin, 2 parts; lead, 1 part. Rich deep
colour.

5. Copper, 91 parts; zinc, 5 parts; tin, 3 parts; lead, 1 part; as the
last.

_g._ For GILDING:--1. As fine brass (_above_).

2. Copper, 64 parts; zinc, 32 parts; lead, 3 parts; tin, 1 part.

3. Copper, 82 parts; zinc, 18 parts; tin, 3 parts; lead, 1 part.

_h._ For SOLDER:--1. Fine brass, 12 parts; zinc, 6 parts; tin, 1 part;
melted together.

2. Brass, 2 parts; zinc, 1 part; as before.

3. Brass, 3 parts; zinc, 1 part. Very strong. Used for soldering tubes and
other like purposes requiring great strength. The above alloys form the
'HARD SOLDER' of the braziers. For certain purposes a little silver is
added to them, when the compound receives the name of 'SILVER-SOLDER,'

_i._ For TURNING:--1. Fine brass, 98 parts; lead, 2 parts; melted
together.

2. Copper, 61 parts; zinc, 36 parts; lead, 3 parts.

3. Copper, 65 parts; zinc, 33 parts; lead, 2 parts.

_j._ For WIRE:--1. Copper, 72 parts; zinc, 28 parts; the resulting alloy
being subsequently properly annealed.

2. Copper, 64 parts; zinc, 34 parts; as before.

3. To the last add of lead, 2 parts.

_Anal._ This may be briefly described as follows:--

_a._ 100 gr. of the alloy is digested in nitric acid. The insoluble
portion is peroxide of tin, every 74 gr. of which, when washed and dried,
contain 58 gr. of metallic tin.

_b._ Sulphuric acid is added to the nitric solution as long as a white
precipitate falls; after a time the precipitate is collected on a filter,
washed with a mixture of water and alcohol, and ignited in a porcelain
crucible. Every 152 gr. of the residuum represents 104 gr. of metallic
lead.

_c._ The liquid filtered from the precipitate of sulphate of lead is
treated with a stream of sulphuretted hydrogen; the precipitate is
collected on a filter, washed with water mixed with a little sulphuretted
hydrogen, dried, and digested in pure nitric acid until the sulphur which
separates acquires its natural full yellow colour; the resulting solution
is next diluted with water, and reprecipitated with potassa, the whole
being boiled until the precipitated oxide of copper becomes of a deep
brown or black; it is then collected on a filter, washed, dried, ignited
in a platinum crucible, and weighed therein immediately after it becomes
cold. Every 40 gr. of oxide of copper thus obtained represents 32 gr. of
pure copper.

_d._ The liquid poured from the precipitate of sulphide of copper is
boiled for about a minute, when it is precipitated with a solution of
carbonate of sodium; the whole is then boiled for a few minutes, and the
precipitated oxide of zinc collected, washed, dried, and ignited. Every 40
gr. of this oxide contains 32 gr. of metallic zinc.

_Concluding Remarks._ In the adoption of his formula the operator should
be entirely led by the object he has in view. The larger the proportion of
copper, the deeper will be the colour, and the greater the density, and,
within certain limits, the toughness of the alloy. Zinc lessens the
specific gravity and colour. Tin gives it hardness and grain; whilst lead
toughens it, and renders it fitter for turning. These facts are known to
every experienced brass-founder. See ALLOYS, COPPER, MOSAIC GOLD, PRINCE'S
METAL, TOMBAC, &c.

=BRASS BATH= (FOR ELECTRO-PLATING). _For steel, wrought and cast iron, and
tin; using ordinary cyanide of potassium._ Dissolve together in 14 pints
of distilled or rain water:--Bisulphite of soda, 7 _oz._; cyanide of
potassium (containing 75 per cent. of real cyanide), 17 _oz._; carbonate
of soda, 34 _oz._

To this solution add the following, made up to 3-1/4 pints of
water:--Acetate of copper, 4-1/2 _oz._; neutral protochloride of zinc,
3-1/2 _oz._; the two liquors become colourless when mixed. Ammonia must
not be used for brass electro-plating baths for iron, especially for
solutions worked in the cold.

=BRASS BATH= (FOR ELECTRO-PLATING). _For zinc._ Pure or rain water, 4-1/2
gallons; bisulphite of soda, 24-1/2 _oz._; cyanide of potassium
(containing 75 per cent. of cyanide), 35 _oz._ To this add the following
solution:--Water, 9 pints; acetate of copper and protochloride of zinc,
each 12-1/2 _oz._; liquid ammonia, 14 _oz._

The filtered bath is colourless, and gives, under the action of the
battery, a brass deposit of a very fine shade, varying from red to green,
by increasing the proportion of copper or that of zinc.

=BRASS'-COLOUR.= _Syn._ BRASS-PIGMENT, B.-BRONZE. _Prep._ 1. Grind copper
filings, or the precipitated powder of copper, with a little red ochre.
Red-coloured.

2. Gold-coloured brass, or Dutch leaf, reduced to a very fine powder.
Yellow or gold coloured.

_Obs._ Before application these powders are mixed up with pale varnish, no
more being worked up at once than is wanted for immediate use. They are
also applied by dusting them over any surface previously covered with
varnish to make them adhere.

=BRASS-PASTE.= _Prep._ 1. Soft soap, 2 oz.; rotten-stone, 4 oz.; beaten to
a paste.

2. Rotten-stone made into a paste with sweet oil.

3. Rotten-stone, 4 oz.; oxalic acid (in fine powder), 1 oz.; sweet oil,
1-1/2 oz.; turpentine, q. s. to make a paste.

_Obs._ The above are used to clean brass-work, when neither varnished nor
lacquered. The first and last are best applied with a little water; the
second with a little spirit of turpentine or sweet oil. Both require
friction with soft leather. See BRASS-WORK, PASTES, &c.

=BRASS PLATING.= _By simple dipping._ A colour resembling brass is given
to small articles of iron or steel by a long stirring in a suspended tub
containing the following solution:--Water, 1 quart; sulphate of copper,
and protochloride of tin crystallised, about 1-5th of an _oz._ each. The
shades are modified by varying the proportions of the two salts.

=BRASS-STAIN.= _Prep._ 1. Sheet-brass (cut into small pieces) is exposed
to a strong heat for 2 or 3 days, then powdered, and again further exposed
in a like manner for several days; the whole is then reduced to fine
powder, and exposed, a third time, to heat, testing it occasionally, to
see if it be sufficiently burnt. When a little of it, fused with glass,
makes the latter swell and froth up, the process is complete. It imparts
to glass a green tint, passing into turquoise.

2. Equal parts of plate-brass and sulphur are stratified together in a
crucible, and calcined, until they become friable; the whole is then
reduced to powder, and exposed to heat as before. This imparts a calcedony
red or yellow tinge to glass by fusion; the precise shade of colour being
modified by the mode of using it.

_Obs._ The common practice in the glass-houses is to conduct the
calcination by exposing the metal, placed on tiles, in the leer or
annealing arch of the furnace; a plan both convenient and economical.

=BRASS'-WORK.= Articles of brass and copper, when not varnished or
lacquered, may be cleaned and polished with sweet oil and tripoli,
rotten-stone, or powdered bath-brick, applied with friction on flannel,
and 'finished off' with leather; due care being taken to ensure the
absence of anything gritty, which would scratch and disfigure the surface
of the metal. A strong solution of oxalic acid in water gives brass a fine
colour. Vitriol and spirits of salts make brass and copper very bright,
but the polish thus obtained soon tarnishes, and the articles consequently
require more frequent cleaning. A strong lye of roche alum and water also
improves the appearance of brass. In all cases where acids or saline
matter has been used, the metal should be at once well rinsed in clean
water, and then wiped dry, and finally dry polished with soft leather.

BRASS INLAID-WORK may be cleaned with tripoli and linseed oil, applied by
a rubber of felt or leather; the whole being afterwards thoroughly rubbed
off, and then finished with clean soft leather. The ornaments of a French
clock, and similar articles, are said to be best cleaned with bread-crumb,
carefully rubbed, so as not to injure the wood-work. ORMOLU CANDLESTICKS,
LAMPS, and BRANCHES, may be cleaned with soap and water. LACQUERED and
GILDED ARTICLES are spoiled by frequent rubbing, and by acids and alkaline
leys.

1. A fine colour may be given to BRASS ORNAMENTS, when not gilt or
lacquered, with a little sal-ammoniac, in fine powder, moistened with soft
water. The articles must be afterwards rubbed dry with bran and whiting.
Another plan is to wash the brass-work with a strong lye of roche alum (1
oz. to water 1 pint), and after rinsing it in clean water and drying it,
to finish it off with fine tripoli. These processes give to brass the
brilliancy of gold. See BRASS-PASTE.

2. A gold varnish for giving a beautiful gilding to brass and bronze
objects is prepared from 16 grams of shell-lac, 4 grams of dragon's blood,
1 gram of turmeric-root, and 332 grams of rectified spirit of wine. The
varnish is thinly stroked over the surface with a sponge, the metal being
warmed over a small coal fire.

The surface at first appears dull, but soon after it appears as if most
beautifully gilded. The ready-prepared spirituous varnish must be
preserved in well-stoppered vessels.--_Dingler's Journal._

=BRASS'ING.= _Syn._ BRASS-COATING. 1. Copper-plates and copper-rods may be
covered with a superficial coating of brass by simply exposing them, in a
heated state, to the fumes given off by melted zinc at a high
temperature. The coated plates and rods are rolled into thin sheets or
drawn into wire. The spurious gold wire of Lyons is said to be made in
this way.

2. Vessels of copper may be coated with brass, internally, by filling them
with water strongly soured with hydrochloric acid, adding some amalgam of
zinc and cream of tartar, and then boiling the whole for a short time.
This plan may be usefully applied in certain cases to copper boilers in
laboratories, and to other purposes.

3. By the electrotype (which _see_).

=BRAUNETINCTUR--QUINSY OR BROWN TINCTURE= (Netsch, Rauschau), an
embrocation for the larynx, is a mixture of 3 parts oil of cloves and 1
part creosote. (Hager.) According to Leimbach 1 part creosote with 3 parts
of a spirituous tincture of cochineal perfumed with oil of cloves.

=BRAWN.= A boar or its flesh. When young, the horny parts feel moderately
tender. If the rind is hard, it is old. (Mrs Rundell.) Also in cookery,
the flesh of the boar, or of swine, collared so as to squeeze out as much
of the fat as possible, boiled, and pickled.

=Brawn, Mock.= _Prep._ (Mrs Rundell.) Take the head and belly-piece of a
young porker, well saltpetred; split the head and boil it; take out the
bones and cut it to pieces; then take 4 ox-feet, boiled tender, and cut
them in thin pieces; lay them in the belly-piece with the head cut small;
roll it up tight with sheet tin, and boil it 4 or 5 hours. When it comes
out set it up on one end, put a trencher on it (within the tin), press it
down with a heavy weight, and let it stand all night. The next morning
take it out of the tin and bind it with a fillet, put it in cold
salt-and-water, and it will be fit for use; it will keep a long time, if
fresh salt-and-water are put into it about once every four days.

=BRAXY.= Inflammation of the bowels in sheep, chiefly affecting young
sheep. It is most frequent during winter, and occurs in exposed wet
localities. The symptoms are restlessness, thirst, tenderness along the
spine or belly, and constipation.

_Treatment._ Bleed early, and give 3 _oz._ castor oil; 8 grains of
calomel; 1/2 _oz._ of laudanum; 3 _oz._ treacle; beat up with two eggs,
and mixed with about 6 _oz._ of warm water; let this be repeated in half
doses every six hours.

This should be combined with clysters and hot fomentations to the belly.
If, after two days, no benefit should be derived, give thrice daily, 5
grains of calomel, 20 grains of carbonate of ammonia, and 1-1/2 dram of
laudanum, in gruel. The animal should be removed to a shed or sheltered
place.

=BRAZIL NUTS.= The particular tree yielding these nuts (the _Bartholetia
excelsa_) is a native of Brazil, whence the nuts are exported to the
yearly annual amount of about 60,000 bushels.

When the kernels of the nuts are submitted to pressure they yield an oil
in great repute for domestic purposes and for export, each pound of the
nuts yielding nine ounces of the oil, valued at two shillings the pound.
According to Martius, this oil consists of 74 per cent. of eldein, and 26
per cent. of stearin. The finely laminated inner bark of the trunks is
also a valuable article of commerce, especially adapted for the caulking
of ships and barges, and is worth about eighteen shillings the cwt.

The following analysis by Corenwinder gives the composition of the kernels
taken from the nuts when in a fresh condition:

  Water                                 8.00
  Oil                                  65.60
  Nitrogenous matters                  15.31
  Non-nitrogenous organic matters       7.39
  Phosphoric acid           1.35 }
  Lime, potash, silica, &c. 2.35 }      3.70

                                      100.00

=BRAZIL'-WOOD= (-z[=e]le'-). _Syn._ BRAZIL[double-dagger]; LIG'NUM
BRAZILIEN'SE, L.; BOIS DE BRESIL, Fr. A dye-stuff furnished by several
species of trees of the genus _caesalpin'ia_, and much used in dyeing
various shades of red. The usual practice is to boil it for some hours in
hard spring-water, and to keep the resulting decoction for some time, or
until it undergoes a species of fermentation; as it is thus found to yield
more permanent and beautiful colours than when employed fresh. The
following are examples of its application:--

_a._ For COTTON:--

1. The goods are first boiled in a bath of sumach, next worked through a
weak mordant of solution of tin, and then run through the Brazil bath
lukewarm. This gives a bright red.

2. The goods are alumed, rinsed, next mordanted with solution of tin,
rinsed again, and then turned through the Brazil dye bath. This gives a
rose colour.

_b._ For LINEN:--This, for the most part, is similar to that adopted for
cotton.

_c._ For SILK:--The goods, after being alumed in the same way as wool, but
at a lower temperature, are rinsed, and passed through the Brazil-wood
bath lukewarm.

_d._ For WOOL:--The goods are first steeped or boiled in a weak mordant of
alum and tartar, for 1 hour, and then allowed to lie in the cold liquor
for 2 or 3 days, with frequent moving about; they are lastly boiled in the
Brazil-wood bath for about 1/2 an hour.

_Obs._ The shades of colour given with Brazil-wood may be modified by
varying the strength of the bath, the mordant, &c. The addition of a
little alum turns it on the purple. A little alkali added to the bath, or
passing the goods, after being dyed, through water holding a little alkali
in solution, produces what is called false crimson. A deep crimson is
obtained by adding a little logwood to the Brazil-wood bath. 1 lb. of
Brazil-wood, 1/2 oz. of alum, and 2 oz. of tartar, are sufficient to dye
from 20 to 28 lbs. of cotton, according to the depth of shade required.
See DYEING, RED DYES, &c.

=BRAZI'LIN.= _Syn._ BREZE''L[)I]NE, SAPAN'[)I]NE. The colouring matter of
Brazil-wood. It forms small orange-coloured needles, soluble in both water
and alcohol. Alkalies turn it violet; acids, yellow. Bolly has shown it to
be identical with the colouring matter of Sapan-wood.

=BRA''ZING.= The operation of uniting pieces of copper, brass, iron, &c.,
by means of hard solder.

_Proc._ The edges, after being filed or scraped quite clean, are covered
with a mixture of hard solder and powdered borax, made into a paste with
water. The whole is then allowed to dry, and is afterwards exposed, in a
clear fire, to a heat sufficient to melt the solder. See AUTOGENOUS,
SOLDERING, SOLDERS, &c.

=BREAD= (br[)e]d). _Syn._ PA'NIS, L.; PAIN, Fr.; BROD, Ger.; BROOD, Dut.;
BROeD, Dan., Swed.; BREOD, Sax. Loaves or cakes made from ground corn, and
constituting the staple article of food of all civilised nations.

This important article of food is made of the flour of different cereal
grains, but only those that contain gluten admit of conversion into light
or spongy bread. In this respect wheat-flour is superior to all others.
When this flour is made into a paste or dough with water, and the dough,
previous to baking, is left for some time in a moderately warm place, a
state of fermentation comes on, owing to the sugar of the flour gradually
undergoing the process of conversion into alcohol, in every respect
similar to that which takes place during the fermentation of wine and
beer. In this process a large quantity of carbonic acid gas is liberated,
and the toughness of the dough preventing its escape, the whole mass
becomes puffed up and spongy, and a light porous paste is formed, the
porosity of which is still further increased by the heat of the oven. The
natural process of fermenting the dough just described is, however,
tedious and uncertain, whilst the dough has a tendency to run into the
acetous fermentation, and to acquire a sour and disagreeable taste, by
which it is rendered less nutritious and less easy of digestion. This has
led to the use of a ferment which produces a similar condition more
speedily, and with greater certainty. Leaven or dough was originally
employed for this purpose, and the bread so made was hence called LEAVENED
BREAD. At the present time barm or yeast is almost universally used for
this purpose. All that is essential to make a loaf of bread is to add a
proper quantity of yeast to the dough, and to allow it to remain for a
short time in a warm place, and as soon as it rises or becomes spongy, to
subject it to the process of baking.

In preparing his dough, the modern baker takes a part of the water needed
for the batch, and having rendered it tepid or lukewarm (80 deg. to 90 deg. Fahr.)
by the addition of boiling water, dissolves his salt in it, and adds the
yeast, together with a portion of the flour. With these he forms a thin
dough, which he sets aside in a moderately warm place provided for the
purpose, and technically called the 'kneading trough,' 'prover,' or
'tryer,' where it soon begins to ferment and swell up. This process is
called 'setting the sponge,' and according to the proportion the water in
it bears to the whole quantity that is to be used, it receives the name of
'whole,' 'half,' or 'quarter sponge.' Here the sponge heaves and swells,
and ultimately the surface bursts and subsides, and if not checked swells
again and again in a similar manner and would continue to do so until the
whole of the 'saccharine matter' was destroyed, and the dough had become
sour. The baker is careful, however, to stop it before it has communicated
a sourness to the mass. After the first, or, at the furthest, after the
second or third 'dropping of the sponge,' he adds the remaining quantity
of flour, water, and salt, necessary to form the 'batch,' and then kneads
the whole until it becomes sufficiently tough and elastic to bear the
pressure of the hand without adhering to it. The 'dough' is now left to
itself for a few hours, during which the fermentation still goes on. The
inflated mass is then again kneaded, cut into pieces, weighed, and shaped
into loaves. In an hour or two these unbaked loaves swell up to nearly
double their former size, and are then placed in the oven and baked.
During this operation they continue for a time to increase in size, in
consequence of the dilation of the pent-up gas by the heat. At length the
fermentation is checked, and the dough becomes too solid to admit of
further alteration.

Such are the principles and practice of the art of baking. The operations
are precisely the same on both the small and the large scale, and
therefore need not be separately described.

The kneading of the dough by hand is not only a very laborious process,
but it is unhealthy and additionally objectionable on account of its being
uncleanly. Added to this, the uniform quality of the dough is not to be
depended upon. Although it is impossible to perform by machinery any
labour which absolutely requires the touch of the human hand,
bread-kneading machines have been introduced wherever the making of only
one and the same kind of bread is required. Amongst the numerous kinds of
machines devised for bread-making, is Clayton's. (_See cut._)

The constituents of the dough are placed in the cylinder, _A_, mounted in
the framework, _b b_, and provided with hollow axles, _c_ and _d_,
turning in their bearings at _e_. The interior of the cylinder is fitted
with the framework, _f_, which may be made to revolve by the aid of the
axles, _g_ and _h_. The two halves of this framework are connected
together by the diagonal knives _i_, _i_, which, when the machinery
revolves, work up the dough; the trough or outer cylinder revolves in the
opposite direction to the revolution of the framework. The crank, _o_, is
connected with the axle of the trough or outer cylinder, the crank, _p_,
with that of the inner framework; as the two cranks are turned in opposite
directions, they impart opposite movements to trough and framework. The
revolving of the machinery may be performed by one man by the aid of one
crank, since the axle, _h_, of the crank, _o_, which is fitted to the
inner frame by means of the hollow axle-tree, and revolves along with it,
carries a conically shaped wheel, _m_, fitted to the wheel _k_, which,
being connected with _l_, causes the trough also to revolve; when
therefore the wheel _m_ turns towards the right, the wheel _t_ will
revolve towards the left. Another kneading machine is that of Mr Stevens.
It is employed at the Holborn Union, where more than 5000 _lbs._ of bread
are made every week by one man and two boys.

[Illustration]

_Adult._ The adulteration of both flour and bread is carried to a fearful
extent, more especially in London. The baker's flour is very often made of
the worst kinds of damaged foreign wheat; and other cereal grains, and
particularly beans, are mixed with them in grinding them into flour. In
this capital no fewer than six distinct kinds of wheaten flour are brought
into the market--fine flour, seconds, middlings, fine middlings, coarse
middlings, and twenty-penny flour.

Among the principal substances which have been proved to have been used to
adulterate wheat-flour and bread are the following:--

  **Alum.
   *Ammonia (Sesquicarbonate).
  **Beans.
   *Bone dust.
   *Chalk.
    Clay.
    Copper (Sulphate).
    Lime (Sulphate from the soda water makers).
   *Magnesia (Carbonate).
   *Plaster of Paris.
   *Potash (Carbonate and bicarbonate).
  **Potatoes.
  **Rice.
  **Soda (Carbonate and sesquicarbonate).
   *Starch (Potato).
  **Water (in excess).
    Zinc (Sulphate).

Of these substances, those marked thus (*) are very frequently used; and
those marked thus (**) almost universally so.

In the absence of chemical analysis the unalumed loaf may be roughly
distinguished from the alumed one by the following characteristics: it is
neither so white, so bulky, nor so symmetrical; it bites shorter, and it
is free from the sour taste which accompanies the presence of alum. Again,
unalumed bread a day or two old will be found to crumble with great
readiness; alumed bread, however old, crumbles, on the contrary, with
difficulty.

According to Mr Accum, the smallest quantity of alum that can be employed
with effect to produce white, light, and porous bread, from the inferior
kinds of flour commonly used by the bakers, is from 3 to 4 oz. to a sack
of flour weighing 280 lbs. But Dr P. Markham states that the ordinary
bread of the London baker is made of one sack or 5 bushels of flour; 8 oz.
of alum; 4 lbs. of salt; 1/2 gall. of yeast; and about 3 galls. of water.
Our own analyses, extending to many hundred samples of London bread, as
well as those of other chemists, show that even this large quantity of
alum is often very much exceeded by the bakers.

Alkaline substances, as the carbonates of ammonia, soda, and potash, are
often employed to realise the important consideration of producing light
and porous bread from spoiled, or, as it is technically called, sour
flour. The first salt becomes temporarily converted into a gaseous state
during the operation of baking, causing the dough to swell up in minute
bubbles, which thus render it light and porous; the salt itself being at
the same time, for the most part, volatilised. Alum is added, not only
with a like intention, but also to enable the dough to carry more water.
There are several instances of convictions on record of millers and bakers
having used gypsum, chalk, and pipeclay in the manufacture of their goods.
A gentleman lately writing from the North of England says that he found
in one sample of flour which he recently examined upwards of 16% of
gypsum; and in another, 12% of the same earth.

A few years since it was discovered that some of the bakers in France and
Belgium added blue vitriol to their dough to make it take more water, in
the same way as the English baker uses alum. 1 oz. of this sulphate was
dissolved in a quart of water, and a wine-glassful of this solution added
to the water necessary to make about 50 4-lb. loaves. This enormous crime
was soon detected, and deservedly caused the ruin of its heartless
perpetrators.

_Exam._ The following are the methods employed for the discovery of the
principal sophisticants of bread, and as the chief of these, and the one
most difficult of identification is alum, we have given prominence to the
processes now generally adopted for the detection of this article:--

1. ALUM:--_a._ (Robine and Parisot.) About 1/4 lb. of the suspected bread
(somewhat stale or dry) is reduced to crumbs, macerated for 2 or 3 hours
in cold water, and then squeezed through a clean piece of white linen. The
liquid is next evaporated to dryness at a steam-heat, the residuum
redissolved in a little hot water, and the solution filtered. Liquor of
ammonia or a solution of sal-ammoniac, and a solution of chloride of
barium added to the filtered liquid, give a white precipitate when ALUM is
present.

When nearly the whole of the alum has suffered decomposition in the loaf,
as is frequently the case, the following process is required:--

_b._ (M. Kuhlman.) 4 or 5 oz. of bread are reduced to ash, which is
powdered and treated with nitric acid, the mixture evaporated to dryness,
and about 1 oz. of hot water added. A little caustic potassa is added to
the last solution (unfiltered), the whole boiled a few minutes, and passed
through a filter. The filtrate is next tested with a solution of
sal-ammoniac, and the whole again boiled for 2 or 3 minutes. If a
precipitate forms it is alumina; every 50 gr. of which are equivalent to
332 gr. of crystallised alum.

_c._ The suspected sample is wetted with a weak solution of logwood, or,
preferably, of cochineal. Pure bread is only slightly stained by this
solution; bread containing alum strikes a lavender, lilac, or purple
colour, according to the quantity of the adulterant present. If it
acquires a pearl-grey or bluish tint, some alkali (potash, soda, or
ammonia) is present.

_d._ (J. A. Wanklyn.) 100 grams of bread are incinerated in a platinum
dish, capable of holding the whole quantity at once. The incineration is
managed at a comparatively low temperature, and takes some four or five
hours; the platinum dish being heated by means of a large Bunsen burner,
abundantly supplied with air. It is well to continue the ignition until
the bread-ash is nearly completely burnt, and it is advisable to weigh the
dish containing the ash. The weight of the ash should not sensibly exceed
2 grams. The ash having been obtained is then moistened with 3 c. c. of
pure strong hydrochloric acid, and then some 20 to 30 c. c. of distilled
water is added, and the whole is boiled, filtered, and the precipitate
washed several times with boiling water. In this manner a precipitate
consisting of a silica, together with some unburnt carbon, is left on the
filter, whilst the filtrate contains the phosphates. The precipitate,
which, after being burnt, consists of silica, is weighed. The filtrate is
mixed with 5 c. c. of ammonia (sp. gr. 0.880), whereby it is rendered
powerfully alkaline and opaque, owing to the precipitation of the
phosphates. It is finally mixed gradually with some 20 c. c. of strong
acetic acid, and as the acid is being poured in, it is to be observed that
the liquid is alkaline and opaque, until some 5 c. c. of the acid have
been added; that when about 10 c. c. have been added the liquid is acid
and much clearer, and that at least 10 c. c. of strong acetic acid are
added after the establishment of a distinctly acid reaction. The liquid is
then boiled and filtered, and the precipitates, consisting of phosphates
of alumina and iron, well-washed with boiling water, ignited and weighed.
The last step is the determination of the iron in the weighed precipitate,
and this is accomplished either by reduction and titration with standard
solution of permanganate in the well known manner, or else by a colour
process, viz., by trituration with ferrocyanide of potassium. Having
ascertained the amount of iron in the precipitate of mixed phosphates, it
is only necessary to calculate it into phosphate of iron, and to subtract
the weight of phosphate of iron from the total weight of the mixed
phosphates, and the difference is the phosphate of alum yielded by 100
grams of the bread. The following results have been obtained by applying
the above-described process to samples of bread presumed to be free from
alum:--

        _From 100 grams of Bread._

                          Precipitate
     Bread-ash.  Silica.  insoluble in
                          acetic acid.
        Grams.    Grams.    Grams.
    A   1.408       ...     0.010
    B   1.378       ...     0.006
    C   1.730     0.018     0.010
    D   1.620     0.032     0.014
    E     ...       ...     0.012
  (1)F  1.383     0.030     0.012
  (2)F  1.324     0.025     0.014

The precipitate insoluble in acetic acid contained in every instance a
large proportion of iron, but in some cases at least did not wholly
consist of phosphate of iron. On deducting the quantity of phosphate of
iron from the total phosphates insoluble in acetic acid, there remains a
residue of some five or six milligrams. It would therefore appear that
unalumed bread is liable to contain a minute trace of alumina, which,
expressed as phosphate of alumina (Al_{2}O_{3}PO_{5}), equals five or six
milligrams per 100 grains of bread, or 0.005 per cent. If the alum
corresponding to this phosphate be calculated, it will be seen that 100
grams of unalumed bread may appear to contain 0.022 grams of alum; or
expressed on the 4-lb. loaf, there may appear to be 6 grams of alum in it.
This agrees very fairly with Dr Dupre's observation.

_e._ (J. C. Thresh.) The author states that this process requires only a
few hours, and quotes experiments, showing the accuracy of the results:--

Take 1250 gr. of bread (from middle of loaf) or flour, and char thoroughly
in a platinum dish or on foil over a gas lamp. Powder the char and mix it
with sufficient pure strong hydrochloric acid to make a thin cream. Boil
gently for a few minutes, then add 100 c. c. of water, and continue the
ebullition a few minutes longer. Dilute to 150 c. c., stir well, and
filter off 120 c. c., which will contain the alumina from 1000 gr. of the
bread or flour. To this filtrate add a slight excess of solution of
ammonia, boil for a few seconds. Then let the precipitate subside, and
decant the supernatant fluid. Add boiling water to the sediment, and again
set aside to settle, and decant the clear fluid. Pass the fluids through a
small filter to collect any particles of the precipitate which may have
been suspended therein, and throw the filtrate away. Now add to the
partially washed precipitate about a gram of pure caustic potash (or
soda), warm, and pass the solution through the same filter employed for
the previously decanted fluids. Wash the filter with hot water, to which a
little KHO may be added, and proceed to precipitate the alumina in the
filtrate by adding a few drops of dilute phosphoric acid and excess of
pure acetic acid. Heat the solution and precipitate to the boiling point,
and then wash the latter by decantation and filtration. Finally dry,
ignite, and weigh. The weight of the resulting Al_{2}PO_{4} in grams,
multiplied by 400, will give the amounts of ammonia alum in grains present
in one pound of the bread or flour.

_f._ (Mr Crookes.) The bread of which at least 500 grains should be taken
is first to be incinerated on a platinum or porcelain dish, until all
volatile organic matter has been expelled, and a black carbonaceous ash
remains. The temperature must not be raised much beyond the point
necessary to effect this. Powder the coal thus obtained and add about
thirty drops of oil of vitriol, and heat until vapours begin to rise; when
sufficiently cool, add water, and boil for ten minutes. Filter and
evaporate the filtrate until the fumes of sulphuric acid begin to be
evolved, when 10 gr. of metallic tin and an excess of nitric acid must be
added, together with water, drop by drop, until action between the acid
and metal commences. When all the tin is oxidised, add water, and filter.
Evaporate the filtrate until fumes of sulphuric acid are again visible,
when more water must be added, and the liquid again filtered if necessary.
To the clear solution now add tartaric acid, then ammonia in excess, and
sulphide of ammonium. Evaporate the liquid containing the precipitate
suspended to it, in a dish, until all the smell of sulphide of ammonium
has disappeared. Filter, evaporate to dryness, and ignite to get rid of
the organic matter. Powder the black ash, boil it in moderately strong
hydrochloric acid, filter, add a crystal of chlorate of potash, and boil
for a minute. Now add chloride of ammonium and ammonia, and boil for five
minutes. If at the end of that time any precipitate is observed, it will
be alumina. From the filtered solution, if oxalate of ammonia be added,
the lime will be precipitated; and if to the filtrate from this, ammonia
and phosphate of soda be added, the magnesia will come down.

Dr Dupre is of opinion that no baker should be fined in whose bread the
amount of alumina found corresponds with less than 10 grains of potash
alum in the 2-lb. loaf, unless there is direct evidence of adulteration by
alum independent of the result of analysis.

Mr Crookes says, "By treatment with a trace of alum, flour with a doubtful
soundness is endowed with soundness. For this purpose a proportion of alum
is required which does not exceed 20 grains to a 4-lb. loaf.

2. COPPER:--_a._ Moisten the suspected bread with a few drops of a
solution of ferrocyanide of potassium. It will assume a pinkish-brown
colour if copper be present.

_b._ A little of the bread may be steeped in hot water, or, better still,
in water soured with a little nitric acid, and the clear liquor squeezed
or poured off, and tested with ferrocyanide of potassium, as before.

3. MAGNESIA:--Bread adulterated with magnesia, on digestion in hot water
acidulated with sulphuric acid, furnishes a liquid which gives a white
precipitate when tested with a solution of either carbonate of potassa or
of carbonate of soda, especially on boiling.

4. SODA; POTASSA:--Hot water after digestion on the ashes or charcoal
turns turmeric paper brown. The liquid may be evaporated to dryness,
redissolved in distilled water, slightly acidulated with hydrochloric
acid, and tested with bichloride of platinum. If a yellow crystalline
precipitate forms, either at once or after some hours, it is potash;
otherwise the alkali present is soda.

5. CHALK, WHITING, BURNT BONES, PLASTER OF PARIS, and similar substances
are easily detected by calcining a little of the flour or bread in a clean
open vessel, when the amount of ash left will indicate the quantity of
adulteration. The quantity of the ash left by genuine bread or flour is
very trifling indeed, about 2%.

=Microscopic Characters of Bread.= When bread is placed under the
microscope, starch cells, broken up into angular masses, or greatly
enlarged, and stringy masses of gluten are usually visible; besides these,
when a microscope of high power is employed, bacteria of the rod-shaped
variety may frequently be detected, the source of these being, probably,
the yeast. Great caution and diligent observation are necessary to guard
against the falling into the serious error of mistaking the many curious
forms the broken-up wheat starch presents for adulterants. By practice and
the constant examination of the characters of unadulterated bread,
combined with a practical knowledge of the appearance different starch
grains present, after being more or less changed in shape by cooking, the
microscopist may identify rice-flour, bean-flour, and Indian millet.
Barley flour and potatoes, however, are very difficult of detection. There
is very little difference in the shape of the barley-starch granule and
that of the wheat, and in the process of bread-making the potato granules
are so changed as to confuse all their distinctive characters. Bone-dust
and a few other mineral adulterations may be detected by the microscope.

_Concluding Remarks._ A number of processes are used by cooks and
confectioners to make the different varieties of fancy bread, cakes,
puddings, &c., which vary according to the peculiar characteristic it is
desired to communicate to them; but none of these articles properly belong
to the trade of the common baker. Thus, some kinds of cakes and pastes are
made to eat 'short,' as it is called, or are rendered less tenacious, and
a species of brittleness imparted to them by the addition of starch,
rice-flour, or sugar. In pastry a similar effect and peculiar lightness is
produced by butter or lard, whilst in some articles white of egg, gum
water, isinglass, and other adhesive substances, are added to produce an
exceedingly light and porous mass.

The chief varieties of bread at present in use in this country are known
according to their shapes, as--BRICKS, COBURG, COTTAGE, BATCH, FRENCH
ROLLS, and RYE BREAD. These vary in their quality, chiefly according to
the flour of which they are formed, and their various flavours depend upon
the heat of the oven in baking. The best WHITE BREAD is made from the
purest wheat-flour; ordinary WHEATEN BREAD, of flour containing a little
of the finest bran; SECONDS, from flour containing a still larger
proportion of bran; and common HOUSEHOLD BREAD, from flour produced by
grinding the whole substance of the grain, without any separation of the
bran. The last variety is undoubtedly the most wholesome and nutritious,
although that least frequently used. SYMNEL-BREAD, MANCHET or ROLL-BREAD,
and FRENCH BREAD are varieties made of the purest flour, from the finest
wheat, a little milk being usually added for rolls, and butter and eggs
for choicer purposes. Several other minor kinds of bread are also made,
varied by the addition of sundry trifles, as sugar, currants, and other
palatable ingredients. The SCOTCH SHORTBREAD is made from a very thick
dough, to which butter, sugar, orange-peel, and spices are added,
according to the taste of the maker.

In the manufacture of white bread from damaged or inferior flour a large
quantity of alum is employed by the fraudulent baker, as already noticed;
but with the 'best flour' no alum is required. The utmost beauty,
sponginess, and sweetness may be given to bread without the addition of
one particle of alum, provided the best materials alone enter into its
composition. As such materials are seldom employed by the bakers, the
usual practice is to introduce 4 or 5 oz. of alum to every sack of flour,
or about 1 oz. to each bushel; and very frequently fully double this
quantity of alum is employed. But even this enormous quantity is often not
the whole of the alum present in common bread; for the miller, in order to
cheat the baker, puts in the 'doctor,' in the shape of 4 to 6 oz. of alum
to the sack, whilst the baker, unconscious of this victimisation,
subsequently uses a double dose of alum in order to cheat his
customers.[229] The method of detecting this pernicious adulteration has
been already explained. The proper quantity of salt is 4 lbs., and never
more than 5 lbs., to the sack, or 1 lb. per bushel. One sack of the best
flour, with 4 or 5 lbs. of salt, yields about 360 lbs. of good bread; and
a sack of seconds, 345 to 350 lbs. of bread; each being moderately baked.
If the loaves are well-baked or over-baked, the product will be from 345
to 350 lbs. only; but if they are slack-baked or under-baked, from 370
lbs. to 385 lbs. of crumbling bread may be obtained from 1 sack of good
white flour.

[Footnote 229: The common excuse of the bakers for using alum is, that
without it the bread is not sufficiently white to please their customers,
and that the batches are not easily parted into loaves after baking; but
Liebig has shown that clear lime-water, which is perfectly harmless, will
effect the same object if substituted for the simple water used to make
the dough.]

The attention of chemists has, at various times, been directed in search
of some method to rectify or lessen the effects of bad harvesting and
improper storage on grain, so that a damaged or inferior article might be
rendered serviceable, and available for human food. Prof. E. Davy
recommends the addition of 1/4 oz. of carbonate of magnesia to about every
3 lbs. of sour, melted, heated, and similarly damaged flour. This
substance materially improves the quality of the bread, "even when made
from the worst new seconds flour;" whilst it is said to be perfectly
harmless; and the bread so prepared, for temporary use, is certainly
unobjectionable. What effects would arise from the daily consumption of
such bread for several months has not been determined; but it is doubtful
whether it would prove salutary. Indeed there are sufficient reasons for
condemning the adoption of such bread in the general diet of a people for
any very lengthened period.[230] Our own experiments in bread-making,
extending over a long period of years, lead us to prefer carbonate or
bicarbonate of soda for the purpose. Theoretically, the corresponding
salts of potassa would be preferable. A mixture of equal parts of the
bicarbonates of potassa and of soda will, perhaps, ultimately be found to
be more useful than either substance used separately.

[Footnote 230: See GOITURE, MAGNESIA, &c.]

In times of scarcity and famine various substances, besides the flour of
the cereals, have been made into bread, or have been mixed with it, in
order to lessen the quantity of the former required by the people. For
this purpose, almost every amylaceous vegetable at once plentiful and
cheap has, in its turn, been eagerly appropriated. Acorns, beech-mast, the
leguminous seeds, numerous starchy bulbous roots, and similar substances,
have been employed, either in the form of meal, or made into an emulsion
or jelly, which has been used instead of water to form the flour of
bread-corn into a dough. At such times bran, the most nutritious and
valuable portion of the grain, although usually rejected as worthless, has
been retained in the flour, and has even been added to it in excess.
Birkenmayer, a brewer of Constance, during a period of scarcity, succeeded
in manufacturing bread from the farinaceous residue of beer (brewer's
grains). 10 _lbs._ of this substance, rubbed to a paste, with 1/2 _lb._ of
yeast, 5 _lbs._ of ordinary meal, and a handful of salt, produces 14
_lbs._ of BLACK BREAD, which is said to be "both savoury and nourishing."
The nutritious quality of brewer's grains is shown by their extensive
employment at the present day as food for pigs and cattle, and
particularly for milch cows. In like manner Iceland, Carragheen, and other
mosses, have been made into bread, either alone, or mixed with flour or
meal. They are used, in the first case, in the state of meal, in the same
way as flour; in the second case, 7 _lbs._ of moss are directed to be
boiled in 10 or 12 _galls._ of water, and the resulting glutinous liquid
or jelly to be employed to make 70 _lbs._ of flour into dough, which is
then fermented and baked in the usual way. It is said that flour thus
produces fully double its weight of good household bread. A simpler plan
is to mix 1 _lb._ of lichen meal with 3 or 4 _lbs._ of flour; the
bitterness of the lichen having been first extracted by soaking it in cold
water. Bread so prepared has of late been highly recommended for the
delicate and dyspeptic. The modern baker is in the habit of mixing large
quantities of potatoes with his bread, whenever he can purchase them at
paying prices. Mealy potatoes are selected, and are carefully mashed or
pulped, and the dry flour is worked into this pulp or dough, which is then
mixed with the sponge in the usual manner. For inferior bread, equal
weights of potato pulp and dry flour are often used. Bread so prepared
eats 'short,' and is deficient in sponginess, and in that fine
yellowish-white tint which forms one of the characteristics of pure
wheaten bread, More recently, rice boiled with water to a jelly has got
into very extensive use among the bakers. A 'sponge' is made with a
portion of the jelly thickened with some flour, and the whole process is
conducted in the ordinary manner, except that the fermentation is
generally more slowly conducted and allowed to proceed for a longer
period. Flour so treated yields fully 50% more bread than when merely
mixed up with yeast and water. This constitutes the process of Messrs
Morian, Martin, and Journet, of Paris, which was tested, a few years
since, at Marylebone Workhouse. The experiment succeeded, but the only
result to the public has been, that the common bakers have adopted the
plan, and now very generally surcharge their bread with such an excess of
water that, in many cases, it only possesses two thirds the amount of
nourishment which it did before the publication of the system just
referred to. Unfortunately, the cupidity of dishonest tradesmen appears to
be continually impelling them to avail themselves of the exertions of
philanthropists and the discoveries of science, in order to increase their
profits, regardless alike of the quality of their commodities and the
health of their customers. Bread containing an excess of water rapidly
becomes sour and mouldy, and is apt to disorder the digestive functions of
those who eat it.

From the experiments of Dr Colquhoun, it appears that the starch of flour
is partially converted into sugar during the process of fermenting and
baking the dough, and thus contributes to the sweetness of the bread. He
proposes to add to the flour, arrow-root, the farina of potatoes, and
similar amylaceous substances, made into a jelly with hot water, for this
purpose. Dr Percival has recommended the addition of salep with the same
intention. 1 _oz._ of salep, dissolved in 1 quart of water; 2 _lbs._ of
flour; 80 grs. of salt; and 2 _oz._ of yeast, gave 3 _lbs._ 2 _oz._ of
good bread. The same weight of materials, without the salep, gave only
2-3/4 _lbs._ If too much salep is added, it gives its peculiar flavour to
the bread.

In reference to the above substitutions, and to the relative quantity of
bread produced from any given weight of flour, the reader should remember
that the mere increase of the weight or bulk of the product does not carry
with it a corresponding increase of the nutritive elements contained in
the flour. These remain the same in all cases; and just in proportion as
the product, in bread, is greater, will be the decrease in the value of
such bread as food. So also with potatoes, rice, and other farinaceous and
pulpy substances used as substitutes for wheat-flour. Their poverty in
nitrogenous matter, or flesh-formers, is so great, that the greatly
increased quantity required as food to support the body, apart from mere
inconvenience, more than compensates for their apparent low price. Thus,
good wheaten bread, at 2_d._ per _lb._, is more than twice as cheap as
potatoes at 1_d._; for, assuming 2 _lbs._ of the first as a day's food, 10
_lbs._ of the last will be required for the same purpose; and even this
large quantity will scarcely effect the desired object. Liebig has
demonstrated that, regard being had to the nutritive power of wheat, it
is, under all ordinary circumstances, the cheapest article of food
provided by nature for man.

We have not entered into particulars respecting oven management, because,
on the large scale, it is thoroughly understood by every practical baker.
For the instruction of the busy housewife, however, we may state that the
oven should always be sufficiently heated before the bread is put into it,
in order that the gas contained in the cells of the 'sponge' may be
expanded as rapidly as possible by the heat, and the resulting light mass
quickly rendered sufficiently solid to prevent its subsequent collapse.
The heat should also be maintained at nearly the same temperature during
the whole of the time the bread is submitted to its action. In general,
with ordinary kitchen ovens properly heated, 30 minutes' baking is
sufficient for one-pound loaves and cakes; and 15 minutes in addition for
every pound after the first for larger ones. Thus, a 1 _lb._ loaf requires
1/2 hour; a 2 _lb._ loaf 3/4 hour; and a 4 _lb._ loaf, 1-1/4 hour.

It is the common ambition of the English baker to give that peculiar tint
to the crust of his bread in the process of baking which is so highly
esteemed by connoisseurs, and so successfully produced by the Viennese and
Parisians. It has been long known at Vienna that if the hearth of an oven
be cleaned with a moistened wisp of straw, the crust of bread baked in it
immediately afterwards presents a beautiful yellow tint. It was thence
inferred that this peculiarity depends on the vapour, which being
condensed on the roof of the oven, falls back on the bread. At Paris, in
order to secure with certainty so desirable an appearance, the hearth of
the oven is generally laid so as to form an inclined plane, with a rise of
about 11 inches in 3 feet; and the arched roof is built lower at the end
nearest the door, as compared with the further extremity. When the oven is
charged the entrance is closed with a wet bundle of straw. By this
arrangement the steam is driven down on the bread, and a golden-yellow
crust is given to it, as if it had been previously covered with the yolk
of an egg.

Pure wheaten bread is one of the most wholesome articles of food, and has
been justly termed the 'staff of life,' and a certain proportion of it
should be taken at every meal.

_New and Stale Bread._--As has been just stated, bread which has been kept
for 24 hours after baking is more digestible, and therefore preferable to
that which has been newly baked. This latter exhibits a well-known elastic
appearance, and possesses a certain degree of moisture which renders its
taste more agreeable to most persons than bread which has been kept for a
day or two, and has become firmer and drier in appearance, and which is
commonly termed _stale_. It is very generally supposed that this change in
properties in bread which has been kept for a few days, is owing to the
loss of water.

This, however, is not the case. The crum of newly baked bread when cold
contains about 45 per cent. of water, and that of stale bread contains
almost exactly the same proportion.

The difference in properties between the two is due simply to difference
in molecular arrangement. Boussingault found that a loaf which had been
kept for six days, though it had become very stale, had not lost more than
1 per cent. of its weight when new. The same loaf was then placed in the
oven for an hour, and at the end of that time it had acquired all the
properties and appearance of new bread, although during the second baking
it lost 3-1/2 per cent. of water. In another experiment a portion of bread
was allowed to become stale when enclosed in a tight case, to prevent loss
of water by evaporation; it was then heated, and was thus restored to the
condition of new bread; these effects were produced alternately, many
times in succession, upon the same piece of bread; a heat of about 131 deg. F.
was found to be sufficient to convert stale into new bread. Every person
who has seen a thick slice of stale bread toasted may have satisfied
himself that the crum has during this operation been converted into the
same condition as that of new bread.

_Fungi._ When bread has been kept a few days and has become stale, certain
species of fungi show themselves in it: these are the _penicillium
glaucum_, which is the green mould of cheese; the _fermentum cerivisiae_ or
yeast fungus; the _oidium auriantiacum_ or orange-red mould; the _puccinia
graminis_ and others. Excess of salt added to the bread prevents the
development of these fungi.

_Diseases arising from the employment of unsound Flour and Bread._--The
flour may be ergotised or grown, and fermenting from the presence of
fungi. All the poisonous symptoms of ergot are induced from continuously
partaking of bread made with ergotised flour. Dry gangrene is one of the
most virulent forms of poisoning caused by partaking of ergotised bread.
Severe intestinal derangement is an accompaniment of the milder forms of
poisoning. Ergot is more frequently present in rye flour than in wheat.
Fermenting bread is a fertile source of dyspepsia, whilst acid bread
causes diarrh[oe]a. This latter malady is also caused by the presence in
bread of the _oidium aurantiacum_. Professors Varnell and Tuson state
that mouldy oats, the mould being caused by a fungus (the _aspergillus_),
have given rise to paralytic symptoms in horses, so that the presence of
these fungi in oats used for making bread should always be regarded with
considerable caution.

It has not been demonstrated that the acarus so common in flour has had
any injurious effect when eaten. When well fermented and baked bread is
very easy of digestion. It should never be eaten until it has stood at
least 24 hours after being taken out of the oven. When newer, bread is apt
to disagree with the stomach, frequently producing indigestion,
biliousness, diarrh[oe]a, dyspepsia, and other like ailments. Bread
prepared from meal containing the whole of the bran is the most nutritious
and digestible, and should alone be given to children and growing persons,
and eaten by the dyspeptic and delicate. Young infants should never be fed
upon bread. See ALEUROMETER, ALUM, FLOUR, WHEAT, &c.

=Bread, Aerated.= The best description of unfermented bread is that
manufactured by the process of Dr DAUGLISH. The method of manufacture has
this advantage:--During the whole of the operation neither the flour nor
the dough comes into contact with the flesh of the workman. For a full
description of the method of preparing this article, _see_ Watts' 'Dic. of
Chemistry.' See BREAD, UNFERMENTED.

=Bread, Amer'ican.= From American barreled flour. "14 _lbs._ of American
flour will make 21-1/2 _lbs._ of bread; whereas the best sort of English
flour produces only 18-1/2 _lbs._ of bread." (Mrs Rundell.) This arises
from the superior quality of the wheat used in its production; and also
from its being kiln-dried before grinding, by which much water is driven
off.

=Bread, Bee.= The matter collected by bees to form the bottom of the hive.
It resembles a mixture of resin and wax. Its fumes were formerly thought
to be anti-asthmatic.

=Bread, Bran.= 1. From the whole meal, without sifting out any of the
bran.

2. By adding about 3 _oz._ of bran to every _lb._ of ordinary flour.

=Bread, Cassava=, is made from the root of the _manihot_, by first
expressing the juice, then grinding the residue into a coarse meal, and
baking it in the form of cakes upon thin iron plates. When steeped in oil,
and flavoured with cayenne, and slightly broiled upon a gridiron, it is
not unpalatable.

=Bread, Extemporaneous.= See BREAD, UNFERMENTED.

=Bread, French.= _Prep._ 1. From fine flour, as the best white bread. For
the better kinds, and for those intended for rolls and small fancy bread,
the sponge and dough is commonly wetted with milk and water, and,
occasionally, a very little butter is added. "When the rolls or small
fancy loaves have lain in a quick oven about a quarter of an hour, turn
them on the other side for about a quarter of an hour longer. Then take
them out and chip them with a knife, which will make them look spongy, and
of a fine yellow; whereas rasping takes off this fine colour, and renders
their look less inviting."

2. FRENCH SOUP-BREAD. From fine flour, but employing fully double the
usual quantity of salt. It is baked in thin loaves, so as to be nearly all
crust, by which means it becomes more soluble in hot soup.

=Bread, Hick's Pat'ent.= This is ordinary bread baked in an oven so
arranged that the vapours arising during the process are condensed in a
suitable receiver. The condensed liquor is a crude, weak spirit, produced
during the fermentation of the dough, and possesses little commercial
value; indeed, insufficient to pay for the expenses attending its
collection. Besides which, the bread prepared under this patent was
rejected by the vulgar, who flocked to the shops of the neighbouring
bakers, who professed to sell their bread with "the gin in it."

=Bread, Household.= This name is commonly given to bread made with flour
from which only the coarser portion of the bran has been removed; and to
bread prepared from a mixture of flour and potatoes. The following are
examples:--

1. (Rev. Mr Haggett.) Remove the flake-bran from flour, 14 _lbs._; boil
the bran in 1 _gall._ of water until reduced to 7 pints; strain, cool, and
knead in the flour, adding salt and yeast as for other bread. Very
wholesome.

2. Flour, 7 _lbs._; mealy potatoes (well mashed), 3 _lbs._; as before.
Objectionable for the reasons already given.

=Bread, Leav'ened.= (l[)e]v'-). Using leaven instead of yeast, and in the
same way. About 1 _lb._ to each bushel of flour is usually sufficient. The
more leaven used, the lighter the bread made with it will be; and the
fresher and sweeter the leaven, the less sour will it taste. Leaven,
except among the Jews and sailors, is now superseded by yeast.

=Bread, London White.= The common proportions of the London bakers
are--Flour, 1 sack; common salt, 4-1/2 lbs.; alum, 5 oz.; yeast, 4 pints;
warm water for the sponge (about), 3 galls. The process has been already
noticed.

=Bread, Paris White.= The following has been handed to us as the plan
commonly adopted by the Paris bakers for their best white bread:--On 80
lbs. of the dough (before the yeast was added) from yesterday's baking, as
much lukewarm water is poured as will be required to make 320 lbs. of
flour into a rather thin dough; as soon as this has risen, 80 lbs. are
taken out and reserved in a warm place as leaven for the next day's
baking; 1 lb. of dry yeast, dissolved in warm water, is then added to the
remaining portion, and the whole lightly kneaded; as soon as it has
sufficiently risen, it is made into loaves, and shortly afterwards baked;
the loaves being placed in the oven without touching each other, so that
they may become crusty all round.

=Bread, Unfermented.= _Syn._ EXTEMPORANEOUS BREAD. _Prep._ 1. From Jones's
patent flour. Very wholesome and excellent; indeed, when skilfully made
and baked, almost equal to French bread.

2. From Sewell's patent flour. Slightly inferior to the last.

3. To each lb. of flour add, separately, 1-1/4 dr. of bicarbonate of soda,
and 1 dr. of tartaric acid (both perfectly dry, and in very fine powder);
rub them well together with the hands until thoroughly incorporated; then
form the whole into a dough with water, as quickly as possible, and at
once bake in a quick oven. About 8 or 9 oz. of water are required for
every lb. of flour. Answers well when expertly managed.

4. Flour, 1 lb.; bicarbonate of soda, 1 dr.; mix; make a dough with water,
q. s., to which 1 dr. of hydrochloric acid (commercial) has been added,
and further proceed as before.

5. Whiting's PATENT BREAD:--This closely resembles the last. The
proportions are--Flour, 7 lbs.; carbonate of soda and hydrochloric acid,
of each 1 oz.; water, 2-3/4 pints. This method was suggested by Dr Henry
in 1797, and was patented by Dr Whiting in 1836. If the proportions be not
observed, or the mixture be not perfect, the quality of the bread suffers.
The action of the acid on the soda forms common salt in the loaf.

6. AMMONI'ACAL BREAD:--Carbonate of ammonia, 3/4 to 1 oz.; cold water, q.
s.; dissolve, add of flour, 7 lbs.; and make a dough, which must be formed
into loaves and baked immediately, as before.--_Obs._ To ensure success
the carbonate should be recent, and free from bicarbonate, the presence of
which is known by its being white and powdery, and of inferior pungency.
If any of the last salt be present, the bread will have a yellowish
colour, and a slightly alkaline or urinous flavour. The process answers
best for small loaves, cakes, and fancy bread. By employing pure carbonate
of ammonia instead of the commercial sesquicarbonate, the process succeeds
admirably, and the resulting bread is most wholesome. A late writer
recommends the use of bicarbonate of ammonia, but evidently does so in
ignorance, as in practice it is inapplicable, as the author verified by
numerous carefully conducted experiments.

7. It has been at various times proposed to knead the dough with water
highly charged with carbonic acid, on which Dr Ure observes that "the
resulting bread will be somewhat spongy." He states that he endeavoured to
make bread in this way, but never could succeed in producing a light
spongy loaf. The quantity of gas in the water is much too trifling for the
purpose, and the greater part of it escapes in the process of making the
dough, even though all the materials be well cooled, and the operation
conducted in a cold place. The only way of obviating the difficulty is to
conduct the kneading in a trough under considerable atmospheric pressure,
and at a very low temperature, by means of machinery, as is done by Dr
Dauglish, whose method is now protected by letters patent. This method is
not, however, adapted either to domestic use or the small scale.[231]

[Footnote 231: For a full description of Dauglish's process, see Watts'
'Dic. of Chemistry.']

_Obs._ Unfermented bread has been strongly recommended as being more
wholesome, and generally better adapted to bilious and dyspeptic patients,
than fermented bread. It must, however, be confessed, that the unfermented
bread commonly met with has a slight 'raw-grain' taste, which is very
disagreeable to some persons. But this taste is not necessarily present,
being chiefly dependent on bad manipulation, the use of inferior flour,
and insufficient baking. The process of fermentation doubtless modifies
the condition of the starch and gluten of the dough, and renders them
easier of digestion. This species of bread is sadly adulterated with a
variety of indescribable messes. See BISCUITS, BREAD (_ante_), FLOUR,
GINGERBREAD, &c.

=Bread Fruit= (_Artocarpus incisa_, nat. order Graminaceae). The tree
yielding the bread-fruit is a native of Central America, the South Sea
Islands, and the Islands of the Indian Archipelago. It is principally
composed of starch, sugar, and water, every 100 parts containing 80 of
water. The fruit is gathered when the starch is in a mealy condition; it
is then peeled, wrapped in leaves, and baked by placing it between hot
stones. It then has the taste of sweetbread.

The natives of the countries where this fruit is found practise a method
for preserving it, which consists in allowing the nitrogenous parts of the
fruit to putrefy in water-tight pits. They thus obtain a mass resembling
soft cheese in consistence, and this, when required to be eaten, is baked
in the same manner as the fresh fruit.

=BREAK'FAST= (br[)e]k'-). _Syn._ JENTACULUM L.; DEJEUNER, DEJEUNE, Fr.;
FRUeHSTUeCK, Ger. The first meal of the day; or the food served at it.

The morning meal--the 'early bit' of the Germans--is perhaps the most
important one of the day. According to Erasmus Wilson, it is usually
"taken at eight or nine." The proper time for the purpose must, however,
depend upon that at which the party rises. About an hour, to an hour and a
half, after leaving the bed, will generally be found the most appropriate
time for breakfast, and appears to be the one pointed out by nature, and
the most conducive to health. By that time the powers of the system have
fully recovered from the inactivity of sleep, and the functions of the
stomach and other viscera have again come into full play. The appetite is
excited and seeks appeasing, and both instinct and reason direct us to the
social board. If abstinence be now prolonged, the physical and mental
energies, unsupported by the supply of food which indirectly gives them
birth, gradually lessen, and incipient exhaustion ensues. The fluids of
the stomach and the smaller intestines begin to act upon the coats of
those viscera instead of on the food, and an unpleasant feeling of hunger
or a loss of appetite comes on, with all its depressing consequences. When
breakfast cannot be taken within a reasonable period after rising, the gap
should be filled up by chewing a crust, a biscuit, or the like. A raw egg
or two, sucked from the shell, or broken into a teacup and drank, will be
found most valuable for this purpose. Raw milk, cheese, salted food, and
other indigestible matter, should be particularly avoided at this early
period of the day.

The articles of food to be chosen for the breakfast-table must depend
entirely on the state of the health, the occupations, &c., of those
assembled round it. Coffee appears to be, by common consent, the favourite
beverage. For the delicate, the bilious, and the young, it should neither
be taken too strong, nor very weak, and should be softened down with milk
or cream, and well sweetened with sugar. Tea is more apt to affect the
nerves and stomach than pure unchicoried coffee. Green tea, taken thus
early in the day, often acts as an absolute poison, though a slow one. We
have seen severe fits of vomiting and exhaustion follow its use.

The solid food for breakfast should be easy of digestion, and nutritious.
Females, children, and persons leading a sedentary life, should confine
themselves to a sufficient quantity of good meal-bread with only a
moderate quantity of butter, to which an egg, or a small rasher of mild
bacon, may be advantageously added. For very young children there is no
better breakfast, where it agrees with them, than scalding-hot new-milk
poured on sliced bread, with a slice or two of bread and butter to eat
with it. Parties engaged in active occupations may extend their exploits
somewhat farther, and add to this bill of fare a little ham or cold meat.
When an undue time will elapse before the luncheon or dinner, and
particularly during the colder season of the year, the broiled leg of a
fowl, an under-dressed mutton chop, or a little tender beef-steak, will be
found, by the parties last referred to, most useful; nay, in many cases,
invaluable. But excess must be particularly avoided. The object is to take
enough food to maintain the system in full energy and vigour, and
particularly to avoid offending the stomach by overloading it; a
misfortune easily effected at the breakfast table. Old commercial
travellers--men wise in the mysteries of life and its enjoyments--are
scrupulously careful to make a good, but not a heavy breakfast, before
commencing the arduous duties of the day. See DEJEUNER, MEALS, &c.

=Breakfast Pow'der.= _Syn._ RYE'-COFFEE, DILLEN'IUS'S C., HUNT'S
ECONOM'ICAL BREAKFAST POWDER, &c. Rye, roasted along with a little fat,
after the manner of coffee. It was once sold at 2_s._ 6_d._ the lb., and
was formerly extensively used as a substitute for foreign coffee, of which
it is one of the cheapest and best. Since the reduction of duty on coffee
it has nearly fallen into disuse, unless it be by the grocers to
adulterate that article.

=BREAST (Sore).= See NIPPLES.

=Breast Pang.= _Syn._ ANGINA PECTORIS. _Symptoms._--A sudden pain
occurring in the parts covered by the breast-bone and the throat,
accompanied with a feeling of suffocation, and the apprehension of
immediate death. The pain sometimes extends down the arms and through the
back. Summon a medical man without a moment's loss of time. Pending his
speedy arrival give a drachm of ether with one third of a grain of acetate
of morphia. Apply hot applications to the chest and stomach; likewise
friction to the chest, back, and sides with spirits. If the relief be only
partial, the dose of ether may be repeated after twenty minutes.

=BREATH (Fetid).= Scarcely anything is more disagreeable or disgusting
than a stinking breath. Various means have been proposed to remove this
annoyance, depending principally on the administration of aromatics, which
by their odour smother it for a time; but these require continual
repetition, and are liable to interfere with the functions of digestion.
The real cause of stinking breath may generally be traced to a diseased
stomach, or to decayed teeth. When the former is the case, mild aperients
should be administered; and if these do not succeed, an emetic may be
given, followed by an occasional dose of the Abernethy-medicines. When
rotten teeth are the cause, they should be thoroughly cleansed, and then
'stopped,' or if this is impracticable, they should be removed. When this
is impossible or inconvenient, the evil may usually be lessened by keeping
them scrupulously clean. Dirty teeth also often cause the breath to smell;
and hence the use of the tooth-brush should be a daily habit. Occasionally
rinsing out the mouth with a little clean water to which a few drops of
solution of chloride of lime, or of chloride of soda, has been added, is
often an effective method. Mouth-washes of Condy's fluid, and also of
carbolic acid, both very greatly diluted, form useful remedies; as do also
chlorate of potash and tannic acid in the form of mouth-washes. As a
tooth-powder, fresh-burnt charcoal, and particularly areca-nut charcoal,
is without comparison the best. Lozenges, such as the following, have been
strongly recommended to sweeten and purify the breath:--Gum-catechu, 2
oz.; white sugar, 5 oz.; orris powder, 1 oz.; neroli, 5 or 6 drops; make
them into a paste with mucilage, and divide the mass into very small
lozenges. 20 or 30 drops of oil of cloves may be substituted for the orris
and neroli, at will. One or two may be sucked at pleasure. When the breath
of a child or infant, usually so sweet and fresh, smells unpleasantly, it
indicates stomach derangement of some sort. Very frequently it is
indicative of worms. See CACHOU AROMATISE, PASTILS, &c.

=BREW'ING.= The art of making beer.

The only ingredients allowed by law to enter into the composition of beer
are malt, sugar, hops, or any substitute for hops, and water, together
with a little yeast.

The apparatus and utensils required under the common system, in brewing
beer, are--

1. A copper or boiler capable of holding fully two thirds of the quantity
proposed to be brewed; with a gauge-stick to determine the number of
gallons of fluid at any given depth therein; and a wooden cover to place
over it before the boiling commences, or when not in use. A copper capable
of holding not less than 140 galls. is a convenient size for brewing a
quarter of malt, and is commonly known as a one-quarter copper.

2. A mash-tub or mash-tun capable of containing one third more than the
copper.

3. One or more tuns or vessels, to ferment the beer in.

4. Three or four shallow coolers, to reduce the wort as rapidly as
possible to a proper temperature for fermentation.

5. One or two copper or wooden bowls, for baling, &c.

6. A thermometer with a scale reaching from below 32 deg. to a few degrees
above the boiling-point of water (say to 225 deg. or 230 deg. Fahr.).

7. A saccharometer, for taking the density of worts and beer.

8. A suitable number of casks (clean and sweet), to contain the beer.

9. One or more large funnels or tunners.

10. Two or more clean pails.

11. A hand-pump of a size proportionate to the brewing.

12. A mill, for crushing the malt. Brewers, for sale, are restricted by
law to the use of mills with plain metal rollers.

These articles will vary in value from L10, upwards to many hundreds, or
even thousands, according to the extent of the brewing; but the whole of
them necessary for a private family may be bought for less than the former
amount, as the mill, pump, &c., may then be dispensed with, and the rest
may be of the simplest and least expensive character possible. By proper
care they will last for 30 or 40 years, and still continue in a useful
state.

Preliminary proceedings:--

The malt is chosen according to the intended character of the
brewing--pale, amber, roasted, or any mixture of them, as the occasion may
require. It is bruised or crushed in a mill (malt-mill) before employing
it in brewing, that it may be the more readily acted on by the water. It
should not be ground too small, as it would then make the wort thick, and
cause it to run with difficulty from the mash-tun. The crushed malt may
advantageously lie for a few days in a cool situation, by which it will
attract a considerable quantity of moisture from the air, and be the more
easily exhausted by the water used in mashing. Pale malt may be used
coarser than amber or brown malt. A bushel of good malt should measure
1-1/4 bushel when ground; and a quarter should yield between 9-1/2 and 10
bushels, the quantity slightly varying according to the degree of bruising
it has undergone. On the large scale, malt is ground in crushing mills
furnished with plain iron rollers; on the small scale, by wooden rollers
or mills worked by hand. For private brewing, the malt is generally bought
ready crushed or ground, for convenience sake.

The hops, after being taken from the 'pockets' or 'bag,' are crumbled with
the hands ready to be thrown into the copper. For general purposes those
grown in Kent, and of the present season, are preferred. For the finer
sorts of ale, East Kent hops are commonly used; and when it is intended to
keep the liquor for a long time, those known by the names of Country's,
Alton's, or Farnham hops, are employed.

The quantity of hops required by a given measure of malt varies from 2
lbs. to 22 lbs. per quarter, according to the strength or gravity of the
wort, the character of the beer intended to be brewed, and the climate
which the beer may have to sustain. Export beer requires, as a rule, an
exceptionally large amount of hops to enable it to bear without injury the
heat of the country to which it is shipped. The following are the usual
proportions:--

  Table beer                      2 lbs.  1 qr.
  Mild ale or porter              4 "     1 "
  Brown stout                     5 "     1 "
  Scotch ale (best)               5 "     1 "
  Strong ale (ordinary)           5-1/2 " 1 "
  "          (keeping)            8 "     1 "
  Bitter ale               10 to 14 "     1 "
  East India ale (export)  12  " 22 "     1 "

When a strong, coarse hop is used, a less quantity suffices for the same
strength brewed, but the flavour is always inferior.

The water, which should be clear, and free from all traces of decomposing
animal and vegetable matter, must be provided in abundance. Of late years
hard water has been preferred by many brewers, on the ground that beer
brewed with it is self-fining, and hence requires no artificial
clarification either in the vat or cask.

Hard water is also much to be preferred to soft in brewing stock beers;
since by its rendering the albuminous matters contained in the mash
insoluble, it prevents the fermentation to which these would otherwise
give rise, and so assists in the preservation of the beer, and in keeping
it free from acidity.

The German brewers, however, who do not brew beverages intended to be kept
for any time, on the contrary, employ a soft water, by which means the
albuminous substances contained in the malt are rendered soluble, and
become diffused throughout the beer, and possibly add in some measure to
its nutritive qualities. Hard waters are said to have the property, over
soft ones, of enabling the beer to retain more saccharine matter, and
hence to improve its flavour and to give it more body. The ales of Burton
are pre-eminent for their excellent quality and keeping properties. In the
neighbourhood of Burton there are extensive beds of new red sandstone and
gypsum, by sinking wells into which the Burton brewers obtain the water
from which they make their beers. From the subjoined analyses of Burton
well waters it will be seen that this water is a very hard one, and
contains, besides other salts, a very large quantity of sulphate of lime.

Analysis of the water used in Messrs ALLSOPP'S brewery (Dr Boettinger):--

                       Amount of ingredients
                          in the imperial
                        gallon, represented
                            in grains.

  Chloride of sodium           10.12
  Sulphate of potash            7.65
  Sulphate of lime             18.96
  Sulphate of magnesia          9.95
  Carbonate of lime            15.51
  Carbonate of magnesia         1.70
  Carbonate of iron             0.60
  Silica                        0.79

                               65.28

Analysis of water from a well at the brewery of Messrs BASS (Cooper):--

  Carbonate of lime             9.93
  Sulphate of lime             54.40
  Chloride of calcium          13.38
  Sulphate of magnesia          0.83

                               78.54

The whole of the water used in the Burton breweries is obtained from
wells, and not from the river Trent, as was at one time erroneously
supposed. A factitious Burton water may, it is said, be obtained by adding
sulphate of lime and salt to any soft water, in the proportions stated in
the above analyses.

Dr C. Graham is of opinion that, although the properties of the Burton
well waters are very greatly due to the large quantity of sulphate of lime
contained in them, the chlorides of sodium and calcium are also important
constituents.

The yeast must be fresh and good; and all the vessels and utensils
perfectly sweet and clean. If the latter be neglected, even the most
skilful brewing will prove a failure.

Process of brewing:--

1. MASHING:--The ground or bruised malt placed in the mash-tun is
macerated for some time in hot water, and the infusion (_wort_) drawn off
from a hole in the bottom, over which a strainer or false bottom is
placed, to prevent the malt passing out along with the liquor. During the
process of mashing a peculiar principle contained in the malt, called
diastase, reacts upon the starch with which it is associated, and converts
it into grape-sugar. The more completely this conversion is effected the
richer will be the resulting wort in sugar or "_saccharine_," and the
stronger and more alcoholic the beer produced by its fermentation. It is,
therefore, a desideratum with the brewer to mash at the temperature which
most fully promotes this important object. The best temperature for this
purpose ranges between 150 deg. and 170 deg. Fahr. When more than one mash is
made, the first should be something lower than the first-named
temperature; the second may be from 175 deg. to 185 deg.; and the third as high as
200 deg. Fahr.

If the first mashing has been rightly conducted, the whole of the starch
will be converted into sugar, and the action of the second and third
mashings is merely to wash out any of the remaining saccharine matter
still existing in the crushed grain.

In practice, as soon as the water in the copper acquires the temperature
of 170 deg., 45 galls. are run into the mash-tun, and 1 quarter of crushed
malt gradually added to it. The whole is now thoroughly mixed with the
mash liquor, by means of oars, or machinery, the agitation (_mashing_)
being continued for 30 or 40 minutes, when 36 galls. more water from the
copper are added, and the whole again well agitated, as before. The
mash-tun is now closely covered up, and the mash allowed to repose for
about two hours, in order that the diastase may exert its saccharifying
power upon the unconverted starch of the malt. At the end of this time the
tap is set, and the wort run into the 'underback.' It generally amounts to
about 50 galls. The second mash is then made with about 60 galls. of
water, at 185 deg. F., and the whole process repeated as before. After an hour
the liquor is drawn off, and the malt drained ready for the third mash.
This time only 35 galls. of water are added at 200 deg. F., and the whole is
seldom allowed to stand longer than half an hour. It is then run off, and
the malt allowed to drain as dry as possible.

In some cases the worts of the first and second mashes only are used for
strong beer; that of the third mashing being kept for table beer, or as
liquor to mash a fresh quantity of malt.

Pale malt and mixtures of malt and raw grain should be mashed for a longer
time, and at a somewhat lower temperature than brown or high-dried malt.

Instead of making second and third mashes as above described, it has long
been the practice in Scotland, and is now becoming common in England, to
sprinkle the surface of the grains in the mash-tun with water, at or about
the temperature of 180 deg. Fahr., by means of a simple revolving instrument
termed a 'sparger,' and to let the liquor drain through the goods and run
off by the tap with the last portions of the first wort. By this means the
whole surface of the grain is continuously and regularly sprinkled with
hot water.

When sugar is used it may be either mixed with the malt in the mash-tun,
at the time of mashing, or put into the underback, just before setting the
taps, and the hot wort run upon it. The proportions of malt and sugar vary
according to the quality of the latter, but, on an average, from 170 lbs.
to 200 lbs. of good raw sugar may be taken as the equivalent of a quarter
of malt.

2. BOILING:--The wort is next transferred from the underback to the
copper, and heated to the boiling-point as soon as possible, the object of
this expedition being to prevent the formation of acid in the wort, by
exposure to the air, before undergoing the changes which take place in the
copper. As soon as the boiling of the wort commences the hops are added,
and the boiling is continued for about 2 or 2-1/2 hours. A longer boiling
is highly objectionable, owing to the extraction of a heavy, resinous
bitter from the hop, and the danger of losing the volatile oil upon which
the aroma depends. For mild beers the worts are seldom boiled so long; for
strong keeping ales, sometimes a little longer. The boiling is known to be
completed when the liquor 'clears,' as it is called, and albuminous flocks
sink to the bottom of the copper.

The hops, strained from each wort, are returned into the copper with the
following one.

The average loss by evaporation in the process of boiling varies from
1/6th to 1/7th of the original bulk of the wort. The gravity increases at
the same time in about the ratio of 5 to 4; so that if the gravity be, at
first, say 32 lbs. per barrel, it will at the end of the operation have
risen to about 40 lbs.

3. COOLING:--The wort, under the common system, is 'run off' from the
copper into the 'hop-back,' through a strainer which keeps back the hops.
It is then pumped into large square shallow vessels called 'coolers,'
where it is freely exposed to a current of air to reduce its temperature
as quickly as possible, in order to avoid acidity or 'souring.' In 6 or 7
hours, or sooner, the temperature should fall to about 60 deg. Fahr. In warm
weather the depth of the liquor in the coolers should not exceed 3 or 4
inches; and in cold weather not more than 5 or 6 inches. As soon as the
temperature has fallen to about 60 deg. the liquor is 'tunned' and 'yeasted.'

The loss by evaporation and condensation in the coolers varies from 13 to
18 galls. per quarter.

4. FERMENTATION:--The cooled wort is next run into the fermenting tuns or
vessels (gyle-tuns). In small brewings these may be casks with one of
their heads removed; but under any form they must not be more than 2/3rds
filled. The yeast, previously mixed with a little wort, and kept until the
whole has begun to ferment (technically termed '_lobb_'), is now added,
and after agitation the vessel is covered up, and kept so, until the
fermentation is well established. By this time the temperature has risen
from 9 deg. to 15 deg..

The quantity of yeast employed, and the temperature of the wort when it is
added, differ in different breweries and for different kinds of beer. It
seldom exceeds 2 lbs. per barrel unless the weather is unusually cold, or
the yeast old or stale, when a larger proportion is required. The Scotch
brewers generally take only 1 gall. of yeast to fully 4 hhds. of wort.

In England, the temperature at which the yeast is added varies from 55 deg. to
65 deg. Fahr. In Scotland, the common temperature is 51 deg. to 52 deg.. In cold
weather the heat may be 5 deg. or 6 deg. higher than in mild and warm weather, and
a little more yeast may also be advantageously employed. In cold weather
ale is commonly tunned at 60 deg., porter at 64 deg., and weaker beers at 65 deg. or
70 deg. Fahr. In 'warm weather' strong beer should be 4 deg. or 5 deg., and other
beers 7 deg. or 8 deg. cooler than the 'heats' just mentioned. On the small scale,
1 to 1-1/4 pint of yeast may be used to every barrel of strong-beer wort,
and 3/4 pint to every barrel of mild-beer wort.

The commencement of the fermentation is indicated by a line of small
bubbles forming round the sides of the tun, and in a short time extending
over the whole surface. A 'crusty head' soon forms, and then a 'fine rocky
head,' followed by a 'light frothy' one. At length the head assumes a
yeasty appearance, the colour becomes yellowish brown, and a vinous odour
is developed. As soon as this last head begins to fall, the tun is skimmed
every 2 or 3 hours, until no more yeast is formed. The object of this is,
not only to check the violence of the fermentation, but also to remove a
peculiar bitterness, with which the first portion of the yeast is
impregnated. The beer is then put into casks, or 'cleansed,' as it is
called. A minute attention to every stage of this process is necessary to
secure a fine flavour and a brilliant beverage.

It may be regarded, as a rule, that the lower the temperature, and the
slower, more regular, and less interrupted the process of fermentation,
the better will be the quality of the brewing, and the less likely to
change by age. A little more yeast is required in winter than in summer.
When the fermentation becomes slack in the 'gyle-tun,' a little more
'lobb' is generally added, and the whole is well 'roused up,' On the
contrary, if the temperature rises considerably, or the fermentation
becomes too brisk, the wort is cooled a little and skimmed, or at once
cleansed.

5. CLEANSING:--This consists in running the beer from the gyle-tun into
casks, or other vessels, set sloping, so that the yeast as it forms way
work off the one side of the top, and fall into a vessel placed below to
receive it. In small brewings the beer is often at once transferred from
the gyle-tun to the 'store-casks,' which are sloped a little until the
fermentation is over, when they are skimmed, filled, and bunged.

The process of cleansing is generally commenced as soon as the
'saccharine' in the fermenting wort falls to about 10 lbs. per barrel, a
degree of attenuation which it usually reaches in about 48 hours. Some
brewers add a little wheat-flour or bean-flour (about 1/4 lb. per barrel)
to the beer in the gyle-tun, shortly before cleansing, to quicken the
discharge of yeast; but it is not clearly ascertained whether such a plan
is advantageous, or the contrary.

6. STORING:--As soon as the fermentation is concluded, which generally
takes from 6 to 8 days, or longer, the clear liquor is pumped into the
store-casks or vats, which are then closely bunged, and deposited in a
cool cellar, if not already there, to mature. The preference, which at
present exists in most parts of the United Kingdom, is for mild,
freshly-brewed malt liquors; the good old or mature-vatted beer being now
seldom met with. This, of course, is a source of increased profit to the
brewer, as it enables him to turn over his capital more rapidly, and saves
the risk and expense attendant on long storage.

7. RIPENING:--After a period varying from one to twelve months or longer,
according to the nature of the brewing, and the condition of the cellar,
the liquor will have become fine, and sufficiently mature for use. During
this period the casks, &c., should be occasionally examined to see that
there is no leakage, and to open the vent-holes, should any oozings appear
at the joints. As equable a temperature as possible should be maintained
in the cellar, by ventilation, on the one hand, and the employment of
artificial heat on the other, as circumstances and seasonal changes may
render necessary.

8. FINING or CLARIFYING:--Beer which has been badly brewed or badly
stored, or which from other causes may be thick or muddy, requires
clarifying by artificial means. For a barrel about 1 to 1-1/2 pint of
brewer's finings (isinglass or fish-gelatin dissolved in sour beer) is put
into a bucket, and some of the beer being gradually added, the whole is
violently agitated with a whisk until a frothy head is formed. The mixture
is then thrown into the cask of beer, and well 'rummaged up,' after which
the bung is replaced, and the liquor allowed to repose for a week or ten
days.

Sometimes the above method is found to fail with weak and bad-conditioned
beer. When such is the case, the addition of a teaspoonful of sulphuric
acid, or a table-spoonful of powdered catechu (previously dissolved in 1/2
a pint of boiling water), followed by agitation for a quarter of an hour,
will generally cause the 'finings' to clarify the liquor; 2 or 3 oz. of
tincture of catechu (mixed with a little water) may be used in the same
way. A handful of hops, previously boiled for five minutes in a little of
the beer, and then added to the barrel, and the whole allowed to stand for
a few days, before proceeding to clarify it, will generally have a similar
effect, and cause the 'finings' to act with certainty. It is the absence
of the proper quantity of astringent matter in beer that usually renders
them ineffective.

M. Brescius employs tannin for the clarification of beer. To 1000 litres
of beer he adds 140 grains of tannin dissolved in 3/4 of a litre of water,
which is thoroughly stirred up. After three or four days he adds one litre
of isinglass or two of gelatin in the proportion of 1 kilo. to 100 litres.
The complete clarification requires about eight days.

_Gen. commentary._ The preceding is a concise account of all the essential
operations of the system of brewing at present practised in this country.
On the large scale, extensive and costly apparatus and machinery are
employed for the purpose. On the small scale, various modifications, of a
minor character, or the several processes herein detailed, are frequently
adopted according to the circumstances or ingenuity of the operator. The
principles and practice of brewing beer are, however, essentially the same
under all the conditions here referred to. In Scotland, only one mash is
made, and that at a temperature of about 180 deg. Fahr., with one third of the
quantity of the water required for the brewing. The 'mash-tun' is then
covered up for about half an hour, when the wort is drawn off, and the
operation of 'sparging' begun. This operation is continued until the
density of the mixed worts becomes adapted to produce the quality of the
ale then under process of manufacture. The 'gyle-tun' (fermenting-tun) is
set at from 50 deg. to 60 deg. Fahr., the fermentation being continued slowly for
fifteen to twenty days; and the ale is not 'cleansed' before the degree of
attenuation falls to about 1/2 lb. per day, and not more than one fourth
of the original gravity of the wort remains. Scotch ale is justly
celebrated for its superior quality. Its usual original gravity is from 34
to 45 lbs. per barrel.

In Bavaria, a country remarkable for the excellence of its beer, the wort
is made to ferment at a low temperature, until all the substances which
favour acetification have been rendered insoluble, and have separated
from the liquor. The fermentation is conducted in wide, open, shallow
vessels, which afford free and unlimited access to atmospheric oxygen; and
this in a situation where the temperature does not exceed 45 deg. to 60 deg. Fahr.
A separation of the nitrogenous constituents thus takes place
simultaneously on the surface, and within the whole body of the liquid.
The clearing of the fluid is the sign by which it is known that these
matters have separated. The fermentation usually occupies three or four
weeks, and is conducted during the cooler portion of the year only, and in
a situation removed as much as possible from the influence of
atmospherical changes of temperature. The sedimentary yeast (unterhefe),
and not the surface yeast (oberhefe), of the Bavarian fermenting backs is
employed.

The beers of England and France, as well as most of those of Germany,
become gradually sour by contact with the air. This defect, as observed by
Liebig, does not belong to the beers of Bavaria, which may be preserved,
at pleasure, in half-full casks, as well as in full ones, without
suffering any material alteration. This precious quality must be ascribed
to the peculiar process employed for fermenting the wort, called by the
German chemists 'untergaehrung,' or fermentation from below; and which "has
solved one of the finest theoretical problems that had long taxed the
ingenuity and patience of both the scientific and practical brewer."
(Liebig.)

The 'Comptes Rendus,' lxxvii, 1140-1148, contains a paper by M. Pasteur on
the manufacture of an 'unalterable beer.' In this communication he states
that the liability of beer to turn sour, ropy, &c., is due to the presence
of special ferments derived from the air, and from the materials used. By
boiling the infusion of malt and hops, cooling out of contact with air,
and fermenting with pure yeast[232] in vessels to which only carbonic acid
or pure air is admitted, a beer is produced of superior quality, which may
be preserved without trouble for any time. Even a partial adoption of
these precautions is attended with valuable results. In preparing pure
yeast to start with, the author makes use of the fact that oxygen favours
the growth of true yeast, but hinders the propagation of the other
ferments. Pure yeast being obtained, the beer is afterwards fermented in
an atmosphere nearly destitute of oxygen, as its quality is thereby
improved. Pure yeast when kept in pure air undergoes no change, even at
summer temperature. The _mycoderma vini_ does not, as the author once
thought, become changed into beer-yeast on submersion in a nutritive
fluid; under these circumstances it acts as an alcoholic ferment, but does
not propagate itself.

[Footnote 232: M. Pasteur does not state how this is to be obtained.]

"In the ordinary fermentation of grape-juice and worts these liquids do
not furnish a quantity of alcohol equivalent to the sugar which they
contain; and this because a certain portion of the sugar serves for the
oxidation of the gluten, and is not transformed like the rest. But
wherever the liquor has arrived at the second period of transformation,
the product in alcohol ought to be equivalent to the quantity of sugar
present, as actually happens in all fermentations (sedimentary) which are
not accompanied with a formation, but a disappearance of the yeast.
According to Dr Ure, worts furnish, in the Bavarian breweries, from 10% to
20% more alcohol than they do by the ordinary process of fermentation
(obergaehrung), or that excited by the use of 'oberhefe' or top-yeast."

East-India Ale or Pale Ale, for exportation, is brewed from worts of a sp.
gr. of from 1.063 to 1.070. For the best varieties, 15 to 16 lbs. of the
finest East Kent hops are used to every quarter of pure malt. The pale ale
or bitter beer of the publicans is commonly a very weak liquor (mere table
beer), highly bittered with the hop, and too often with quassia, wormwood,
and other still more objectionable substances. The process now adopted by
the great brewers of pale ale at Burton-on-Trent combines all the most
admirable points of both the Bavarian and Scotch systems of brewing.

Berlin White ale or Pale beer is brewed from wheat-malt mixed with about
1/6th part of barley-malt, the 'wort' being boiled with hops, 1/2 lb. to
the bushel, and slightly fermented with 'top-yeast,' at a rather higher
temperature.

The desire of evading the duty led to the discovery of its being only
necessary to employ 1/3rd, or less, of the grain, in the form of malt;
this portion being sufficient to convert into sugar, in the process of
mashing, the starch of the unmalted grain forming the other part. This
plan answers well when the wort is merely intended for the production of
'grain spirit,' but beer so made is insipid and inferior in quality to
that brewed wholly of malt. Inferior kinds of beer have also been made
from other ingredients than barley-malt, among which may be named the
grain of the cheaper cereals, bran, potatoes, turnips, beet-root, carrots,
parsnips, pea-shells, and other vegetable substances rich in starch and
sugar, all of which will produce beer by being mashed with water in the
common way, with about 9% or 10% of barley-malt.

One quarter of the best barley-malt yields, by skilful mashing, fully 84
lbs. of 'saccharine,' or soluble sweet extractive matter. This
concentrated within the compass of one barrel (33 galls.) gives a sp. gr.
of 1.234. In the process of mashing about 4/7ths of this quantity of
saccharine (or 48 lbs.) is generally carried off in the first wort; 2/7ths
(or 24 lbs.) in the second wort; and 1/7th (or 12 lbs.) in the third wort;
the strengths of the worts being to each other respectively as 4, 2, 1.
The average gravity obtained by the common brewers from malt of current
quality ranges from 80 to 81 lbs. Sugar may be used as a partial
substitute for malt, with, in most cases, some degree of saving to the
brewer, and without injury to the quality of the beer. The kind of sugar
to be used will depend on the quality of the beer to be brewed, but it
should be remembered that a bad sugar will not, any more than bad malt,
yield a sound palatable beer. From 170 lbs. to 200 lbs. of good raw sugar
may be taken as the average equivalent of a quarter of malt.

When the process of mashing has been properly conducted, the wort, after
leaving the cooler, should not be turned blue by tincture of iodine, or by
iodide of potassium mixed with a few drops of nitric acid. If it turns
blue some of the starch has escaped conversion into sugar, and is
dissolved in the liquor.

By multiplying the decimal part of the number representing the specific
gravity of a wort by 360 (the weight in pounds of a barrel of pure water),
we obtain the quantity of saccharine per barrel, corresponding to the
given sp. gr.; and by dividing the joint weight of saccharine and water,
per barrel, by 360, we obtain the specific gravity. Thus--

Suppose a sample of wort to have a specific gravity of 1.055, then--

Decimal of sp. gr. .055 x 360 = 19.8 lbs. per barrel.

Again, a barrel of wort weighs 379.8 lbs., that is, 360 lbs. for the
weight of a barrel of water, and 19.8 lbs. for the weight of saccharine in
the water, then--

297.8 / 360 = 1.055 specific gravity.

It is usually stated in works on brewing that certain temperatures must be
reached by each variety of beer, during the progress of the fermentation,
in order for the liquor to acquire its characteristic flavour. Thus, it is
stated that mild beer begins to acquire flavour when the heat of
fermentation arrives at 75 deg. Fahr., increases at 80 deg., and is highest at
90 deg., but sometimes even reaches 100 deg.. Old ale is said to obtain its best
flavour at a temperature not exceeding 75 deg.; and porter at 70 deg. Fahr. In
order to reach these temperatures the worts are directed to be set at from
10 deg. to 15 deg. lower, the rise being due to the heat generated during the
fermentation. That these statements refer principally to the old methods
of brewing is shown by the fact that some of the brewers of Bavaria,
Scotland, and Burton-on-Trent produce rich and high-flavoured liquors at
temperatures vastly below those above enumerated. Still, however, the fact
must not be concealed, that since the introduction of the new German
system of brewing into England the general character of its beers, as they
reach the consumer, are inferior in strength and flavour to those of a
former period. We may now seek almost in vain for the fine vinous,
high-flavoured, invigorating old beers vended in our early days by the
common publicans and tavern-keepers, of whom the larger majority were
their own brewers. Under the new system of chemical brewing, as worked by
those huge monopolists, the 'great brewers,' the only object appears to be
to obtain the largest quantity possible of saccharine out of the quarter
of malt, and to convert this into the largest possible quantity of beer,
with little regard to flavour or quality, but an excessive one for their
own profits. In due course this liquor is forced on their helpless tenants
the publicans, who, in their turn, 'reduce' and 'doctor' the liquor,
until, by the time it reaches the consumer, its insipidity and low
strength would have led even a brewer's drayman of the last century to
cast it into the kennel.

The best times for brewing are the spring and autumn; as at those periods
of the year the temperature of the air is such as to permit of the easy
cooling of worts sufficiently low, without having recourse to artificial
refrigeration, or to the use of machinery for the purpose. Old ale cannot
be conveniently brewed in summer.

Beers are classed by the brewers into--

  _Small beers_--made from worts not exceeding the sp. gr. 1.025, or 9
      lbs. per barrel.
  _Middlings_--made from worts of the sp. gr. 1.030 to 1.050, and
      averaging about 14 lbs. per barrel.
  _Strong beers_--made from worts of the sp. gr. 1.040 to 1.080, extending
      from about 35 lbs. per barrel upwards.

The densities of the worts employed for different kinds of beer vary
considerably, as will be seen by the following table:--

        TABLE _of the Densities of Beers_.

  |----------------------------------------------------|
  |                     | Pounds  |                    |
  |    Description.     |  per    |  Specific Gravity. |
  |                     | barrel. |                    |
  |----------------------------------------------------|
  |Burton ale, Class 1  |40 to 43 |   1.111 to 1.120   |
  |    "         "   2  |35 "  40 |   1.097 "  1.111   |
  |    "         "   3  |28 "  33 |   1.077 "  1.092   |
  |Ordinary ale         |25 "  27 |   1.070 "  1.075   |
  |Common    "          |   21    |   1.058            |
  |Scotch ale, Class 1  |40 to 44 |   1.111 to 1.122   |
  |    "         "   2  |33 "  40 |   1.092 "  1.111   |
  |Porter (ordinary)    |   18    |   1.050            |
  |  "    (good)        |18 to 21 |   1.050 to 1.058   |
  |  "    (double)      |{?} to 22|   1.055 "  1.060   |
  |Brown stout          |   23    |   1.064            |
  |      "    (best)    |   26    |   1.072            |
  |Table beer           |12 to 14 |   1.033 to 1.039   |
  |Small  "   (com.)    |    6    |   1.017            |
  |----------------------------------------------------|

EXPORTATION OF BEER:--When beer is exported from any part of the United
Kingdom, either as merchandise or ships' stores, the brewer or exporter of
such beer is allowed a certain drawback of duty. The amount is
proportional to the quantity of malt or sugar inferred to have been used
in the brewing of the beer. Thus, if the original specific gravity of the
worts from which the beer was brewed were not less than 1.040, a drawback
is granted of 4_s._ 3_d._ per barrel. This is equivalent to a return of
the duty on 1-1/2 bushels of malt, with an allowance of 3_d._ for licence
duty, now charged in lieu of the abolished hop duty. For every additional
5 degrees of specific gravity, from 1040 deg. to 1125 deg. inclusive, a further
sum of 5_d._ per barrel is allowed.

[For further information connected with the above subject the reader is
referred to the separate articles--ALE, BEER, DEXTRINE, DIASTASE,
FERMENTATION, MALT LIQUORS, PORTER, SACCHAROMETER, SPECIFIC GRAVITY, WORT,
YEAST, &c.]

=Brewing Uten'sils.= The cleansing and preservation of brewing utensils,
beer casks, &c., has frequently engaged the attention of practical men and
brewers' chemists. To preserve them sweet they should always be thoroughly
cleaned before setting them aside. Contact with soap, or any greasy
material, should be carefully avoided. A scrubbing-brush and scalding-hot
water are generally sufficient to clean them. Great care should be taken
to remove every particle of yeast or fur on the sides and bottom; and
after being well drained they should be stowed away in some clean and cold
situation, properly exposed to the fresh air. Should they become tainted
or mouldy, a strong lye of pearl-ash, common salt, or quick-lime, may be
spread over them, scalding hot, with a broom or scrubbing-brush. Washing
them with oil of vitriol diluted with about 7 or 8 times its bulk of
water, is another excellent and very effective method. Fresh-burnt
charcoal has also been employed for the same purpose. In each case the
vessels must be subsequently thoroughly washed out with clean water, as
before. Steam, assisted by the action of a chain, has been successfully
applied to clean casks in several breweries. Bisulphite of lime has,
within the last few years, been highly recommended for sweetening and
cleaning vats, casks, &c. It is also said to prevent beer from developing
acidity. See CASKS, VATS, SPOROKTON, &c.

=BRICKS.= Brick-making scarcely comes within the province of this work. In
connection with hygiene, however, we may call the reader's attention to
the superior advantages of both hollow and waterproof bricks; the first,
for ventilation and lightness; the last, for preserving the dryness and
integrity of our homes under all the vicissitudes of climate, season, and
weather, either on damp soils or dry ones. Workman's "Patent Waterproof
Bricks" received a strong commendatory notice from the Commissioners of
the "Great International Exhibition" of 1851.

=BRILLIANTINE.= 1. Castor oil, 1 part; eau de Cologne, 4 parts. Mix. 2.
Honey, 1 _oz._; glycerin, 1/2 _oz._; eau de Cologne, 1/2 _oz._; spirit of
wine, 2 _oz._ Mix.

=BRINE= (for Meat). _Prep._ 1. A nearly saturated solution of common salt,
1 lb.; and saltpetre, 1 oz.; in soft water.

2. To the last add of sugar or treacle, 1/2 lb. Bay-salt is recommended
when the meat is to be kept for a very long period. Meat preserved in
brine that has been used for curing several times is said to become
poisonous. See PICKLING, &c.

=Brine, Red-Cabbage.= Red-cabbage leaves steeped in a strong solution of
common salt. Used as a test for acids and alkalies.

=Brine, Vi'olet.= From the petals of the blue violet, as the last. Used as
a test for acids.

=BRIOCHE PASTE= (bre-[=o]sh'). In _cookery_, a species of paste, or crust,
prepared of eggs and flour, fermented with yeast, to which a little salt,
a large quantity of sugar, and about half as much butter as the weight of
the flour used, are afterwards added, and well worked in. Used as an
addition to soup, and as a casing for lobsters, patties, eggs, &c.

=BRISK'NESS.= The natural briskness and sparkling of fermented liquors
depends on the gradual evolution of carbonic acid gas within the body of
the fluid, by the process of fermentation. See MALT LIQUORS, PORTER,
WINES, &c.

=BRIS'TLES= (br[)i]s'lz). The stiff hair of swine, &c. They are commonly
stiffened by immersion for a short time in alum-water; and are dyed by
steeping them for a short time in any of the common dyes used for cotton
or wool.

=BRITAN'NIA METAL.= _Syn._ TUTANIA. A superior species of pewter, used for
teapots, spoons, &c.

_Prep._ 1. Plate-brass, bismuth, antimony, and tin, equal parts, melted
together, and the resulting alloy added at discretion to melted tin, until
it acquires the proper degree of colour and hardness.

2. To the first alloy, prepared as in No. 1, add one fifth of its weight
of metallic arsenic, before mixing it with the melted tin.

3. Antimony, 1 part; brass, 4 parts; tin, 5 or 6 parts; melted together.
See QUEEN'S METAL (ALLOYS), PEWTER, &c.

4. Tin, 150 parts; copper, 3 parts; antimony, 10 parts.

5. Tin, 46-1/2 parts; copper, 1 part; antimony, 3 parts.

=Britannia Metal for Casting.= _a._ Tin, 100 parts; hardening (see
_below_), 5 parts; antimony, 5 parts. _b._ Tin, 105 parts; copper, 2
parts; antimony, 12 parts.

=Britannia Metal (Best) for Handles.= Tin, 140 parts; copper, 2 parts;
antimony, 5 parts.

=Britannia Metal, Hardening for.= Tin, 1 part; copper, 2 parts.

=Britannia Metal (Best) for Lamps, Pillars, and Spouts.= Tin, 75 parts;
copper, 1 part; antimony, 3-3/4 parts.

=Britannia Metal for Registers.= Tin, 25 parts; antimony, 2 parts;
hardening, 2 parts.

=Britannia Metal for Spinning.= Tin, 25 parts; antimony, 1 part;
hardening, 1 part.

=Britannia Metal (Best) for Spoons.= Tin, 20 parts; antimony, 2 parts;
hardening, 1 part.

=Britannia Metal for Spouts.= Tin, 46-1/2 parts; copper, 1 part; antimony,
2 parts.

=BRITANNIA SILVER.= Under this name there is, or was, offered to the
public at Vienna, and probably elsewhere, under the misleading
recommendation that it is a perfect substitute for silver, a heterogeneous
metallic composition, in the form of spoons, forks, candlesticks, cups,
&c. The Britannia silver is sometimes, or always, light, silvered,
Britannia metal (an alloy of 86 tin, 10 antimony, 3 zinc, 1 copper; or of
2 copper, 6 zinc, 21 antimony, 71 tin; or of 1.84 copper, 81.90 tin, 16.25
antimony, and 1 zinc). One firm announces that Britannia silver is
silver-white throughout, a colour which can only be obtained in similar
alloys by the addition of arsenic. Another firm sells candlesticks of
inferior packfong as Britannia metal, and another actually sells tinned
Bessemer steel-plate cups as guaranteed Britannia silver. (Ackerman.)

=BRIT'ISH GUM.= See GUM.

=BRITISH WINES.= See WINES.

=BROC'COLI.= [Eng., L., Ger.] _Syn._ BROCOLI, Fr.; BROCCOLO, It. A
well-known sub-variety of cauliflower. The qualities, and the mode of
dressing broccoli, are similar to those of cabbages, noticed elsewhere.
See VEGETABLES (Culinary), &c.

=BROKEN KNEES= (IN HORSES). The wound should first be thoroughly washed,
and then sewn up, and fomented with tepid water. Afterwards cold-water
dressings containing a little carbolic acid may be applied. Perfect rest
is essential, and, where necessary, splints and slings must be had
recourse to. After the wound has thoroughly healed blisters are
recommended for restoring the hair.

=BROKEN WIND= (IN HORSES). Of the many remedies said to be useful in this
malady few, if any, appear to exercise any permanent advantage. There is
no reason, however, why a horse affected with broken wind should not be
made serviceable if the precaution be taken to put him to moderately slow
work, if the following precautions be followed. His food should be given
him in small quantity and at frequent intervals. The oats should be
bruised and the hay cut small, and both be slightly damped before he
partakes of them. This dietary may be varied by small doses of carrots or
turnips.

The amount of fluids should be restricted, and he should be fed and
watered at least an hour before going to work. A mild physic ball should
also be occasionally administered.

Dogs suffering from asthma should be subjected to the same treatment. To a
full-sized dog ten drops each of ether and tincture of belladonna may be
given every hour during an attack of spasm until the breathing becomes
easier.

=BRO'MA.= _Prep._ 1. Pure cocoa, 1 lb.; sugar and sago-meal, of each 4
oz.; mix. British arrow-root (_i. e._ carefully prepared potato-starch) is
often substituted for the sago.

2. As the last, but using fine wheat flour in lieu of sago-meal. Made into
a beverage in a similar way to cocoa.

=BRO'MAL.= C_{2}Br_{3}HO. A colourless, oily liquid, obtained by the
action of bromine on alcohol. Sp. gr. 3.34; boiling point above 212 deg. F.
Like chloral it yields a solid hydrate with water. Because of its powerful
irritant properties it seems unlikely to prove useful, either as a
hypnotic or as an anaesthetic.

=BRO'MIDE= (-m[)i]d). _Syn._ BRO'MURET*, HYDROBRO'MATE*; BROMI'DUM,
BROMURE'TUM, HYDROBRO'MAS, L.; BROMIDE, BROMURE. Fr. A chemical compound
of bromine with another radical.

_Prop._, _&c._ The soluble bromides give white precipitates with nitrate
of silver, acetate of lead, and protonitrate of mercury. That from the
first of these is insoluble in dilute nitric acid and in ammonia water
unless concentrated; and it has a slight yellowish tinge, changing to a
violet on exposure to the light. A few drops of liquid chlorine poured
upon a bromide, followed by agitation of the mixture with a little
sulphuric ether, furnishes an ethereal solution of bromine. [For the other
bromides see the respective bases.]

=BRO'MINE= (-m[)i]n), (_bromos_, a stink). Br. _Syn._ BROME*; BRO'MIUM,
BROMIN'IUM, L.; BROME, Fr. An elementary substance, discovered by M.
Balard, of Montpellier, in 1826.

_Prep._ 1. A current of gaseous chlorine is passed through the
uncrystallisable residuum of sea-water called bittern, which then assumes
an orange tint, in consequence of bromine being set free from its
combinations; sulphuric ether is then agitated with it, and the mixture is
allowed to stand, in a close vessel, until the ethereal portion floats
upon the surface. This is a solution of crude bromine, and for common
purposes the ether may be at once evaporated by a very gentle heat. To
render it pure, caustic potassa is added in excess to the ethereal
solution, or the latter is agitated with a solution of potassa, by which
means bromide and bromate of potassium are formed. The whole is evaporated
to dryness, and submitted to a dull red heat. The residuum is next
powdered and mixed with pure peroxide of manganese; the mixture having
been placed in a retort, sulphuric acid (diluted with half its weight of
water) is poured in. Red vapours immediately arise, and condense into
drops of bromine, which are collected by plunging the neck of the retort
nearly to the bottom of a small receiver containing a little very cold
water. The bromine forms a stratum beneath the water, and may be collected
and at once put into a stoppered bottle; or it may be further purified by
distillation from dry chloride of calcium.

2. Leisler's patent for a method of obtaining bromine consists in
decomposing the lye containing the bromine salt by heating it with
hydrochloric acid and bichromate of potash in a leaden still having an
earthenware head. The volatilised bromine with the vapour of water is
conducted into a receiver containing iron turnings, bromide of iron, which
dissolves in the water contained in the receiver, being formed. The
bromide of iron so produced is either converted into other metallic
bromides by the usual processes, or the bromine is obtained in a separate
state from the iodide by treatment with sulphuric acid and bichromate of
potash.

3. Large quantities of bromine are extracted from the mother liquor of
carnallite, a double chloride of magnesium of potassium occurring in
enormous quantities in a bed of clay in the neighbourhood of Stassfurt,
near Magdeburg. The mother liquid of the carnallite at 35 deg. B. is first
freed as much as possible from the chloride of calcium it contains, by
means of refrigeration. It is next evaporated down until it acquires a
density of 40 deg. B. Frank says it cannot be concentrated to the above
extent, because of a waste of bromine resulting from the formation of
hydrobromic acid produced by the decomposition of the lye, owing to its
being overheated at the bottom of the pan. Upon being cooled to 25 deg. C. a
quantity of chloride of magnesium crystallises out, whilst the remaining
liquor contains from 0.3 to 0.5 of bromine as bromide of magnesium. The
liquor is then put into a sandstone apparatus such as is used for the
preparation of chlorine, and the requisite quantity of manganese and
hydrochloric acid being added, steam is poured into the apparatus. After
about a quarter of an hour the bromine is evolved in the form of vapour,
which becomes condensed by being made to pass through a leaden worm cooled
in water, and is finally collected as liquid bromine in Woolff's bottles.

The crude bromine so obtained is purified by redistillation in glass
retorts. It is stated that the sandstone apparatus can be charged six
times in 24 hours. In order to free the bromine from the presence of any
chloride it is shaken up with a solution of bromide of potassium.

The chlorine unites with the potassium, forming chloride of potassium and
liberating an equivalent quantity of bromine in so doing. Dr Frank
suggests the use of earthenware worms in preference to leaden ones, these
latter being acted upon and corroded by liquid bromine. In Dr Frank's
bromine works at Stassfurt the distillation is conducted in cubic
stoneware vessels, having a capacity of about three cubic metres. These
vessels are surrounded with belts of iron, in case of the occurrence of
fracture. It was found that few stones answered the purpose required of
them, as by reason of their porous nature they permitted the chloride of
manganese formed during the distillation to ooze through. To remedy this
the stones had to be coated with tar, a process which entailed a very
serious loss of bromine, from the formation of bromine compounds with the
hydrocarbons of the tar, as well as a contamination of the bromine with
the tar. Subsequently Dr Frank found in the neighbourhood of Porta
Westphalia a stone which answered the purpose without requiring the
previous objectionable and expensive preparation with tar.

It seems that the workmen discard the respirators which are provided for
their use in the bromine works, and merely tie a cloth over the mouth and
nose (sometimes neglecting this precaution) when decanting the bromine.

To lessen the evil effects of the vapours upon the health of the workmen
under these circumstances, the building is rendered as airy as possible by
being thoroughly ventilated throughout. No workmen afflicted with asthma
or with any catarrhal affection are employed, whilst those engaged are
strictly prohibited from taking spirituous liquids in any form, a custom
which begets an irritability of the mucous membranes, which is found to be
exceedingly dangerous; on the contrary, a generous diet, and one
consisting of an abundant use of bacon and butter, was found very
beneficial.

Bromine is sometimes contaminated with chlorine, iodine, and occasionally
bromide of carbon. A small quantity of the bromine agitated with a
solution of soda, in such proportion that the fluid is made very slightly
alkaline, forms a colourless solution, which, if coloured by the further
addition of a small quantity of the bromine, does not become blue on the
subsequent addition of a cold solution of starch. This shows the absence
of iodine. Chlorine may be detected by adding a small quantity of the
suspected bromine to some warm solution of potash in a capsule,
evaporating, drying the residue, and distilling with bichromate of potash
and sulphuric acid. Bromide of carbon has a higher boiling-point than pure
bromine.

_Prop., &c._ A dark, reddish-coloured, volatile liquid, having an odour
intermediate between that of chlorine and iodine, but much more
suffocating and offensive. It solidifies at about 19 deg., and boils at about
145 deg. Fahr. It is slightly soluble in water, more so in alcohol, and
abundantly so in ether. Its aqueous solution bleaches like chlorine, but
less powerfully. With hydrogen it forms HYDROBRO'MIC ACID; and with the
bases, compounds called BRO'MIDES. Its sp. gr. is 2.976; that of its
vapour, 5.39.

_Tests._ It is readily recognised by its colour, odour, and volatility,
and by the colour of its vapour; by its giving a yellowish-white
precipitate with nitrate of silver, which is turned violet by the action
of light; and by its solutions giving an orange or yellow colour to
starch, and a red tinge to solution of chloride of gold.

_Uses, &c._ Bromine possesses very similar medicinal properties to iodine,
and has been administered in goitre, scrofula, &c., in the form of an
aqueous solution composed of 1 part of bromine to 40 of water, of which 5
or 6 drops is the dose; but it is more usually given under the form of
bromide of potassium (which _see_). The compounds of bromine are also
largely used in photography in the manufacture of certain coal-tar
colours, and in scientific chemistry the solution has also been used as a
lotion. Bromine is a good disinfectant. It is very poisonous; the
antidotes, &c., resemble those for iodine. See BROMIDE, SOLUTIONS, &c.

=BROMOCHLORALUM= (Tilden & Co., New York), for the removal of bad smells,
as a disinfectant, and antiseptic. A fluid, sp. gr. 1.43, containing 27.5
per cent. of solid matter. The latter consists of 18.5 per cent. of
aluminium chloride, with chalk and a considerable quantity of alkaline
salts. Free bromine is not present. (H. En{?}demann.)

=BROMOFORM= (CHBr_{3}). A colourless liquid obtained by distilling bromide
of calcium with alcohol. It has a sp. gr. of 2.90; and boils at 305.6 deg. F.,
emitting a vapour having a density 8.632. It is somewhat similar in
properties to chloroform, but much more irritating; hence it has been
rarely employed medicinally.

=BROMTHEE--BRAMBLE TEA= (?)--is a mixture of 5 parts lime flowers _cum
bracteis_, 5 parts senna leaves, 5 parts acacia flowers, 8 parts cort.
frangulae, and 2 parts sassafras chips. (Hager.)

=BROHCHI'TIS= (br[)o]ng-k[=i]'). [L.; prim. Gr.] In _pathology_,
inflammation of the mucous lining of the bronchia or smaller ramifications
of the windpipe. In its milder form it is popularly called a 'cold on the
chest.'

_Symp._ The usual symptoms are hoarseness, dry cough, and a slight degree
of fever, followed by expectoration of mucus, at first thin, and
afterwards thick and copious. In the severer forms there is more fever,
cough, and oppression at the chest, &c.

_Treatm._ It generally yields to small and repeated doses of ipecacuanha
and antimonial diaphoretics; a light diet and mild purgatives being at the
same time adopted, but in every case it is safer to have recourse to
medical aid.

HORSES.--Finlay Dun prescribes the following:--Tincture of aconite,
inhalation of the vapour of water, ether and belladonna, carbolic acid,
sulphurous acid, mash diet, salines, chlorate of potash, the salts of
ammonia, chloral hydrate, mustard externally, warm clothing, but cool air.
Symptoms very similar to those of bronchitis are frequently caused in
calves and young cattle by the presence in the bronchii of threadworms or
filaria. The cause is generally removed by the administration of a dose or
two of oil of turpentine, given at intervals of a day or two.

=BRON'CHOCELE= (br[)o]ng'-ko-s[=e]le). See GOITRE.

=BRONZE.= [Eng., Fr., Ger.] _Syn._ AES, L.; BRONZO, It. An alloy of tin and
copper, remarkable for the exactness of the impressions which it takes by
moulding and stamping, as well as for its great durability. It has hence
been always extensively employed in the casting of buts, medals, statues,
&c. In ancient times, when the manufacture of steel was ill-understood,
cutting instruments were commonly made of it. It was also the general
material of coins of small value; a use which, of late years, has been
revived in several of the states of Europe, and still more recently in the
coinage of these realms. Bell-metal, gun-metal, and speculum-metal are
mere varieties of bronze.

_Prep._ On the small scale this alloy is prepared in crucibles; but for
statues and larger works on reverberatory hearths. The fusion of the mixed
metals is conducted as rapidly as possible under pounded charcoal, and the
melted mass is frequently stirred together to produce a perfect mixture
before casting.

The proportions of the materials so vary in different castings that it is
almost impossible to say precisely what quantities are the best. The
following are given as examples:--

_a._ For EDGE-TOOLS:--Copper, 100 parts; tin, 14 parts. When skilfully
hardened and tempered this alloy is capable of receiving an edge nearly
equal to that of steel.

_b._ For GILDING:--1. Copper, 82 parts; zinc, 18 parts; tin, 3 parts;
lead, 2 parts.

2. From copper, 83 parts; zinc, 17 parts; tin, 2 parts; lead, 1 part.

_c._ For MEDALS:--1. Copper, 89 parts; tin, 8 parts; zinc, 3 parts. This
alloy assumes a beautiful antique appearance by age, and takes a sharp
impression by stamping.

2. (M. Chaudet.) Copper, 95 parts; tin, 4 or 5 parts. This is also
excellent for any small castings.

_d._ For MORTARS:--Copper, 93 parts; lead, 5 parts; tin, 2 parts.

_e._ For STATUARY:--1. Copper, 88 parts; tin, 9 parts; zinc, 2 parts;
lead, 1 part.

2. Copper, 82-1/2 parts; zinc, 10-1/2 parts; tin, 5 parts; lead, 2 parts.
These are very nearly the proportions of the celebrated statue of Louis
XV.

3. Copper, 90 parts; tin, 9 parts; lead, 1 part.

4. Copper, 91 parts; tin, 9 parts.

For a gold varnish for bronze objects refer to BRASS.

_Obs._ Several analyses have been made of ancient cutting instruments,
from which it appears that the proportion of tin varies from 4% to 15%; a
fact which tends to prove that more depends upon the exact mode of
tempering the alloy than on the relative proportions of the ingredients.
Lead and zinc are inadmissible in bronze for this purpose. One or two per
cent. of iron may, nevertheless, be added with advantage. The ancient
bronze used for springs contained only 3% to 4% of tin. The edges and lips
of bronze mortars must be carefully tempered by heating them to a cherry
red, and then plunging them into cold water, as unless so treated they are
very apt to be broken in use. See BELL-METAL, BRASS, GUN-METAL, &c.

=Bronze'-powder.= _Syn._ BRONZE. A name given to various powders having a
rich metallic appearance, which they retain when applied on varnish, or
when mixed with it, as in surface bronzing.

_Prep._ 1. GOLD-COLOURED:--_a._ From Dutch-foil, reduced to an impalpable
power by grinding. Cheap and looks well, and is very durable when
varnished.

_b._ From gold-leaf, as the last.

_c._ Precipitated powder of gold.

_d._ From verdigris, 8 oz.; tutty powder, 4 oz.; borax and nitre, of each
2 oz.; bichloride of mercury, 1/4 oz.; grind them together, make the
mixture into a paste with oil, and then fuse it; when cold, roll it into
thin sheets or leaves, and grind it as in No. 1.

2. IRON-COLOURED:--Plumbago, in fine powder.

3. RED:--Sulphate of copper, 100 parts; carbonate of soda, 60 parts; mix,
and apply heat until they unite into a mass; then cool, powder, and add of
copper filings, 15 parts; again well mix, and keep the compound at a white
heat for about twenty minutes; lastly, when cold, reduce the 'residuum' to
an impalpable powder, wash it in pure water, and dry it.

4. SILVER:--Bismuth and tin, of each 1 oz.; melt them together, and add of
quicksilver, 1 to 1-1/2 oz.; when cold, powder it.

_Obs._ The above are used by painters, japanners, &c. See BISULPHIDE OF
TIN (TIN), POWDERS, &c.

=BRONZ'ING.= The process of giving a bronze-like, or an antique metal
appearance, to the surface of copper, brass, and other metals. The
following methods are recommended for this purpose:--

1. To the surface of the article, first thoroughly cleaned and polished,
evenly apply with a brush the common crocus powder ('jewellers' rouge'),
previously made into a smooth paste with water. When dry, place it in an
iron ladle, or on a common fire-shovel, and expose it over a clear fire
for about one minute; lastly, when sufficiently cold, polish it with a
plate-brush. This gives a very rich appearance, similar to that on
tea-urns; the shade depending on the duration and the degree of heat
employed.

2. As the last, but substituting finely powdered plumbago for crocus
powder. Equally beautiful, but deeper coloured and more permanent than
that produced by No. 1.

3. As the preceding, but employing mixtures of plumbago and crocus in
various proportions according to the shade desired.

4. A dilute solution of liver of sulphur (sulphurated potash), or of
hydrosulphate of ammonia is applied with a camel-hair pencil to the metal
previously slightly warmed; when dry, the surface is either left rough or
brushed off. If liver of sulphur has been used, it will be better to wash
it first in clean hot water; but without the slightest friction. This
gives the appearance of very antique bronze.

5. Verdigris, 2 oz.; and sal-ammoniac, 1 oz.; are dissolved in vinegar, 1
pint; and the mixture is diluted with water until it tastes only slightly
metallic, when it is boiled for a few minutes, and filtered for use.
Copper medals, &c. (thoroughly clean) are steeped in the liquor at the
boiling-point until the desired effect is produced. Care must be taken not
to keep them in it too long. When taken out they are carefully washed in
hot water, and dried. Effect as the last.

6. Verdigris and vermilion, of each 2 oz.; alum and sal-ammonia, of each 5
oz. (all in fine powder); vinegar, q. s. to form a thin paste. This is
spread over the surface of the copper, which is then uniformly warmed by
the fire, and afterwards well washed and dried. The tint may be deepened
by repeating the process. The addition of a little blue vitriol inclines
the colour to a chestnut-brown; and a little borax to a yellowish-brown.
Used by the Chinese for copper tea-urns, &c.

7. Sal-ammonia, 1 oz.; cream of tartar, 3 oz.; common salt, 3 oz.; hot
water, 1 pint; dissolve; then add of nitrate of copper, 2 oz., dissolved
in 1/2 a pint of water; mix well, and with it repeatedly moisten the
article (placed in a damp situation) by means of a soft brush. Produces a
very antique appearance.

8. Salt of sorrel, 1 oz.; sal-ammoniac, 3 oz.; distilled vinegar, 1 quart;
dissolve. As the last. Much used for bronze figures.

9. A very weak solution of bichloride of platinum, applied with a hair
pencil or by immersion. Used for binding screws, holders, and other small
articles of copper and brass.

10. Sulphate of iron and sulphate of copper, of each 1 oz.; water, 1 pint;
dissolve; wash the surface of the articles with it; let them dry; then
apply a solution of verdigris, 2 oz. dissolved in strong vinegar, 1/4
pint; when dry, polish them with a soft brush, and either some plumbago or
colcothar. Used for tin castings.

11. The articles (properly cleaned) are either immersed in, or washed
over, with a solution of sulphate of copper or of verdigris. In a short
time they acquire a coating of pure metallic copper, and are then washed.
This only answers with iron and steel goods. It is admirably suited for
iron castings.

12. An antique appearance may be given to silver by either exposing it to
the fumes of hydrosulphate of ammonia, or immersing it for a very short
time in a solution of hydrosulphate of ammonia, or in dilute nitric acid.

=Bronzing, Sur'face.= A term commonly applied to the process of imparting
a bronze-like or metallic appearance to the prominent portions of the
surfaces of figures made of paper, wood, plaster of Paris, &c. It is
effected by first giving them a coat of oil-varnish or size, and when this
is nearly dried, applying, with a 'dabber' of cotton, or a camel-hair
pencil, any of the ordinary metallic bronze-powders before referred to.
Sometimes the powder is placed in a little bag of muslin, and dusted over
the surface. The articles should be afterwards varnished.

Paper is bronzed by mixing the bronze-powders up with a little weak
gum-water, and burnishing the surface when dry and hard.

=Electrotypes, to Bronze. Green.= Steep the medal or figure in a strong
solution of common salt, or sugar, or sal-ammoniac, for a few days; wash
in water, and allow to dry slowly; or suspend it over a vessel containing
a small quantity of bleaching powder, and cover over. The length of time
it is allowed to remain will determine the depth of colour.

=Brown.= Add four or five drops of nitric acid to a wine-glassful of
water. The object is rubbed over with this gently, and allowed to dry, and
when dry subjected to a gradual and equal heat; the surface will be
darkened in proportion to the heat applied.

=Black.= Wash the surface over with a little dilute solution of
hydrosulphate of ammonia, and dry at a gentle heat.

=BROOM.= The common name of the plant _spar'tium scopa''rium_. A useful
diuretic; of great service in dropsy. See DECOCTION.

=Broom Ashes.= From broom-stalks burnt. Formerly used as a diuretic in
dropsy.

=Broom, Salt of.= Obtained by dissolving broom ashes in water, and
filtering and evaporating the solution. It consists principally of
carbonate of potassa. It was formerly used in dropsy, and as an antacid,
&c.

=BROSSE DE CORAIL.= [Fr.] The root of lucerne (_medicago sativa_),
cleaned, dried, and hammered at the end. Used as a tooth-brush.

=BROTH.= _Syn._ JUS (coctis carnibus), JUS'CULUM, L.; BOUILLON, JUS, Fr.;
FLEISCHBRUeHE, Ger. In _cookery_, the liquor in which flesh has been
boiled. Broth is distinguished from soup by its inferior strength and
quantity of seasoning, &c. It contains much of the nutriment of the meat.
We extract the following from Dr Letheby's work 'On Food':--

"A nutritious broth, containing the albumen of the meat or chicken, may be
obtained by infusing a third of a pound of minced meat or chicken in 14
oz. of _cold_ water, to which a few drops (4 or 5) of muriatic acid and a
little salt (from 10 to 18 grains) have been added. After digesting for an
hour or so, it should be strained through a sieve, and the residue washed
with five ounces of water, and pressed, The mixed liquids thus obtained
will furnish about a pint of _cold extract of meat_, containing the whole
of the soluble constituents of the meat (albumen, creatin, creatinin,
&c.), and it may be drunk cold, or slightly warmed, the temperature not
being raised above 100 deg. F., for fear of coagulating the albumen."

=Broth, Scotch.= This, which is in very general use amongst the middle and
working classes of Scotland, is made as follows:--Put into a pot three
quarts of cold water along with a cupful of Scotch barley, and let it
boil; add two pounds of neck of mutton. Allow it to stew gently for an
hour, skimming occasionally. Then add turnips cut in squares, and onions
sliced, and carrots and turnips uncut. The half of a small cabbage chopped
in moderately fine pieces may be put in instead of all these vegetables;
and leeks may be used instead of onions. Stew the whole for an hour
longer. The broth is now ready. Season with salt and serve in a tureen.
The meat is served in a separate dish, with the uncut pieces of turnip and
carrot and a little of the broth as gravy. Any meat may be employed in the
same way. Broths and soups contain the greater part of the saline matter
of the meat, the crystalline principles, viz. creatin and creatinin, some
of the albumen and fat, and an amount of gelatin, dependent upon the
duration of the boiling process. They also contain nearly all the odorous
matters of the meat. Cold water extracts from one sixth to one fourth of
the solid ingredients of meat. The presence of a large quantity of highly
nitrogenous crystalline principles in broths and soups accounts for their
restorative powers. These, which are the _creatin_ and _creatinin_, bear a
close resemblance to the thein of tea and coffee, and the _theobrominae_ of
cocoa, in their physiological effects.

Broth is contra-indicated for children at the breast, as it not
unfrequently induces sickness, disorders the bowels, and induces fever.
The same applies to beef tea. When, however, broth and beef tea are used
as clysters in such quantities that can be retained, they act most
beneficially. See BOILING, SOUP, &c.

=BROWN DYE.= Every shade of brown may be produced, almost at will, by
mixtures of reds and yellows with blues and blacks; or directly by simple
dyes. The following are examples:--

_a._ For COTTON:--

1. Give the goods a mixed mordant of acetate of alumina and acetate of
iron, followed by a bath of madder or of madder and fustic. Excess of
acetate of alumina turns it on the AMARANTH TINT; the acetate of iron
darkens it.

2. First 'gall' the goods, then turn them for a short time through the
black bath; next give them a mordant of sulphate of copper, then pass
them through a decoction of fustic, afterwards through a bath of madder,
and again through the solution of sulphate of copper; drain, dry, rinse
well, and finish with a boil in soap and water. This gives a
CHESTNUT-BROWN.

3. First give the goods a mordant of alum, then a bath of madder, and next
a bath of fustic to which a little green copperas has been added. This
gives a CINNAMON-BROWN.

_b._ For LINEN:--This varies little from that commonly employed for
cotton.

_c._ For SILK:--

1. One of the above mordants is followed by a bath made by mixing equal
parts of the decoctions of logwood, fustic, and Brazil-wood. The shade may
be varied by altering the proportions of the decoctions; Brazil-wood
reddening, logwood darkening, and fustic yellowing, the tint.

2. Annotta, 4 oz.; and pearlash, 1 lb.; are dissolved in boiling water, q.
s.; the silk is passed through it for two hours, then taken out, and
squeezed dry; it is next passed through a mordant of alum, and then
through a bath of Brazil-wood, followed by another of logwood to which a
little green copperas has been added.

_d._ For WOOL:--

1. Boil the cloth in a mixed mordant of alum, common salt, and water, then
dye it in a bath of logwood to which a little green copperas has been
added. 2 oz. of alum, and 1 oz. of salt, are required for every lb. of
wool.

2. Boil the goods in a mordant of alum and sulphate of iron, then pass
them through a bath of madder. The more copperas the darker will be the
dye. Good proportions are 2 parts of alum and 3 of copperas.

3. Give a mordant of alum and tartar, then pass the goods through a madder
bath; next run them through a bath of galls and sumach or logwood to which
a little acetate or sulphate of iron has been added.

4. Mordant the cloth as last, dye in a madder bath, remove the cloth, add
a little acetate or sulphate of iron, and again pass it through the bath
as long as necessary.

5. Give the cloth a light blue ground with indigo, and then a mordant of
alum; rinse, and lastly run it through a bath of madder.

6. A mordant of alum and tartar, followed by, first a bath of madder, and
afterwards a bath of weld or fustic to which a little iron-liquor has been
previously added. In this way every shade, from MORDORE and CINNAMON to
DARK CHESTNUT, may be produced.

7. Boil fustic-chips, 1 lb., for 2 hours; pass the cloth through the bath
for 1 hour; take it out and drain; add of green copperas, 1-1/4 oz.; good
madder, 4 oz.; boil for a short time, and again pass the cloth through the
bath, until it acquires the proper tint. BRONZE-BROWNS, and every similar
shade, may be thus given by varying the proportions.

_e._ The following are called SUB'STANTIVE or DIRECT BROWNS:--

1. Decoction of oak-bark. It dyes wool of a fast brown of various shades,
according to the quantity employed. A mordant of alum brightens it.

2. Infusion or decoction of walnut-peels. Dyes wool and silk a brown,
which is brightened by alum.

3. Horse-chestnut-peels. A mordant of chloride of tin turns it on the
BRONZE; and sugar of lead, on the REDDISH-BROWN.

4. Catechu or Terra Japonica. For cottons. Blue vitriol turns it on the
BRONZE, and green copperas darkens it, when applied as mordants. Acetate
of alumina as a mordant brightens it. The French colour, CARMELITE, is
given with 1 lb. of catechu, 4 oz. of verdigris, and 5 oz. of
sal-ammoniac.

5. Sulphate or chloride of manganese. Dissolved in water with a little
tartaric acid, it gives the bronze tint called SOLITAIRE. The stuff, after
being passed through the solution, is turned through a weak lye of potash,
and afterwards through another of chloride of lime, to heighten and fix
it.

6. Prussiate of copper. This gives a fine BRONZE or YELLOWISH-BROWN to
silk. A mordant of blue vitriol is commonly first given, followed by a
bath of prussiate of potash.

=BROWN PIG'MENTS.= The principal and most useful of these are--umber,
terra di Sienna (both burnt and raw), Spanish brown, and some of the
ochres. Brown, of almost any shade, may be made by the admixture of blacks
with reds and yellows, or with greens, in different proportions. See
BISTRE, BLACK, NEWCASTLE,[233] OCHRES, SEPIA, &c.

[Footnote 233: Under BLACK PIGMENTS.]

=Brown, Span'ish.= See OCHRES.

=BROWN PINK.= See YELLOW PIGMENTS.

=BROWN'ING.= In _cookery_, a fluid preparation used to colour and flavour
gravies, soups, &c.

_Prep._ 1. Sugar, 4 oz.; and butter, 1 oz.; are melted in a frying-pan or
ladle with about a tablespoonful of water, and the heat is continued until
the whole has turned of a deep brown; the heat is then lowered a little,
and some port wine (about 1 pint) is gradually poured in; the pan is now
removed from the fire, and the mixture well stirred until the roasted
sugar is entirely dissolved; it is then put into a bottle, and 1/2 oz.
each of bruised pimento and black pepper, 5 or 6 shalots (cut small), a
little mace and finely grated lemon peel, and 1/4 pint of mushroom catsup,
added. The bottle is shaken daily for a week, and the clear liquid, after
5 or 6 days' repose, decanted into another bottle. Rich flavoured, but
expensive.

2. As the last, but using strong beer, or water, instead of wine. A
glassful of spirit may be added after bottling it.

3. Sugar-colouring, 1 pint; salt, 1/4 lb.; mushroom-catsup, 1/2 pint;
spice, q. s. Excellent for all ordinary purposes.

4. Lump sugar (powdered), 2-1/2 lbs.; salad oil, 1/2 lb.; heat as before;
then add, of port wine, 1 quart; Cape wine, 3 quarts; shalots, 6 oz.;
mixed spice, 4 oz.; black pepper, 3 oz.; mace, 1 oz; salt, 1 lb.; lemon
juice, 1 pint; catsup, 1 quart; mix well.

5. Good spirit-colouring or sugar-colouring and mushroom catsup, of each 1
gall.; Jamaica pepper, black pepper, and shalots, of each 4 oz; cloves,
cassia, and mace, bruised, of each 3/4 oz.; boil in a covered vessel for 5
minutes; digest for 14 days, and strain.

6. Colouring, 3 pints; mushroom catsup, 1 pint; common salt, 3/4 lb.;
Chili vinegar (strongest), 1/2 pint; spice, q. s. Half a pint of British
brandy or rum may be added.

_Obs._ The above are excellent additions to gravies, soups, &c.; and of
themselves form most admirable sauces for fish, meat, and game.

=Browning= (for Gun-barrels). _Prep._ The following are current formulae:--

1. Blue vitriol, 4 oz.; tincture of chloride of iron, 2 oz.; water, 1
quart; dissolve, and add aquafortis and sweet spirit of nitre, of each 1
oz.

2. Blue vitriol and sweet spirit of nitre, of each 1 oz.; aquafortis, 1/2
oz.; water, 1 pint; as last.

3. Butter of antimony and sweet oil, equal parts; well shaken together. To
be applied to the iron previously warmed.

_Obs._ The above fluids are rubbed on the barrel (previously well polished
and cleaned off with whiting to remove the oil), and allowed to remain on
for some hours, or until the next day, when they are rubbed off with a
stiff brush. The process may be repeated, if necessary. The barrel is next
washed in water in which a little pearlash or soda has been dissolved, and
afterwards well rinsed in clean water; it is then polished, either with
the burnisher, or with a brush and beeswax. Sometimes a coat of tough
shell-lac varnish is applied.

=BRUCEA= (-sh'[)a]). False cusparia (which _see_).

=BRUCHBALSAM--RUPTURE BALSAM= (Dr Taenzer).--No. 1. Compound rosemary
cerate, nutmeg cerate, red Johannis oil, yellow wax, of each 1 part; fat,
5 parts. No. 2. Mixture of nutmeg cerate, 50 parts; tallow, butter, of
each 10 parts, melted and mixed with 25 parts strongest liquor potassae.
No. 3. Compound rosemary cerate, oil of bayberries, of each 2 parts;
nutmeg cerate, 4 parts; red Johannis oil, 6 parts; yellow wax, 3 parts;
tincture of myrrh and tincture of aloes, of each 1/2 part; tr. opii, 1/4
part, melted and heated until the spirit has evaporated. (Hager.)

=BRUCHPFLASTER--RUPTURE PLASTER= (Kruesi Altherr). A spread plaster, the
mass consisting of 5 parts Bergundy pitch and 2 parts turpentine. (Walz
and Hager.)

=Bruchpflaster--Rupture Plaster= (Caspar Menet). Machine-made paper
covered with thin gauze, and thinly spread with a mass of 9 parts wax, 3
parts turpentine, and 1 part elemi. (Hager.)

=BRUCHSALBE--RUPTURE CERATE= (Gottlieb Sturzenegger, Herisau, Canton
Appenzell). A mixture of 50 parts fat and 1 part oil of bayberries.
(Hager.)

=BRUCHE=, ruptures cured without medicine, operation, or pain, by Lavedan,
chemist. A pelotte containing in it zinc and copper plate on which a
solution of the "poudre electrochimique" (common salt) is dropped.
(Hager.)

=BRU'CIA.= C_{23}H_{26}N_{2}O_{4}. Aq. [Eng., Fr.] _Syn._ BRU'CINE;
BRU'CINA, L. An alkaloid discovered by Pelletier and Caventou, in the bark
of _bru'cia antidysenter'ica_, and afterwards associated with strychnia,
in _nux vomica_.

_Prep._ Ground nux vomica, or the bark of brucia antidysenterica, is
boiled in dilute sulphuric acid, and the resulting decoction mixed with
hydrate of lime (in excess); the crude precipitate thus obtained is boiled
in alcohol (sp. gr. .850), and the tincture filtered whilst hot. A mixture
of crude strychnia and brucia is deposited as the fluid cools, and the
remainder is obtained by evaporation. This is powdered and digested in
cold alcohol, which dissolves out the brucia; the solution furnishes
crystals on spontaneous evaporation. It may be further purified by
recrystallisation from alcohol.

_Prop._ Soluble in 850 parts of cold, and about 500 parts of hot water;
freely soluble in alcohol; added to the dilute acids until they are
neutralised, it forms crystallisable salts, easily obtained by
evaporation.

_Tests._ It is distinguished from strychnia, which in many respects it
resembles, by its ready solubility in both dilute and absolute alcohol,
and its insolubility in ether. With nitric acid it strikes a fine red
colour, which is removed by sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphurous acid.
Iodic acid, chloric acid, and chlorine, also turn it red.

Professor Sonnenschein has succeeded in converting brucia into
strychnia. He says--"Brucia C_{23}H_{26}N_{2}O_{4} and Strychnia
C_{21}H_{22}N_{2}O_{2} differ apparently considerably in their
composition; but the former may easily be converted into the latter.
Referring to the formulae it will be seen that strychnia is produced by
combining brucia with 4O, and eliminating 2H_{2}O_{1} and 2CO_{2}. This is
effected as follows:--Brucia is moderately heated with 4 to 5 times its
weight of diluted nitric acid, when a red colouration will be produced and
gases evolved, which cause in a mixture of barium chloride and ammonia a
white precipitate of carbonate of barium.

The red solution is concentrated in a water-bath, super-saturated with
potassa, and agitated with ether, which, on spontaneous evaporation,
leaves a reddish mass, containing a red colouring matter, a yellowish
resin, and an alkaloid which is obtained pure by dissolving in an acid and
crystallising. This base has the intensity, bitter taste, and other
properties of strychnia, gives the characteristic reactions with potassium
chromate, cerium oxide, and sulphuric acid, and yields with chlorine the
sparingly soluble compound. The muriate crystallises in fine silky
needles, from which 9.20 per cent. of chlorine was obtained.

The conversion of brucia into strychnia is not only highly interesting,
but it is likewise of great importance in forensic analysis, proving again
that in such cases the employment of oxidising agents is admissible only
with great caution. A student who had received for analysis a mixture
containing, among other substances, brucia and nitrate of lead, employed
the process of Stas and Otto for the separation of the alkaloids, and
found strychnia instead of brucia which had been oxidised by the liberated
nitric acid.

"If strychnia is heated with a strong base like potassa, soda, or baryta,
for some time, in a sealed glass tube placed in a water-bath, a body is
obtained which no longer shows the reactions of strychnia, but resembles
brucia in its reactions. The experiments on this decomposition, which is
likewise of importance in forensic analysis, are not yet concluded."

=BRUISE= (br[=o][=o]ze). _Syn._ CONTU'SIO, CONTU'SUM, L.; CONTUSION,
MEURTRISSURE, Fr.; BRAUSCHE, QUETSCHUNG, &c., Ger. A contusion; but in
popular language applied chiefly to cases in which there is an
extravasation of blood owing to the rupture of the minute vessels, with
consequent discoloration or tumefaction of the part.

_Treatment._--In common cases, sufficiently serious, bruises may be rubbed
with a little opodeldoc or soap-liniment; or, if the inflammation be
considerable, they may be bathed with a little weak goulard water, or with
vinegar and water. In more severe cases leeches may be applied. See
CONTUSION.

_Treatment for Animals._--The same as for man.

=BRUNS'WICK BLACK.= See VARNISHES.

=BRUNS'WICK GREEN.= See GREEN PIGMENTS.

=BRUSHES.= Brushes may be best washed in a moderately cold weak solution
of borax. They should afterwards be rinsed in cold water and dried.

=BRUSTBONBONS--PECTORAL BONBONS= (Fr., Stollwerck, Cologne). Carageen, 3
parts; Iceland moss, 2 parts; red poppy petals, 1-1/2 parts; coltsfoot, 1
part; liquorice, 2 parts; marshmallow root, 2 parts; daisy (_Bellis
perennis_), 1-1/2 parts; Souchong tea, 1 part; boiled with 24 parts of
water till reduced to half, and the fluid afterwards mixed with refined
sugar.

=BRUSTGELEE--PECTORAL JELLY= (Daubitz, Berlin). A yellowish-brown nearly
clear jelly, with a sweet, weak anise, followed by a somewhat bitter
taste, made of gelatin, 12 grammes; sugar, 60 grammes; and a herbal
infusion, 120 grammes; the latter made from anise, star-anise, Iceland
moss, &c.

=BRUSTPULVER--PECTORAL POWDER= (Beliol, Paris). For chronic pains in the
chest. A mixture of 75 parts milk-sugar, 20 parts gum arabic, 5 parts
Rochelle salt. (Mayer).

=BRUSTSAFT PRAPARIRTER--PREPARED PECTORAL JUICE= (Rudolph Buettner,
Berlin). For coughs, hoarseness, tightness of the chest, &c. An ordinary
pectoral tea made of an infusion of red poppy petals, which is boiled to a
syrup with sugar (Hager).

=BRUSTSYRUP WEISER MAYERSCHER--WHITE PECTORAL SYRUP= (G. A. W. Mayer,
Breslau). 4 parts powdered radish extracted with 5 parts water (according
to others rose-water), the liquor expressed and filtered. 6 parts of the
clear liquor digested with 10 parts of sugar to make a syrup. (Hager.)
Frequently nothing but a simple solution of sugar.

=Brustsyrup--Pectoral Syrup= (Dr Moth). A mixture of syrup of marshmallow,
1000 parts; extract of horehound, 30 parts; oxymel of squills, 50 parts;
aq. amygd. amar., 25 parts; aqua. foenic, 100 parts; spirit of ether, 10
parts.

=BRUSTWARZEN--MITTEL ZUR HEILUNG WUNDER.= Miraculous remedy for healing
sore nipples. (From Paris.) A dirty brownish-yellow, somewhat turbid
liquid, smelling of vinegar, and with a taste both sour and sweet. A
solution of 1-1/4 parts litharge in 100 parts vinegar. (Wittstein.)

=Brustwarzen--Mittel Gegen Wunde.= Sore nipple preventive. (From Paris.)
Acetic acid, 1 part; sugar of lead, 3 parts; camphor, 5 parts; water, 100
parts. (Terreil.)

=BRUSTWARZENBALSAM, RIGAER--RIGA'S NIPPLE BALSAM.= A mixture of the yolk
of one egg with 10 to 12 grammes balsam of Peru.

=BRY'ONIN= (-n[)i]n). A peculiar bitter principle extracted from the root
of white bryony (_bryonia dioica_, Jacq.). It is obtained from the dry
extract of the expressed juice, by solution in alcohol, filtration, and
cautious evaporation.

_Prop., &c._ A yellowish-white mass. It is a drastic purgative; and, in
large doses, poisonous. It enters into the composition of several quack
medicines.

=BUBBLE-AND-SQUEAK.= In _cookery_, a species of olla podrida variously
prepared, as the materials and fancy of the maker dictate.

_Prep._ (Rundell.) Take slices of cold meat, fry them quickly until brown,
and put them into a dish to keep them hot. Then clean the pan from the
fat; put in it greens and carrots (previously boiled and chopped small);
add a little butter, pepper, and salt; make them very hot, and put them
round the beef with a little gravy. Cold boiled pork is a better material
for bubble-and-squeak than beef. In either case the slices should be very
thin and lightly fried.

=BUB'BLE FEVER[double-dagger].= See PEMPHIGUS.

=BU'CHU= (-k[=u]). The plant _dios'ma crena'ta_ (which _see_).

=BUCK'BEAN= or =BOG'BEAN=. The _menyanthes trifoliata_. See INFUSIONS.

=BUCKINGHAM'S DYE= for the whiskers; manufactured by R. E. Hall & Co.,
Nashua, N.H. This whisker dye is an ammoniacal solution of nitrate of
silver, and consists of 1/2 gramme nitrate of silver, 2-1/2 grammes
solution of ammonia, and 40 grammes distilled water. (Dr Schacht).

=BUCK'THORN.= _Syn._ RHAM'NUS, L. The _rham'nus cathar'ticus_ (Linn.).
Berries (BAC'CAE RHAM'NI, L.), cathartic; juice of the berries (SUC'CUS R.,
L.) is officinal in the B. P. See RHAMNINE, SYRUPS, &c.

=BUCK'WHEAT.= See WHEAT.

=BUG.= _Syn._ CI'MEX, L.; PUNAISE, Fr.; WANSE, Ger. A name popularly and
very loosely applied to a vast number of insects that infest houses and
plants; in _zoology_, hemipterous insects of the genus 'cimex,' of which
there are many hundred species; appr., the bed-bug.

=Bug.= _Syn._ BED'-BUG, HOUSE'-B., WALL-B., WALL'-LOUSE*, &c.; CI'MEX
DOMES'TICUS, C. LECTULA''RIUS (Linn.), L.; PUNAISE, Fr.; BETTWANZE,
HAeUSWANSE, Ger. An insect too well known in all the larger towns of Europe
and America, and in the huts of squalid poverty everywhere, to require a
description here. It is almost the only species of the bug kind that has
undeveloped wings. Its introduction to England is believed to have
occurred soon after the great Fire of London (A.D. 1666). Human blood
appears to be its favourite food; but it will also eat grain, seed, flour,
dried paste, size, soft deal, beech, osier, &c. Cedar, mahogany, and the
odorous and harder woods are usually avoided by this insect. Aromatics,
perfumes, and strong odours generally are unfavorable to its propagation.

_Exterm., &c._ Various means have been adopted to prevent the accession,
and to destroy or drive away, these enemies of "tired nature's sweet
restorer, balmy sleep." Among the most certain of these is thorough
cleanliness and ventilation. The furniture brokers put articles infested
with these insects into a room with doors and windows fitting quite close,
and subject them to the fumes of burning sulphur or chlorine gas. In the
small way poisonous washes are commonly resorted to. For this purpose
nothing is more effective than chloride of lime or chloride of zinc; the
latter being preferable to the other on account of its being comparatively
scentless.

The following mixtures are in common use, or have been recommended for
this purpose:--

1. Corrosive sublimate (in powder) and hydrochloric acid, of each 1 oz.;
hot water, 3/4 pint; agitate them together until the first is completely
dissolved. It is applied with a paint-brush, observing to rub it well into
the cracks and joints. This is the common 'bug-wash' of the shops. It is a
deadly poison!

2. As the last, but substituting 2 oz. of sal-ammoniac for the
hydrochloric acid.

3. Oil of turpentine, 1 pint; camphor, 2 oz.; dissolve. Very cleanly and
effective.

4. Tobacco-water, made by steeping 2 oz. of good shag in 1 pint of warm
water for a few hours.

5. Crude pyroligneous acid.

6. Coal-tar naphtha. This, as well as No. 3 (_above_), should never be
used by candle-light, as it is excessively inflammable. When the smell of
the common naphtha is objectionable, benzol or benzine may be used
instead. The celebrated nostrum vended under the name of 'Insecticide' is
said to be nothing but benzol.

7. Sulphurated potash (in powder), 6 oz.; soft soap, 1/2 lb.; oil of
turpentine, 1/4 pint or q. s. to make a species of soft ointment. The
odour of the last three (Nos. 5, 6, 7) is rather persistent and
disagreeable; but they are very effective.

8. Strong mercurial ointment, soft soap, and oil of turpentine, equal
parts, triturated together. Rather greasy and dirty.

9. Scotch or Welsh snuff, mixed with twice its weight of soft soap.

10. Sulphur, or squills, in impalpable powder, blown into the cracks or
joints, or scattered in a fine cloud, by means of a hollow ball or balloon
of vulcanised india rubber filled with it and furnished with a small
wooden jet or mouth-piece, or in any other convenient manner. Very cleanly
and effective. Dumont's 'Patent Vermin Killer,' as well as the whole host
of imitations of it, is of this kind.

_Obs._ Out of the above list there is ample room for selection. The common
practice is to take the bedstead or other piece of furniture to pieces
before applying them.

These pests exist only in dirty houses. A careful housewife or servant
will soon completely destroy them. The surest method of destruction is to
catch them individually when they attack the person in bed. When their
bite is felt, instantly rise and light a candle and capture them. This may
be troublesome, but if there be not a great number a few nights will
finish them. When there is a large number, and they have gained a lodgment
in the timbers, take the bed in pieces, and fill in all the apertures and
joints with a mixture of soft soap and Scotch snuff. A piece of
wicker-work, called a BUG-TRAP, placed at the head of the bed, forms a
receptacle for them, and then they may be daily caught till no more are
left. Oil-painting a wall is a sure means of excluding and destroying
them. It has been asserted that these insects are so fond of narrow-leaved
dittany or pepperwort (_lepidium ruderale_), that if a bunch of it be
suspended near their haunts they will settle in it, and may be thus easily
captured. It is said to be commonly used as a bug-trap in some of our
rural districts. Water, poured boiling from the spout of a kettle into the
cracks and joints, is a cleanly and certain remedy, which we have often
seen employed; so also is a jet of steam; they are both destructive to all
insects, and will be found particularly so to beetles.

The proper time for attacking these pests is early in March, or shortly
before they are revived from their dormant state by the warm weather. See
INSECTS.

=Bug, Harvest.= See ACARI.

=BU'GLE= (bu'gl). An elongated cylindrical glass bead. See BEAD.

=BUILDING STONES.= Amongst the calcareous and magnesian stones used for
building many of the fine-grained and porous varieties are liable to split
into flakes after a few years' exposure to the atmosphere, owing to the
absorption by the stone of water, which, becoming frozen during severe
weather, fractures the stone by its expansion. Brard invented a simple
means of ascertaining whether a building stone is liable to this defect,
which consists in taking a smoothly-cut block of the stone, one or two
inches square, and placing it in a cold saturated solution of sodic
sulphate. The temperature of the solution is gradually raised to the
boiling point; it is allowed to boil for half an hour, and then the stone
is left to cool in the liquid. When cold it is suspended over a dish, and
once a day for a week or a fortnight plunged for a few moments into a cold
saturated solution of sodic sulphate, and it is then again freely
suspended in the air. The sulphate crystallises in the pores of the stone
and splits off fragments of it. A similar experiment is made upon an
equal-sized mass of stone which is known to be free from this defect. By
the comparative weight of these fragments in the two cases the tendency of
the stone to the defect in question may be estimated.

A stone that is placed in a building in a position similar to that in
which it is found in the quarry, that is, with its seams lying
horizontally, is found to resist the weather much more successfully than
one that has not been so placed.

=BUN.= A well-known kind of light, sweet cake.

_Prep._ 1. BATH-BUNS:--As 6, but adding a little candied lemon and orange
peel, and putting a little grated peel and a few caraway comfits on the
top of each.

2. CROSS-BUNS:--Flour, 2-1/2 lbs.; sifted sugar 1/2 lb.; coriander seeds,
cassia, and mace, of each (powdered) a sufficiency; make a paste with
butter, 1/2 lb.; (dissolved in) hot milk, 1/2 pint; work with three
table-spoonfuls of yeast; set it before the fire for an hour to rise, then
make it into buns, and set them before the fire on a tin for half an hour;
lastly, brush them over with warm milk, and bake them to a nice brown in a
moderate oven.

3. MADEIRA-BUNS:--Butter, 8 oz.; 2 eggs; flour, 1 lb.; powdered sugar, 6
oz.; half a nutmeg (grated); powdered ginger and caraway seeds, of each
1/2 teaspoonful; work well together, then add as much milk as required,
and ferment; lastly, bake on tins in a quick oven.

4. PLAIN BUNS:--Flour, 2 lbs.; butter, 1/4 lb.; sugar, 6 oz.; a little
salt, caraway and ginger; make a paste with yeast, 4 spoonfuls, and warm
milk, q. s.; as before.

5. PENNY-BUNS:--To the last add of currants, well washed, 1/2 lb.; and
water, stained by steeping a little saffron in it, q. s., to give a light
yellow tinge to them.

6. RICH BUNS:--Fine flour, 3 lbs; sugar, 1 lb.; butter, 2 lbs. (melted and
beat with) rose water, 4 oz.; currants, 1 lb.; yeast, 1/4 pint; as before.

_Obs._ The great secret in producing good buns is the use of sweet yeast
and the best currants only, and thoroughly washing these last in a sieve
or colander, to remove grit, before adding them to the dough.

=BUNION= (-y[)u]n). A species of corn or swelling on the ball of the great
toe, resulting from pressure, and irritation by friction. The treatment
recommended for corns applies also to bunions; but in consequence of the
greater extension of the disease, the cure is more tedious. A bunion may
often be effectually stopped and removed by poulticing it, and, at the
proper time, carefully opening it with a lancet. See CORNS.

=BURETTE.= A graduated glass vessel employed in volumetric analysis for
measuring liquids.

1. The first burette was invented by Gay-Lussac, a drawing of whose
instrument is given below.

It rarely, if ever, has a capacity greater than 50 cubic centimetres, and
consists of a narrow tube fused on to a wider one. The larger tube is
about 33 centimetres long, the graduated portion occupying about 25
centimetres, and its internal diameter measures 15 millimetres; the narrow
tube has a diameter of 4 millimetres, which in the upper bent end
decreases to 2 millimetres. When used the instrument should be held in the
left hand, the bottom part being allowed to lean a little against the
chest. The operation is aided by giving the instrument from time to time a
slight turn in the direction of its longitudinal axis, thereby placing the
curve of the stout alternately in a more vertical, alternately in a more
horizontal position. The volume must not be read off before the surface of
the liquid has attained a constant height.

2. Geissler's burette. This instrument differs from Gay-Lussac's in having
the narrow tube inside, instead of outside the wider one. It is found very
convenient in use, and is less liable to fracture than Gay-Lussac's.

3. Mohr's burette, which can be more easily and readily managed than
either of the two preceding ones, is described and figured under
ALKALIMETRY.

[Illustration: Gay-Lussac's Burette and Geissler's Burette.]

In volumetric analysis the method of taking the readings of the burette is
an operation of great importance, requiring considerable method and
practice.

The first proceeding is to bring the eye to a level with the fluid, and to
adopt a fixed and unalterable standard of what is to be considered the
surface.

If you hold a burette partly filled with water between the eye and a
strongly illumined wall, the surface of the fluid presents the appearance
shown in fig. _a._ If you hold close behind the tube a sheet of white
paper with a strong light falling on it, the surface of the fluid will
present an appearance similar to that shown in fig. _b._

In both cases you have read off at the lower border of the dark zone, this
being the most distinctly marked line. Its distinctness may be heightened
by adopting Mohr's contrivance which consists in pasting on a sheet of
very white cardboard a broad strip of black paper, and when reading off
holding this close behind the burette in a position to place the border
line between white and black from 2 to 3 millimetres below the lower
border of the dark zone as shown in figure _c._

[Illustration: _a._ and _b._]

[Illustration: _c._]

Great care must be taken to hold the paper invariably in the same
position, since if it be held lower down, the lower border of the black
zone will move higher up.

To test the correctness of the graduation of a burette proceed as
follows:--Fill the instrument up to the highest division with water at
60.8 deg. F., then let the cubic centimetres of the liquid flow out into an
accurately weighed flask, and determine the weight of these ten cubic
centimetres in the usual way; then let another quantity of ten cubic
centimetres flow out, and weigh again, and repeat the operation till the
contents of the burette are exhausted. If the instrument is correctly
graduated, every ten cubic centimetres of water at 60.8 deg. F. must weigh
9.990 grammes.

=BURG'LARIES.= The common precautions of locks and bolts, alarum-bells and
fire-arms, are frequently found useless in preserving houses from
burglars; but a light in the upper part of the house, or a small dog on
the ground-floor, with the means of running into a place of safety from
its enemies, has been seldom known to fail. A combination of the two would
undoubtedly be doubly effective. The bark of the dog and the fear of
detection by the approach of the light would deter the majority of rogues
of common pluck and feeling. A dog out of doors, and consequently
accessible, however large and fierce, is easily pacified or silenced by
men of the class referred to.

=BURLS, REMOVAL OF, from Cloth and Wool.= Introduce the wool or the
woollen goods into 100 litres of sulphuric acid at 6 deg. B., in which 500
grams of alum and 250 grams of salt have been dissolved. Work in this bath
for one or two hours, drain in the centrifugal, and hang up at 100 deg. to
120 deg.. Wash for an hour and a half in clear water, treat for two hours with
fuller's earth, soda and lime, and wash again for two hours. Sulphuric
acid is adapted only for whites and indigo blues. For coloured goods
solutions of chloride of tin, and chloride of manganese at 6 deg. B., are
recommended.

=BURNS[234] and Scalds.[235]= _Treatm._ When the injury is superficial and
slight, a little creosote may be applied to the part. If a scald, the
vesicle should be first pierced with a needle, or what is better, snipped
with a pair of scissors, and the water which it contains should be then
gently squeezed out. When creosote is not procurable, a liniment formed of
equal parts of soft soap, basilicon ointment, oil of turpentine, and
water, may be used instead. When the part feels very hot and painful, a
poultice may be applied, on the surface of which a few drops of creosote,
or of the liniment, should be spread with a knife. This treatment will
generally succeed in allaying the pain. It may be followed by a dressing
of zinc ointment, or any other like simple emollient or unctuous
preparation. Creosote, contrary to what is commonly asserted, produces
scarcely any smarting or pain; whilst it rapidly removes the burning
sensation, and the charred surface soon assumes a dry scabby appearance,
which, by dressing with simple ointment, soon comes off and leaves the
part beneath in a sound and healthy state. If a poultice be applied it is
best to keep it on until the next day. Plunging the part into very cold
water immediately after the receipt of an injury of this kind will
frequently prevent any further remedy being required. Flexible collodion
painted over a burn forms a good protective envelope. In all cases cooling
laxatives should be administered; and the diet should be rather low until
the inflammatory symptoms subside.

[Footnote 234: BURN, s. sing.; AMBUS'TIO, L. BRULURE, Fr.; BRAND,
BRANDMAHL, Ger.]

[Footnote 235: See SCALDS (under _S_).]

_Treatment for Animals._ Carbolic dressing, exclusion of air, cotton wool,
linseed oil and lime water.

=BURNING-GLASS.= See LENS.

=BUTEA FRONDOSA=, _Roxb._ (Ind. Ph.) _Syn._ BENGAL KINO TREE. _Habitat._
Common all over India.--_Officinal part._ The inspissated juice obtained
from the stem by incision (_Buteae Gummi_, _Kino Bengalensis_, _Bengal
kino_). It occurs in the form of irregular shining fragments, seldom as
large as a pea; more or less mixed with adherent pieces of greyish bark;
of an intense ruby colour and astringent taste; soluble, but not freely
so, in water and in alcohol. Its astringency is due to the presence of
tannic and gallic acids.--_Prop. & Uses._ Similar to those of kino, for
which it has been found an efficient substitute.--_Prep._ Same as those of
kino.

=BUTTER.= [Eng., Ger.] _Syn._ BUTY'RUM, L.; BEURRE, Fr.; BUTER, BUTERA,
Sax. The fatty matter obtained from cream by churning it.

_Manuf._ The process of making butter by the common operation of churning
is extremely simple, and is well known. The chief objects to attend to are
maintaining a proper temperature, and a certain degree of exposure to the
air. Extreme cleanliness must also be observed; the churn and other
utensils being frequently scalded out with water. When the butter is
'come,' it should be put into a fresh-scalded pan, or tub, which has been
standing in cold water, cold water poured on it, and after it has acquired
some hardness, it should be well beaten with a flat board until not the
least taste of the butter-milk remains, and the water, which must be often
changed, becomes quite colourless and tasteless. A little salt may then be
worked into it; after which it may be weighed and made into 'forms,' which
should then be thrown into cold water contained in an earthen pan provided
with a cover. In this way nice and cool butter may be obtained in the
hottest weather.

At Dumbarton the newly separated butter is put into a clean vessel, and a
corn sickle is drawn several times crosswise through it, to extract any
hairs that may adhere to it. This operation is performed in very cold
spring water, and is followed by thoroughly washing it therein. 10 oz. of
salt are now added to every stone-weight of the butter, and well mixed in.

In Devonshire the milk is generally scalded in copper pans over a charcoal
or wood fire, and the cream collected as soon as it rises, or, and more
frequently, when the whole has got cold. It is then churned in the usual
way. On the small scale the butter is commonly obtained from this cream by
patiently working it with the hand in a shallow pan or tub. Without care
the cream is apt to absorb some of the fumes from the charcoal, which
impart a peculiar taste to the butter. This is the reason why some of the
Devonshire butter has a slight smoky flavour. It may be removed by
thorough washing in cold water. Of late years, in the large dairy-farms of
Devonshire, covered flues, with openings to receive the bottoms of the
pans, have superseded open fires, by which the danger of contamination
from the fumes is removed.

_Choice._ Fresh butter has a pleasant odour and is of an equal colour
throughout its substance. If it smells sour, the butter-milk has not been
well washed out; and if it is streaked or veiny, it is probably mixed with
stale butter or lard. A good way to try butter is to thrust a knife into
it, which should not smell rancid and unpleasant when withdrawn. Rancid
and stale butter, when eaten in quantity, is capable of producing
dangerous symptoms.

_Pur._ The cheaper kinds of butter are frequently adulterated with common
wheat-flour, oatmeal, pea-flour, lard, and is sometimes mixed with suet
and turnips, as well as with a large quantity of salt and water. The trick
is concocted between the Irish factors and the London dealers. The higher
priced article is seldom mixed with anything beyond an excess of salt and
water, notwithstanding the assertions of alarmists to the contrary. The
presence of lard may be detected by the flavour and paleness of the
colour. A little of the sample adulterated with the other substances
named, if melted in a glass tube or phial, will separate into strata,
which are very marked when cold.

_Quantitative Analysis of Butter._--1. The following process for the
analysis of butter, by Mr A. H. Allen, is extracted from the 'Chemical
News' (xxxii, 77):--The Society of Public Analysts has adopted 80.00 per
cent. as the lowest limit of fat contained in a genuine butter.

The amount of water is best ascertained by heating 5 grams of the butter
in a small weighed beaker to a temperature of about 110 deg. or 120 deg. C. for an
hour or so. Some chemists merely heat the butter on a water bath.
According to the author's experience, perfect drying is next to impossible
at that temperature.

The dried butter is next treated in the beaker with anhydrous ether, or
commercial benzoline. The former liquid is expensive and inconveniently
volatile, while it must be used in a perfectly anhydrous condition (to
avoid solution of the salt), and except when boiling has but a limited
solvent power for butter, especially when adulterated. Benzoline dissolves
fat more readily than ether; it does not volatilise so rapidly at ordinary
temperatures, it is always anhydrous and has the advantage of low price.
The "benzoline" employed by the author is made by redistilling the
commercial article from a retort immersed in a bath of boiling water.
About one third of the original bulk usually comes over readily at 100 deg.
C., and has a gravity of 0.689.

On warming the beaker containing the benzoline the dry butter readily
dissolves. The liquid is poured on a small dry filter and washed with warm
benzoline, the filtrate being collected in a small wide beaker. If the
filter had been previously weighed, its increase of weight, after careful
drying, will of course give the quantity of curd and salt in the 5 grams
of butter taken. Except in cases in which extreme accuracy is desired, it
is preferable to scrape the residue off the filter and weigh it
separately.

The error (owing to imperfect removal) only amounts to one or two tenths
per cent. of the butter taken. As the salt is accurately estimated
afterwards, the loss falls on the curd. The salt may be determined by
careful ignition of the filter and residue, the incombustible matter
consisting almost wholly of common salt, while the curd is ascertained by
loss of weight. This method is not to be recommended; for without great
care some of the salt will be volatilised and lost, the error causing the
amount of curd to appear excessive.

Ignition also renders any further examination of the curd an
impossibility. A far preferable plan is to return the weighed curd and
salt to the filter, and to wash them with cold water. The filtrate is made
up to 100 c. c., and the salt is estimated in a half of it by titrating
with decinormal nitrate of silver. The remaining portion of the solution
can be employed for the estimation of sugar, if desired. This is effected
by inverse titration with Fehling's copper solution, in the same way as
grape sugar. The estimation of sugar may sometimes be of interest, as a
means of ascertaining whether the aqueous portion of the butter consisted
of mere water or of serum of milk. In other words, the estimation of the
sugar may furnish a means of ascertaining whether an excess of water in
the butter is due to insufficient removal of the butter-milk, or to
subsequent incorporation of water. Every 0.001 gram of milk sugar
represents about 0.022 of average milk serum.

The residue insoluble in cold water usually consists almost wholly of
casein. If, however, the butter has been adulterated with mashed potatoes,
flour, or other starchy matters--said to be occasionally employed--they
will be found here. The presence of starch in the residue will, of course,
be readily indicated by treating it with hot water, and testing the cooled
liquid with solution of iodine. By pressing out a small portion of the
butter between two slips of glass, so as to obtain a thin film, and
observing it under the microscope (or by observing the caseous residue
after treatment with cold water), the nature of the starch may be
ascertained.

The solution of the fatty matter in benzoline is evaporated at 100 deg. C.
till it no longer decreases in weight. The average proportion of fatty
matter in butter is about 85 per cent. If less than 80 per cent. the
butter must be considered adulterated. It is evident that a careful
estimation of the per-centage of fatty matter would often render separate
estimations of the water, curd, and salt unnecessary; for unless the sum
of the three latter constituents exceeded 20 per cent. the butter could
not be considered as adulterated, unless by an admixture of other fats.

An easy and rapid method of estimating the fat in the undried butter is
therefore a great desideratum; but unfortunately no satisfactory method is
at present known. The indirect estimation of the fat, by subtracting the
sum of the per-centages of water, curd, and salt from 100.00, ought to
agree with the direct estimation of fat within 0.5 per cent., and the
variation is often much less.

2. Dr Dupre adopts the following method: About 5 grams of the dry filtered
butter fat are weighed in a small strong flask; 25 c. c. of a normal
alcoholic soda solution are added; the flask is closed by means of a
well-fitting cauotchouc stopper, firmly secured by a piece of canvas and
string, and heated in a water-bath for about an hour. When cool the flask
is opened, the contents--which are semi-solid--carefully liquefied by
heat, and washed into a flask with hot water. This flask is now heated for
some time on a water-bath to expel the alcohol, some more hot water is
added, and 25 c. c. of diluted sulphuric acid somewhat stronger than the
alkali used, are run in. The contents are allowed to cool, and the acid
aqueous solution below the cake of fatty acids is passed through a filter.
The fatty acids in the flask are washed by hot water in the manner
recommended by Dr Muter, _i.e._, each time allowed to cool; all the
washings are passed through a filter.

The author uses no cambric, but passes everything through paper. With care
scarcely any of the fatty acid will find its way into the filter. After
the washing with water is completed and the flask drained, he washes any
fatty acid that may be on the filter into the flask by means of a mixture
of alcohol and ether on a water bath, and finally dries the fatty acids in
the flask at a temperature of 105 deg. C. The drying can be done readily if
the melted fat is now and then shaken briskly, so as to subdivide the
water as much as possible. In this way the acids when once in the flask
are not taken out until their weight has been taken, thus reducing the
risk of loss to a minimum. Meanwhile the acidity of the aqueous filtrate
and washings is estimated by decinormal soda solution. Subtracting from
the amount required to the proportion necessary to neutralise the excess
of acid added in decomposing the soap, the rest represents the soluble
fatty acids contained in the butter taken, and on the assumption of its
being butyric acid, we can, of course, calculate the amount of this acid
present. When once the equivalent of the soluble acids present in butter
is fairly determined, this, of course, will have to be substituted for
that of butyric acid. The results thus obtained are very accurate, and the
process is very simple in execution.

The author has satisfied himself by repeated experiments that the
alkalinity of the alcoholic soda solution by itself is not altered by the
process. The author places no reliance on the specific gravity test, as he
finds that mutton dripping, and other fats likely to be used as
adulterants of butter, may acquire a specific gravity above .911 by being
strongly and repeatedly heated. He thinks, however, that any sample of
butter below .911 may safely be pronounced adulterated.

In a subsequent note Dr Dupre states that he has effected the
saponification, decomposition of the soap, and the washing and drying of
the fatty acids at ordinary temperature, thus still further reducing the
risk of breaking up the higher into lower acids. The saponification is
readily effected by using a sufficiency of alcoholic soda. Between four
and five grams of the dry butter fat were shaken up for several minutes
with 100 c. c. of normal alcoholic soda. The butter soon dissolves, but
after a time the solution gelatinises to a clear transparent mass. (The
temperature of the laboratory at the time of these experiments ranged
between 22 deg. and 50 deg..) This jelly is now allowed to stand over night,
during which time the smell of butyric ether, very strong at first,
entirely disappears. In one of the experiments the alcohol was allowed to
evaporate spontaneously before the acid was added; in the other (made with
a different sample of butter) the soap was dissolved in about half a litre
of water, and at once decomposed by the addition of hydrochloric acid.

The fatty acids which separated in white curdy masses were thoroughly
washed on a filter with cold water, about four litres, dried in vacuo over
oil of vitriol, and weighed. The results of experiment show that butter
fat yields the same proportion of insoluble fatty acids when saponified
with or without the aid of heat.

3. Mr Gatehouse. _Rapid Method of Detecting the Adulteration of Butter
with other Fats._ The following comparative method is based upon the
insolubility of potassium stearate in alkaline solutions when the stearate
has been produced at high temperatures:

Before applying the test it is essential to remove all curd, butter-milk,
and salt, by washing with hot water or dissolving in ether. Twenty grains
of the butter are placed in a large test-tube one third full with water
boiled thoroughly and allowed to stand till the fat separates. The fat is
either dissolved in ether, and after evaporation saponified, or the lower
layer of the liquid is drawn off by a pipette as follows:--A thin glass
tube is drawn out to a fairly fine point and bent at the top to an obtuse
angle. Whilst the butter is still liquid this nozzle is inserted into the
bottom of the test-tube, placing the finger over the upper end to prevent
any liquid from getting in till it reaches the bottom. When fairly cold
the liquid may be withdrawn by a pipette attached to the tube. This
process can be repeated till the washings are free from chlorides.

The saponification is effected by heating the purified butter with 1/3-1/2
of its own weight of pure solid potassium hydrate (purified by alcohol) to
a temperature above 420 deg. F.; applying the heat gently at first, and when
the frothing ceases, heating it more strongly, till no further apparent
action occurs. The ultimate temperature during saponification must be kept
above 400 deg. for some minutes, otherwise the sterate formed will be soluble
instead of insoluble in the alkaline solution.

If the butter is pure, the colour of the residue will be at the utmost
light yellow, but should the butter be adulterated to any extent, it may
be almost black. Too much reliance must not, however, be placed on the
colour.

After allowing the tube and its contents to cool, the mass is boiled with
successive portions of distilled water till 6 oz. (or 200 c. c.)
altogether have been used. If the butter is pure, a portion of this
solution poured into a test-tube will present only a faint opalescence;
if, on the other hand, the butter is impure, a decided opacity will be
perceived, the degree depending upon the amount of adulteration.

The amount of adulteration in any sample is determined by first obtaining
pure butter and adding to separate portions of it known per-centages of
lard, &c. Each of these can be saponified as stated above; they are then
corked up in tubes of equal diameter and labelled with the per-centage of
lard they contain. On comparing them it will be seen that 2 per cent. of
lard can be clearly indicated.

When a butter is analysed all that is wanted is to saponify, make up to
the correct strength, and after cooling pour into a test-tube and compare
with the specimen tubes.

4. Dr Redwood. _The Determination of the Melting Points of Butter and
other Fats._ The apparatus in the form best suited for general use
consists of a basin, two small beakers, and a thermometer. The author uses
an enamelled iron basin about six inches in diameter, and three and a half
inches deep. In this is placed a beaker four and a half inches deep and
three inches in diameter, and within this beaker is placed another much
smaller one, supported by its projecting rim on a disk of tinplate or
copper, the outer edge of which rests on the mouth of the larger beaker.
Some mercury is put in the smaller beaker to the depth of about an inch,
and cold water into the larger beaker, so that its surface shall be half
an inch or an inch higher than that of the mercury.

A small drop of the fat which has been previously melted and heated to
several degrees above its melting-point, but has been allowed to cool
again to near its setting point, is put on the surface of the cold
mercury. This is best done by means of a thin glass rod about one eighth
of an inch in diameter, the end of which has been rounded off in the
blow-pipe flame.

It is important that the drop should be very small, and its temperature
when placed on the mercury not much above its melting point, for if it be
too hot it will spread over the surface of the mercury, which is not
desirable.

If the rounded end of the rod be slightly dipped into the melted fat, and
then brought to the surface of the mercury, a small hemispherical particle
will attach itself there and speedily congeal, becoming more or less
opaque in doing so. The weight of one of these hemispherical masses, which
should not be more than the eighth of an inch in diameter, will be from
1/50 to 1/10 of a grain. Having placed the drop of fat upon the mercury,
the bulb of a thermometer, with sufficiently minute graduations, is
introduced into the mercury and hot water poured into the basin. The heat
is thus communicated to the contents of the small beaker slowly through
the water in the larger beaker, and the rise of temperature in the mercury
may be easily regulated, and should take place at the rate of about one
degree per minute.

The mercury, by virtue of its comparatively good conducting power,
acquires a uniform temperature throughout, which is indicated by the
thermometer, and at the same time communicated to the fat. The fat when
the temperature approaches its melting point becomes partially
transparent, and if the stem or elongated bulb of the thermometer be now
brought up against it, the moment fusion takes place the liquid fat will
run into the channel formed by the repulsion of the mercury and the
outside of the thermometer tube. This process presents the following
advantages:--

1. The heat-conducting power of the mercury, on which the fat is placed,
ensures the equalisation of the temperature as indicated by the
thermometer, and at the same time communicated to the fat.

2. The direct contact of the fat with the mercury, without the
intervention of a bad conducting medium, such as glass, ensures a more
immediate and correct indication of the temperature at which liquefaction
takes place than would otherwise occur.

3. The minuteness of the quantity of fat operated upon reduces to a
minimum the time occupied in its melting, and thus facilitates the
determination with exactness of its melting point.

4. The time occupied in preparing small tubes and charging them with the
fat is saved, and several experiments in succession may be easily and
rapidly made with the same apparatus. The author observed that in butter
as well as other fats, such as tallows, there were at least two melting
points, dependent upon the way in which the fat had been previously
subjected to the action of heat, and that they may differ in butter to the
extent of 3 deg. or 4 deg. F.; the low melting point being that of the fat after
it has been heated to several degrees above its first melting point, and
the higher melting point being that of fat which has been previously
melted to the lowest possible temperature, and then immediately allowed to
congeal.

5. Professor Wanklyn carefully weighs one gram of butter, and heats it in
a platinum dish of the size shown in the accompanying figure, from four to
six hours or even more--in short, until it ceases to lose weight. The loss
of weight is the water, which should be calculated and expressed in
per-centages.

_Fat._ The dried butter is now to be heated with ether (the ether should
be made to boil by floating the dish in hot water). Several successive
portions should be taken, the whole passed through a filter, the filter
well washed with ether, and the filtrate evaporated to dryness and
weighed.

_Caseine and Ash._ The residue from which the fat and water have been
extracted is now to be taken, carefully weighed, then burned down to a low
red heat; the residue remaining is the ash, the loss the caseine.

[Illustration: Butter-analysing dish.]

The amount of ash, practically speaking, is the salt, but if there be any
doubt as to its composition, the chlorine maybe estimated by a volumetric
solution of nitrate of silver, and further examined.

The following table shows the composition of a few genuine and other
butters, examined according to the same, or at least to a similar process
to the one described:--

  --------------------+------+-----------+------+--------+-----------------+------------------
                      |      |   Ash,    |      |        |                 |
                      | Fat. |principally|Water.|Caseine.|    Quality.     |
                      |      |   Salt.   |      |        |                 |
  --------------------+------+-----------+------+--------+-----------------+------------------
  Fresh Devonshire    |82.7  |   1.1     |16.2  | 16.2   |Good.            |WANKLYN.
    butter.           |      |           |      |        |                 |
  Normandy butter.    |82.1  |   1.8     |16.1  | 16.1   |   "             |   "
  Jersey butter.      |78.491|   8.528   |10.445|  2.536 |   "             |ANGELL AND HEHNER.
  Normandy butter.    |82.643|   2.915   | 9.305|  5.137 |   "             |
  Butter from Ventnor.|86.280|   6.600   | 3.831|  3.289 |Found to be      |        "
                      |      |           |      |        |  adulterated    |
                      |      |           |      |        |  with foreign   |
                      |      |           |      |        |  fat.           |
  Butter from London. |87.50 |   1.559   |23.981| 6.880  |Adulterated  with|        "
                      |      |           |      |        |  water.         |
      "       "       |47.119|   2.689   |42.358| 7.834  |Adulterated with |        "
                      |      |           |      |        |  water, and     |
                      |      |           |      |        |  contains an    |
                      |      |           |      |        |  excess of curd.|
  --------------------+------+-----------+------+--------+-----------------+-----------------

6. _A Method of Detecting Meat Fats in Butter._ Mr Horsley, writing to the
'Chemical News,' September, 1874, says:--"My starting point is, that fresh
butter is permanently soluble in methylated ether, sp. gr. 0.730 at the
temperature of 65 deg. Fahr. But with the view of seeing if any other
substance it may contain could be precipitated from it, I took, say, 20 or
25 grains of fresh butter, placed it in a small test-tube, and poured over
it one drachm of methylated ether, and on corking the tube it readily
dissolved after a few minutes' agitation. I then added 30 drops of
methylated alcohol, 63 deg. o. p., and agitated again, but nothing was
precipitated. I, therefore, made another experiment with 15 grains of
butter and 10 grains of prepared mutton fat, dissolved them in 1 drachm of
ether first, and added 30 drops of alcohol, when in less than half an hour
the fat was precipitated in a room heated to 68 deg. Fahr. Next, in order to
see the effects upon mixtures of known fats, such as lard, beef, mutton,
and tallow fats properly melted together in proportions of 60 grains of
butter and 40 of fat, and stirring till cold, I found that each of them
could, by a similar procedure, be precipitated in a few minutes. In one
case, that of mutton, I filtered off the ethereal liquid, and collected
the residue, and obtained as much as 30 per cent. of what had been used;
so that there is no longer any doubt about easily detecting fatty
adulterations in butter. Lastly, I would observe that crystallisation of
butter, out of the ethereal solution at a lower temperature than 65 deg., must
not be mistaken for the fats precipitated by alcohol alluded to, as the
butter, besides being so much lighter, occupies the upper layer, and is
different in character and easily remelted by the application of the warm
hand for a minute or so.

"Further experiments have proved that half an hour suffices to effect the
full precipitation of fats from the ethereal solutions by the addition of
20 drops or so of alcohol to the drachm of ether, containing not more than
25 grains of the adulterated butter; after which the tube should be
agitated and its contents projected on to a small double filter, washed
with a little alcohol, and the residue whilst moist scraped off, and
transferred to a watch-glass to dry. In this way loss by melting and
absorption into the paper is obviated.

"The following were the proportions of fats I recovered, viz.--

  Lard             60 per cent.
  Mutton fat       75    "
  Beef fat         95    "

The precipitated mutton fat is powdery, and white as snow. Lard and beef
are more adherent and greasy; for that reason mutton makes the firmest
compound."

7. _On the Cooling of Fats._ At a meeting of the University of Edinburgh
Chemical Society, held on March 13th, 1878, a paper on the above subject
was read by Mr Treharne, M.B.C.M., wherein the author states:--"If equal
bulks of the fats of mutton, beef, pork, and butter, and palm oil be
heated to 100 deg. C. in small flasks fitted with a thermometer through the
cork, and then allowed to cool by radiation under the same conditions for
each, temperature is found to fall regularly to a certain point (which is
different for each of the facts above named) and then to rise to a certain
turning point. These turning points are approximately as follows:--

  For Mutton fat      40 deg. C.
   "  Beef     "      28.5 deg. C.
   "  Pork     "      26.5 deg. "
   "  Butter   "      23.5 deg. "
   "  Palm oil        21.0 deg. "

The extent of the rise in temperature is different in each fat, being
greatest in that of mutton, and least in that of butter and palm oil. The
extent of the rise is also greater within certain limits the greater the
quantity of fat employed; but as a rule the turning point is pretty
constant for the same fat. There is also a little difference in the
turning points and the extent of rise according to the part of the carcase
from which the fat has been taken. If temperature and time be taken as
co-ordinates, and the rate of cooling be represented by curves, these
latter will be characteristic of the respective fats. A mixture of equal
parts of mutton and butter fats does not give a curve intermediate between
those of its two components; but is such as to indicate that less heat is
given out on cooling (to 20 deg. C say) than in the case of butter, which,
compared with mutton fat, gives off very little heat."

For further information on the subject of 'Butter' the reader is referred
to a Report by Mr Bell--the principal of the Chemical Laboratory at
Somerset House--to the Board of Inland Revenue, included in a return made
to the House of Commons in 1876.

_Preservation._ 1. Melt the butter in a stoneware or a well-glazed earthen
pan set in a water bath at a heat not exceeding 180 deg. Fahr., and keep it
heated, skimming it from time to time until it becomes quite transparent;
then pour off the clear portion into another vessel, and cool it as
quickly as possible by placing the vessel in very cold water or ice. This
is the method employed by the Tartars who supply the Constantinople
market. In this state it may be preserved perfectly fresh for 6 or 9
months, if kept in a close vessel and a cool place. This is the plan so
strongly recommended by M. Thenard. Mr Eaton states that butter melted by
the Tartarian method, and then salted by ours, will keep good and
fine-tasted for two years.

2. Saltpetre and white sugar, of each 1 oz.; best Spanish great-salt (or
Cheshire large-grained salt), 2 oz.; all in very fine powder; mix
thoroughly, and add 1 oz. of this mixture to every lb. of butter, and
thoroughly incorporate them together. The butter thus prepared is then to
be tightly pressed into clean glazed earthenware vessels (or well-seasoned
casks), so as to leave no vacuities. This plan is recommended by Dr
Anderson, who declares that "butter so prepared will keep in a cool place
for years; and will bear a voyage to the East Indies, if packed (stowed)
so as not to melt." It does not taste well before it has stood for three
or four weeks, after which it acquires a rich marrow-like flavour, which
no other butter ever possesses. A good method to preserve the butter from
the air is to fill the pots to within an inch of the top, then to lay on
it some coarse-grained salt to the depth of a 1/4 to 1/2 an inch, and
lastly to cover each pot with a slate, plate, or other flat article. The
salt by long keeping runs to brine, which forms an air-tight layer on the
top of the butter, and may at any time be very easily removed by turning
the pot on one side.

3. Fresh butter, 21 lbs.; salt, 1 lb.; saltpetre, 1 oz. These are the
common proportions for the best salt butter of the shops.

4. Fresh butter, 18 lbs.; salt, 1 lb.; saltpetre, 1-1/2 oz.; honey or fine
brown sugar, 2 oz. Superior to No. 3.

_Concl. Remarks._ It may be useful to know that rancid butter may be
restored, or, in all cases, greatly improved, by melting it in a water
bath with some fresh-burnt and coarsely powdered animal charcoal (which
has been thoroughly freed from dust by sifting), and straining it through
clean flannel. A better and less troublesome method is to well wash the
butter first with some good new milk, and next with cold spring water.
Butyric acid, on the presence of which rancidity depends, is freely
soluble in fresh milk.

The turnip-flavour arising from the cows being fed on turnips or cabbages
is said to be removed by one or other of the following methods:--1. When
the milk is strained into the pans put to every 6 galls. 1 gal. of boiling
water.--2. Dissolve 1 oz. of nitre in a pint of spring water, and put a
1/4 pint of the solution to every 15 galls. of milk.--3. Keep back a 1/4
pint of the sour cream when you churn, and put it into a well-scalded pot,
into which you are to gather the next cream; stir that well, and do so
with every fresh addition. Each of these methods come on good authority,
but we are bound to say that our own experience does not confirm their
constant success. We have found that the addition of a handful of salt to
the water used to wash the butter is as good a plan as any.

=Butter, Ancho'vy.= From anchovies (boned and beaten to a paste), 1 part;
butter, 2 parts; spice, q. s.

=Butter-colouring= (from Paris). A mixture of 40 per cent. of chrome
yellow with some fat coloured with annatto. (Flueckiger and Weil.)

=Butter, Clar'ified.= Fresh butter melted in a water bath, allowed to
settle, and the clear portion poured into an earthenware basin or pot, set
in cold water, so as to cool it as quickly as possible, without allowing
it to crystallise. It keeps a long time without becoming rank. See BUTTER,
No. 1 (_ante_).

=Butter, Hon'ey.= Fine Narbonne honey, 2 to 4 oz.; mixed with good butter,
1 lb. Used as a delicacy for children, and by the sick and aged.

=Butter, Lem'on.= See BUTTER, ORANGE.

=Butter, Melt'ed.= This well-known sauce may be prepared of excellent
quality as follows:--Beat up about 1 oz. of fine flour with 4 oz. of
butter, in the cold, until they are evenly and thoroughly mixed, then add
4 or 5 table-spoonfuls of hot milk, put the whole into a small saucepan,
and continue shaking it, all in one direction, until it simmers very
gently; lastly, remove it from the fire, and pour it into the butter-boats
for use. These last should be filled with hot water, and then emptied and
wiped dry, before putting the melted butter into them. See SAUCES.

=Butter, Or'ange.= _Prep._ 1. From 6 eggs, 2 oz. of powdered sugar, and 4
oz. of butter, well beaten together with a little orange-flower water.
Sometimes 1 or 2 oz. of blanched almonds, or of almond-paste, is added.

2. Butter, 1 lb.; syrup of orange peel, 4 oz. Both are eaten as a
delicacy. LEMON BUTTER, is made in a similar manner.

=Butter of An'timony*[double-dagger].= Trichloride of antimony.

=Butter of Caca'o.= See CO'COA, and CO'COA-NUT OIL.

=Butter of Nut'megs.= Collected from the surface of the water in the
still, after the distillation of the essential oil of nutmegs.

=Butter of Ro'ses.= Obtained by distilling damask roses. It separates
slowly from the water in the receiver. It has little smell, and is hence
used to dilute the odour of musk, ambergris, and civet.

=Butter of Wax.= Prepared by distilling bees'-wax. A factitious kind is
also made.

=Butter of Zinc*[double-dagger].= Chloride of zinc.

=Butter Powder= (from the Adler-Apotheke Emmerich on the Rhine).
Bicarbonate of soda. (Dr U. Kreusler.)

=Butter Powder= (Lemmel, Schleswig-Holstein). An impure bicarbonate of
soda, coloured with turmeric. (Hirschberg.)

=Butter Powder, Schuhrer's= (Emil Schuehrer, Mutzschen, Saxony). This, it
is claimed, will considerably increase the yield of butter, shorten the
process of churning, and yield a product which will be firm even in the
height of summer, well-flavoured, of a handsome colour, and of excellent
commercial value. It consists of a tolerably pure commercial bicarbonate
of soda, with 1/2 per cent. of powdered turmeric. (Dr Peters.)

=Butter Powder, Tomlinson's= (Tomlinson & Co., Lincoln, England). Ordinary
bicarbonate of soda, coloured with 3/4 per cent. of annatto. (Dr
Karmrodt.)

=Butter-preservative Paste= (from Spaa). Consists of common salt, 52
parts; nitre, 23 parts; syrup, 5 parts. (Wittstein.)

=BUTTERINE.= A substance known under this name, and intended as a
substitute for butter, is imported into this country from New York.

Of butterine Dr CAMPBELL BROWN remarks:--"In general appearance, taste,
and consistence, it is very similar to ordinary butter; but
notwithstanding that its solidifying point is lower than that of some
butters, it retains much of the peculiar crumbly texture and fracture of
dripping.

"It softens at 78 deg. F., and melts at 86 deg.. When heated and slowly cooled it
obscures the thermometer at 62 deg. and solidifies at 60 deg.. It contains--

  Water        11.25  to   8.5
  Salt          1.03   "   5.5
  Curd          0.57   "   0.6
  Fat          87.15   "  85.4

              100.00    100.00

"The fat consists of oleine, palmitine, margarine, a trace of stearine,
and about 5 or 6 per cent. of butter. When dissolved in about four times
its weight of ether, and allowed to evaporate spontaneously, it does not
deposit any fat until more than half of the ether has passed off, and if
the temperature is not below 60 deg. the deposit is not solid.

"The first deposit when dried fuses at 108 deg.; the second deposit fuses at
88 deg., and solidifies at 64 deg..

"Under the microscope butterine does not appear to consist of acicular
crystals of fat, but of irregular masses, containing a few butter
globules, particles of curd, and crystals of salt. With polarised light
the irregular crystalline structure is beautifully seen, and is clearly
distinguishable from butter which has been melted and recongealed. When
old and rancid it acquires the odour and taste of dripping, but it keeps
longer undecomposed than butter. When fresh it is a wholesome substitute
for real butter. No one can reasonably take exception to its sale.

"Butterine may be detected by the following characters:--

"1. Its crumbly fracture.

"2. Its loss of colour when kept melted for a short time at 212 deg..

"3. The behaviour of its ethereal solution.

"4. Its action on polarised light."

The 'American Chemist' for 1876 contains an interesting paper by Mr Henry
Mott on the manufacture of artificial butter, which is too lengthy for
insertion here.

=BUTTER-MILK.= The liquid that remains after the butter is separated from
the cream.

_Qual., &c._ Butter-milk left from the churning of sweet cream is not only
very delicious, but exceedingly wholesome and nutritious. It is eaten with
fruit, puddings, and cakes, and is said to possess the property of
allaying the nervous irritability induced by excessive tea-drinking. It is
an admirable beverage in rickets, diabetes, and many stomach affections.
An American physician has recently asserted that it induces longevity. See
MILK.

=BUTTONS.= See BRASS, GILDING, &c.

=BU'TYRATE.= [Eng., Fr.] _Syn._ BU'TYRAS, L. A salt in which the hydrogen
of butyric acid is replaced by a basic radical.

=Butyrate of Barium.= _Prep._ Saponify butter with a boiling solution of
caustic alkali, and decompose the resulting soap by adding a solution of
tartaric acid; filter and distil; neutralise the distillate with hydrate
of barium, and evaporate; the first crystals that form are caprate of
barium; the next, caproate of barium; and the last, butyrate of barium.
This salt is very soluble in water, and hence is easily separated from the
others.--_Use._ Chiefly for making butyric acid.

=BUTYRIC= (-t[)i]r'-). _Syn._ BUTYR'ICUS, L.; BUTYRIQUE, Fr. Of or from
butter.

=BUTYRIC ACID.= HC_{4}H_{7}O_{2}. _Syn._ ACIDUM BUT[)Y]R'ICUM, L.; ACIDE
BUTYRIQUE, Fr.; BUTTERSAeURE, Ger. An oily acid, first obtained by Chevreul
from butter.

_Prep._ From butyrate of barium or magnesium, by adding sulphuric acid in
quantity not quite sufficient to decompose the whole of the salt; the
clear liquid, filtered and distilled, yields butyric acid, from which the
water may be removed by digestion with chloride of calcium.

_Prop._ A thin colourless liquid, of pungent rancid odour, and sour taste,
miscible with water and alcohol. It boils and distils unchanged at 327 deg.
Fahr. Sp. gr. .963. See ETHERS.

=BU'TYRIN= (-in). [Eng., Fr.] An oily substance existing in butter, and of
which it forms the characteristic portion. It was discovered by Chevreul.

_Prep._ Keep clarified butter in a porcelain vessel, at a heat of 66 deg., for
some days; carefully collect the oily portion which separates, mix it with
an equal weight of alcohol of the sp. gr. .796, and agitate it frequently
for 24 hours; after repose pour off the clear portion, and evaporate it;
treat the oily residuum with a little carbonate of magnesium, to remove
free acid, and wash off the butyrate of magnesium, thus formed, with
water; lastly, heat the remaining fatty matter in alcohol, filter, and
evaporate, by a gentle heat; the residuum is butyrin.

=BUXINE= (-[)i]n). A substance detected by M. Faure in _bux'us
semper'virens_, or the common box-tree.


=CABBAGE.= _Syn._ BRAS'SICA, L.; CHOU, Fr.; KOHL, Ger. This common
esculent, and all its numerous varieties, are merely cultivated specimens
of the wild sea-cabbage of our coasts (_bras'sica olera'cea_, Linn.), one
of an extensive and valuable genus of plants belonging to the nat. ord.
Cruciferae. After the potato, the cabbage is doubtless more extensively
used by the masses of the people than any other fresh vegetable. When
young, and properly dressed, it forms an agreeable and wholesome addition
to animal food, the grossness of which, it is said, it tends to correct.
It should be eaten only when fresh gathered and fresh cooked; and the
unconsumed portion, as well as the water in which it has been boiled,
should be at once thrown away. Persons troubled with a weak digestion, or
who have a tendency to flatulence, diarrh[oe]a, or worms, would do well to
avoid them. Their use is particularly serviceable in scurvy, and in
numerous skin diseases.

It has been asserted that cabbages, cauliflowers, broccoli, celery, and
several other culinary vegetables, may be preserved in a fresh state for
some time, by cutting them so that they may have about two inches of stem
left below the leaves, scooping out the pith as far down as a small knife
will reach, and then suspending them perpendicularly by means of a cord,
in an inverted position, in some cool situation, and daily filling up the
bottom part of the stem with clean cold water. In this way it is stated
that a supply of green vegetables may be readily obtained during a severe
winter, and on ship-board. Other methods, including those usually adopted
with the same object, are noticed under VEGETABLES (Culinary).

Cabbages, broccoli, &c., are dressed by simply throwing them into boiling
water, and simmering them until tender. A few minutes is sufficient for
this purpose. A pinch of salt of tartar, or of carbonate of soda, is
commonly added to the water, to preserve the green colour of the
vegetables.

=CACHOU AROMATISE= (k[)a]shoo [)a]r[)o]m[)a]t[=e]z[=a]). [Fr.] A
mouth-lozenge intended to sweeten and perfume the breath. Preparations of
this description are much used by smokers and bacchanals. The form under
which they are generally prepared for sale is that of 1-1/2 to 2 gr.
pills, neatly silvered. Originally they were composed chiefly of catechu
and sugar, flavoured and perfumed with the stronger aromatics; but at the
present day the catechu, from which they derive their name, is not
unfrequently omitted. Their preparation is described elsewhere. See
BREATH, LOZENGES, PASTILS, &c.

=CAD'MIUM.= Cd. [Eng., L.] _Syn._ KLAPRO'THIUM. A metal discovered by
Stromeyer and Hermann, in the ores of zinc.

_Prep._ 1. (Stromeyer.) The cadmo-zincic ore is dissolved in an excess of
dilute sulphuric or hydrochloric acid by heat; a stream of sulphuretted
hydrogen is passed through the solution, the resulting precipitate
(sulphide of cadmium) dissolved in nitric acid, and the solution
evaporated to dryness; the residuum is dissolved in water, the solution
precipitated with carbonate of ammonium in excess, and the precipitate
(carbonate of cadmium) collected, mixed with charcoal, and heated to
redness in a crucible apparatus so arranged as to condense the fumes; the
cadmium sublimes.

2. (Wollaston.) A solution of the ore obtained as above is placed in a
platinum capsule, and a piece of metallic zinc is plunged into it. In a
short time the cadmium is precipitated, and attaches itself to the sides
of the capsule, when it is collected, washed, and dried.

3. (Herapath.) When zinc is obtained by distilling its ores, per
descensum, the first portion of the metallic fumes evolved burn with a
brownish flame, and deposit oxide of cadmium, which is subsequently
reduced by distillation with charcoal. Thousands of pounds of cadmium are
yearly wasted at the zinc works which might be easily collected in a
similar manner.

_Prop., &c._ Resembles tin in most of its physical properties, being
white, soft, and malleable. Sp. gr. 8.61. Stromeyer gives its melting
point as 442 deg. Fahr., but Dr Wood, an American chemist, states that the
metal requires for its fusion nearly the same heat as lead, and gives it
as about 600 deg. Fahr. It volatilises at a somewhat higher temperature,
giving off orange-coloured, suffocating fumes, which, when inhaled too
freely, leave a disagreeable, sweetish, styptic sensation upon the lips,
and a persistent brassy taste in the mouth, with constriction of the
throat, heaviness in the head, and nausea. The alloys of cadmium are said
to be brittle by almost all who have treated of them, but Wood found that
many were extremely tenacious, as, for instance, the combination of 2
parts of silver and 1 part of cadmium, which is perfectly malleable and
very strong. The amalgam of equal parts of cadmium and mercury is also
highly malleable. Like bismuth, cadmium has the property of promoting
fusibility in certain alloys; thus, a remarkable fusible metal may be
formed by melting together cadmium 1 to 2 parts, lead 2 parts, and tin 4
parts.

_Tests._ Its ores and salts are recognised as follows:--1. Mixed with
carbonate of sodium, and exposed on a charcoal support to the reducing
flame of the blowpipe, the charcoal becomes almost instantly covered with
a reddish-yellow incrustation of oxide of cadmium, commonly forming a
circle or zone.--2. Caustic soda and potassa give a white precipitate
(hydrated oxide) in solutions containing cadmium, insoluble in excess of
the precipitant.--3. Ammonia gives a similar white precipitate, freely
soluble in excess.--4. The alkaline carbonates give white precipitates
(carbonate of cadmium), insoluble in excess.--5. Sulphuretted hydrogen,
and sulphydrate of ammonium, give a bright yellow precipitate (sulphide of
cadmium), which is insoluble in dilute acid, alkalies, sulphides, and
cyanide of potassium, but readily soluble in both hydrochloric acid and
nitric acid, especially with heat.--6. The salts of cadmium are readily
distinguished from those of arsenic, by the precipitated sulphide being
insoluble in ammonia, and soluble in hydrochloric acid, and being capable
of sustaining a white heat without subliming.

=Cadmium, Car'bonate of.= CdCO_{3}. _Syn._ CAD'MII CAR'BONAS, L. From a
solution of sulphate or chloride of cadmium, and an alkaline carbonate;
the precipitate being collected, washed, and dried by a gentle heat. A
white powder.

=Cadmium, Chlo''ride of.= CdCl_{2}. _Syn._ HYDROCHLO''RATE OF CADMIUM,
MU''RIATE OF CADMIUM; CAD'MII CHLORI'DUM, CAD'MII HYDROCHLO''RAS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Pure.) By dissolving carbonate or oxide of cadmium in
hydrochloric acid, and crystallising by gentle evaporation. Prismatic
crystals; very soluble in water.

2. (Turner.) By exposing the product of the last process to heat.
Amorphous.

3. From crude cadmium or its oxide, and hydrochloric acid, as last.

=Cadmium, I'odide of.= CdI_{2}. _Syn._ HYDRI'ODATE OF CADMIUM; CAD''MII
IODI'DUM, C. HYDRIO'DAS, L.

_Prep._ (Crookes.) Cadmium in filings 1 part, pure iodine 2 parts, are to
be placed together in a capacious flask, with alcohol sufficient to cover
them. Action commences at once, attended with considerable evolution of
heat; when it ceases, heat the mixture till it is colourless; then filter
from a few grains of cadmium which will remain undissolved, evaporate and
crystallise.

_Uses._ In photography this salt has lately been employed with great
success for iodizing collodion. Being very stable, it is not decomposed,
and the collodion iodized with it preserves its sensitiveness undiminished
during many months. (See COLLODION.) In _medicine_ it is used occasionally
as a substitute for iodide of lead.

=Cadmium, Ox'ide of.= CdO. _Syn._ PROTOX'IDE OF CADMIUM; CAD'MII OXY'DUM,
L. _Prep._ 1. (Hydrated.) From sulphate or chloride of cadmium, and a
solution of caustic alkali; observing to well wash and dry the
precipitate. A white powder, freely soluble in acids.

2. (Anhydrous.) By igniting the hydrated oxide, or the carbonate or
nitrate of cadmium. That from the first two has a pale brown colour; that
from the nitrate has a dark brown tint and a semi-crystalline appearance.
The former has been proposed to be used as a pigment.

=Cadmium, Sul'phate of.= CdSO_{4}. _Syn._ CAD'MII SUL'PHAS, CAD'MIUM
SULPHU'RICUM, KLAPRO'THRIUM SULPHU'RICUM, L. _Prep._ 1. From carbonate or
oxide of cadmium and dilute sulphuric acid, as the chloride.

2. (Cottereau.) Oxide of cadmium, 1 oz.; sulphuric acid, q. s.; dissolve,
evaporate, and crystallise.

3. (Pereira.) Sulphuric acid, 6-1/2 parts; water, 15 parts; mix; add
cadmium, 7 parts; dissolve, evaporate to dryness, redissolve in water,
filter, and evaporate by a gentle heat, so that crystals may form.

_Prop., &c._ Efflorescent, rectangular, prismatic crystals; very soluble
in water; tastes astringent. It is about 4 times as strong as sulphate of
zinc, and is used in similar cases. _Dose_, 3 to 10 gr. _Externally_ (1/2
to 3 or 4 gr. to water, 1 oz.); in specks of the eye, opacity of the
cornea, chronic ophthalmia, &c. As an ointment, 10 to 12 gr. to lard, 1
oz.

=Cadmium, Sul'phide of.= CdS. _Syn._ CADMIUM YELLOW. This occurs native as
GREENOCK'ITE. It may be prepared artificially, either by fusing its
elements together, or by passing a stream of sulphuretted hydrogen through
a solution of the chloride, nitrate, or sulphate. When prepared
artificially, it is of a bright yellow or orange colour, and is of great
value to the artist. It has been used in making fireworks. See FIRES,
_Coloured_.

=Cadmium, Yellow.= See CADMIUM, SULPHIDE OF (_above_), and YELLOW
PIGMENTS.

=CAESALPINA (GUILANDINA) BONDUCELLA.= (Ind. Ph.) _Habitat._ Tropical
portions of both hemispheres.--_Officinal part._ The seeds (_Bonducellae
semina_, _Bonduc seeds_); of a somewhat irregular sub-spherical or
ovoid form, usually from 5/8 to 6/8 of an inch in diameter, smooth,
hard, and lead-coloured, and contain an amylaceous white nucleus,
having a bitter taste. They contain a fixed oil, resin, and a bitter
principle.--_Properties._ Tonic and antiperiodic.--_Therapeutic uses._ In
intermittent fevers; also in debility, and other cases requiring
tonics.--_Dose_, 10 to 15 grains twice daily.

COMPOUND POWDER OF BONDUC (_Pulvis Bonducellae compositus_). Take of bonduc
seeds, deprived of their shells and powdered, 1 oz.; black pepper,
powdered, 1 oz. Mix thoroughly, and keep in a well-stoppered
bottle.--_Dose_, 15 to 30 gr., three times a day.

=CAESIUM.= [Eng., L.] Cae. A metal belonging to the alkaline group,
discovered by Bunsen in the mineral water of Durckheim by means of
SPECTRUM ANALYSIS (which _see_), and so named by him from _caesius_,
greyish-blue, the colour of its characteristic ray.

=CAFFE'IC ACID.= _Syn._ CHLOROGE'NIC ACID. A white powder, discovered by
Runge in coffee, in which it exists in combination with potassium
(caffeiate of potassium), and caffeine, and is then very soluble in
alcohol. Pfaff states that the aroma of coffee is dependent on the
volatilisation, or, rather, the decomposition of this acid.

=CAFFE'INE.= C_{8}H_{10}N_{4}O_{2}. _Syn._ CAFFE'INA, THEINE, GUARANINE. A
peculiar nitrogenised principle, discovered by Robiquet in coffee. It is,
moreover, the essential principle of tea, of Paraguay tea, and of Guarana,
infusions of which are used as beverages in different parts of the world.
The proportion of caffeine to the pound was found by Liebig to be as
stated below in the six descriptions of coffee named:--

  Martinique       32 grains.
  Alexandrian      22   "
  Java             22   "
  Mocha            20   "
  Cayenne          19   "
  St Dominique     16   "

In Hyson tea it exists in the proportion of from 2.5 to 3.4 per cent.; and
in gunpowder tea from 2.2 to 4.1. In Paraguay tea, or _mate_ as it is
called in Brazil, and in Guarana, it exists in the proportion of .13 per
cent.

_Prep._ 1. Coarsely powdered raw or unroasted coffee is boiled in water,
and subacetate of lead added to the filtered decoction to throw down the
extractive and colouring matter; the excess of lead is next precipitated
with sulphuretted hydrogen, and the liquid filtered and evaporated by a
gentle heat; the residuum is dissolved in boiling water, the solution
agitated with freshly burnt animal charcoal, filtered, evaporated, and
crystallised. By redissolving the product in hot alcohol, it may be
obtained in white, shining, silky filaments, as the solution cools.

2. (H. J. Versman.) Quick-lime, 2 lbs.; water, q. s. to form a hydrate;
raw coffee (bruised), 10 lbs.; mix, put it into a displacement apparatus,
and cause alcohol of 80% to percolate through the mixture, until the fluid
obtained no longer contains caffeine; the mass in the percolator is then
roughly ground to powder, mixed with a fresh quantity of quick-lime, and
the process of percolation repeated with fresh alcohol, as before. The
spirit is next distilled from the mixed tinctures in a retort, and the
residuum washed with a little warm water to remove the oil; the
evaporation is then gently conducted until a crystalline mass is obtained,
which is further freed from adhering oil by pressure between folds of
blotting paper. It is purified by redissolving it in boiling water or hot
alcohol, &c., as before.

3. (A. Vogel.) An extract of powdered coffee is made with commercial
benzol; this being distilled off, leaves an oil and caffeine behind; the
oil is then removed by a little ether or by hot water, from which latter
liquid the alkaloid crystallises on cooling.

4. From a hot infusion of tea-leaves by treatment with subacetate of lead
and sulphuretted hydrogen, as in process 1 (_above_).

5. (F. V. Greene.) Powdered guarana is intimately mixed with three times
its weight of finely divided litharge, and the mixture boiled in distilled
water, the ebullition being continued until, on allowing the temperature
to fall below the boiling point, the insoluble portion is found to subside
rapidly, leaving the supernatant liquid clear, bright, and without colour.
The quantity of distilled water required will be found to be about a pint
for every fifteen grams of the guarana used in the experiment, and as the
boiling has to be continued for several hours before the desired and all
essential separation mentioned above takes place, water must be added from
time to time to supply the place of that lost by evaporation. When cool,
the clear liquid is decanted upon a filter, and when it has passed
through, which it will be found to do with facility, the precipitate is to
be transferred to the filter, and washed with boiling water, the washing
to be continued as long as yellowish precipitates are produced with either
phosphomolybdic acid solution, auric, or platinic chloride. A stream of
sulphuretted hydrogen gas is now passed through the filtrate to remove the
small quantity of lead that has been dissolved, and the sulphide thus
formed separated by filtration. The solution is evaporated on a water bath
to expel the excess of sulphuretted hydrogen, filtered to remove a trace
of sulphur, finally evaporated to the crystallising point, and the
caffeine which crystallises out in cooling removed from the mother liquor
and pressed between folds of bibulous paper. After being thus treated the
crystals will be found to be perfectly white. On diluting the mother
liquor with distilled water, filtering, and evaporating, a second crop of
crystals are obtained, which are also perfectly white, after being pressed
as above. The crystals are now dissolved in boiling dilute alcohol,
filtered, and the solution set aside to crystallise by spontaneous
evaporation. The resulting crystals of caffeine are perfectly pure and
colourless.

6. (O. Caillol and P. Cazeneuve.) The following is a process for the rapid
preparation of caffeine:--Black tea is thoroughly softened with four times
its weight of hot water; a quantity of calcium hydrate equal to that of
tea used is then added, and the whole evaporated on a water-bath to
perfect dryness. The dry residue is exhausted with chloroform in a
displacement apparatus, and the chloroform recovered from the percolate by
distillation. The residue left in the retort is a mixture of caffeine and
a resinous substance containing chlorophyll. On treating it with hot
water, filtering and evaporating the filtrate on a water bath, the
caffeine is obtained in perfectly white crystals.

_Prop., &c._ Soluble in 100 parts of cold water; freely soluble in hot
water and in water acidulated with an acid; slightly soluble in cold
alcohol; it fuses at 352 deg. Fahr., tastes slightly bitter, and possesses
feeble basic properties. With the sulphuric and hydrochloric acids it
forms crystallisable compounds. The salts of caffeine may be made by
dissolving it to saturation in the dilute acid, and evaporating the
solution by a very gentle heat. It forms splendid double salts with
bichloride of platinum and terchloride of gold.

_Uses._ Caffeine has been recommended in those pains that affect only one
side of the head (hemicrania); in doses of 1 to 3 gr. Its physiological
action is very trifling, notwithstanding all that has been said to the
contrary. Mr Cooley took 20 gr. daily of pure caffeine, for above a month,
without experiencing any other effect than a very slight elevation of
spirits after each dose, similar to that produced by a small quantity of
spirits of sal volatile. It has been used lately with doubtful success as
an antidote to the poisonous effects of opium. See COFFEE, TEA, &c.

=CAFFE'ONE.= A brown, aromatic oil, formed during the roasting of coffee.

=CAJ'EPUT OIL.= See OILS (Volatile).

=CAKES.= A species of fancy bread or trifle familiar to every one.

Before proceeding to the actual operation of cake-making, the various
materials which are to enter into their composition undergo a certain
amount of preparation. For this purpose every article is got ready about
an hour previously to its being wanted, and is placed before the fire, or
upon a stove, that it may become gently heated. Without these precautions
it is impossible to produce good cakes. The flour is thoroughly dried, and
warmed. The currants are nicely washed in a hair sieve, wiped dry in a
cloth, and then set before the fire. Before use they are dusted over with
a little flour. The sugar is rubbed to a fine powder, and passed through a
sieve. The eggs are well beaten in a basin, and strained. The butter is
melted by being placed in a basin set in hot water, and is afterwards well
beaten up with a little warm milk. The lemon peel is cut very thin, and
beaten in a mortar to a paste or powder, with lump sugar; or for common
purposes, it is grated. The caraways, ginger, and other flavouring
ingredients are preferred in the form of fine powder, or are made into an
essence, by digesting them in spirit of wine; the first is the most common
method. The milk and water is made lukewarm. When all these things are
ready and have stood a sufficient time, they are put into a pan, one after
another, in the proper order, and well beaten together, by which the
lightness of the cakes is considerably increased.

In plum cakes, as well as in some other varieties, a little yeast may be
added after the butter, and the mass allowed to rise a little, and then
again well kneaded, by which not only less butter and eggs may be used,
but the products will be both lighter and more wholesome. Good stale
bread, well soaked in hot milk or water, and then beaten to a paste, and
passed through a fine sieve, forms an excellent thing to mix up the
ingredients with, and produces a very light and nutritious cake. Cakes
"wetted up" with milk are richer, but do not keep so well as those without
it; they get stale sooner, and then in that state are far from agreeable
to the palate. A kind of flour prepared from maize or Indian corn has been
recently introduced to the notice of cooks, but it is better adapted for
puddings than for cakes. See CORN-FLOUR.

Cakes are preferably baked on flat tins or in little "tin shapes," which
should be first well buttered.

Cakes should be kept for store in tin canisters; wooden boxes, unless very
well seasoned, are apt to give them an unpleasant taste. Brown-paper
linings and wrappers should be avoided for the same reason. See BISCUITS,
BREAD, BUN, ICING, STAINS, &c.

=Cakes, Al'mond.= _Prep._ 1. From sweet almonds (blanched and beaten to a
smooth paste), flour and powdered sugar, of each 1/2 lb.; 7 eggs, and the
outside peel of 4 lemons (shredded small). The almonds, sugar, lemon peel,
and eggs, are beaten together, until as white as sponge paste; the flour
next worked in, and the paste put into buttered moulds, and baked in a
slack oven, with 8 or 10 thicknesses of white paper under them and one or
two over them.

2. Almonds, 1 lb.; sugar, 1/2 lb.; rose water or orange-flower water, 1/4
pint; flour, 3/4 lb.; 3 eggs; as above. Some persons ice these cakes.

=Cakes, Ban'bury.= _Prep._ From butter and dough fermented for white
bread, of each 1 lb., as in making puff paste, then rolled out very thin,
and cut into oval or triangular pieces, or other shapes. On these are
placed a mixture of currants and moist sugar, equal parts, wetted with a
little wine or brandy, and the paste being closed up, they are placed on a
tin with the closed side downwards, and baked. A little powdered sugar,
flavoured with candied peel (grated), or essence of lemon, is sifted over
them as soon as they come out of the oven. In the common cakes of the
shops the brandy is omitted, and lard is used for butter, but less of it.

=Cakes, Bath.= _Prep._ From butter, 1/2 lb., flour, 1 lb., 5 eggs, and a
cupful of yeast; when risen, add powdered sugar, 4 oz., and caraways, 1
oz. Bake them on tins.

=Cakes, Cheese.= _Prep._ 1. Curdle some warm new milk with rennet, drain
the curd in a linen bag, and add 1/4 of its weight, each, of sugar and
butter, 6 eggs, some grated nutmeg, and a little orange flower or rose
water.

2. (_Almond Cheese Cakes._) To the above add as much blanched almonds,
beaten to a smooth paste, as there is butter, and an equal weight of
macaroni.

3. (_Lemon Cheese Cakes._) To the first form add lemon peel (grated fine),
or essence of lemon, q. s.

=Cakes, Di'et.= _Syn._ DIET BREAD. _Prep._ 1. Dissolve sugar, 1 lb., in
milk, 1/2 pint; add 6 eggs, and whisk the mixture to a full froth, then
cautiously stir in flour, 1 lb., beat it for 3/4 hour, and immediately
bake it in a quick oven. It may be baked whole or divided into small
cakes.

2. From fine flour and powdered sugar, equal parts; 6 eggs; and the juice
and rind (grated) of 1 lemon.

=Cakes, Drop.= _Prep._ Eggs, 1 dozen; rosewater, 1 table-spoonful;
powdered sugar, 1/2 lb.; fine flour, 1/2 lb.; and caraways, 1/2 oz. Drop
it on wafer paper, and bake as before.

=Cakes, Gin'ger.= _Prep._ Sugar, 1 lb.; powdered ginger, 4 oz.; flour, 2
lbs.; water, 1 pint; butter, 1/2 lb.; candied orange peel, 8 caps
(grated).

=Cakes, Lem'on.= _Prep._ Flour and sugar, of each 1 lb.; eggs, 1 dozen;
grated peel and juice of 4 lemons; whisk the eggs to a bright froth; then
gradually add the rest.

=Cakes, Marl'borough.= _Prep_. Beat 8 eggs and 1 lb. of pounded sugar 3/4
hour; then add fine flour, 1 lb.; and caraway seeds, 2 oz.

=Cakes, Plain.= _Prep._ 1. From flour, 4 lbs.; currants, 2 lbs.; butter,
1/2 lb.; caraway seeds, 1/4 oz.; candied lemon peel (grated), 1 oz.;
yeast, 1/4 pint; milk, q. s. Let it rise well before baking.

2. Baker's dough, 2 lbs.; currants, 1 lb.; butter, 1/4 lb.; 3 eggs; milk
(hot), 1/4 pint.

3. (Rundell.) Baker's dough, 4 lbs.; butter and moist sugar, of each 1/4
lb.; caraway seeds, a small handful. Well work it together, pull it into
pieces the size of a golden pippin, and work it together again. This must
be done three times, or it will be in lumps, and heavy when baked.

4. (Rich) Equal weights of flour, butter, sultana raisins, eggs, currants,
and brown sugar, mixed up with milk, and seasoned with candied peel,
nutmeg, &c., and baked in a quick oven. This resembles "pound cake."

=Cakes, Plum.= _Prep._ 1. (Good.) From butter, 1/2 lb.; dry flour, 3 lbs.;
Lisbon sugar, 8 oz.; plums and currants, of each 3/4 lb.; and some
pimento, finely powdered; to be "wetted up" with 3 spoonfuls of yeast, and
a Winchester pint of new milk (warmed); bake on a floured tin half an
hour.

2. (Excellent.) From fresh butter, sifted sugar, flour, and currants, of
each 1 lb.; 18 eggs; powdered spices, 2 oz. (viz. cloves, mace, cinnamon,
nutmeg, and allspice); sliced almonds, 4 oz.; raisins (stoned and
chopped), 1/2 lb.; and a large glass of brandy; bake in a hot oven. When
sufficiently baked let the oven cool, and afterwards put in the cake and
allow it to remain for several hours to dry. (Rundell.)

3. (Rich.) Take fresh butter and sugar, of each 1 lb.; flour, 1-1/2 lb.;
currants, 2 lbs.; a glass of brandy; sweetmeats and peels, 1 lb.; sweet
almonds, 2 oz.; 10 eggs; allspice and cinnamon, of each 1/4 oz.; bake in a
tin hoop in a hot oven for 3 hours, and put 12 sheets of paper under it to
keep it from burning. (Mackenzie.)

=Cakes, Port'ugal.= _Prep._ From flour, powdered sugar, and fresh butter,
of each 1 lb.; 10 eggs; currants, 1/2 lb.; and a little white wine; bake
in small tins only half filled.

=Cake, Potato.= A pound of cold potatoes, a quarter of a pound of flour or
oatmeal, half a gill of warm milk (with a quarter of an ounce of yeast
dissolved in it), a little salt and butter. Mash the potatoes, add the
other ingredients, roll out the paste an inch and a half or two inches
thick, place it in a greased tin, and bake it.

=Cakes, Pound.= _Prep._ 1. As plum cake; but using 1 lb. each of all the
ingredients except the spices.

2. Using equal parts of sugar, flour, currants, and sultana raisins, and
half that quantity each of butter, brandy, and candied peel, with spices
as required.

=Cakes, Queen.= _Prep._ From about 1 lb. each of dried flour, sifted
sugar, washed currants, and butter, with 8 eggs; the whole beaten for an
hour, made into a batter, and baked in little tins, teacups, or saucers,
only half filled. A little fine sugar is frequently sifted over them.
Nutmeg, mace, and cinnamon are also sometimes added.

=Cakes, Rat'ifia.= _Prep._ Beat 1/2 lb. of sweet and 1 oz. of bitter
almonds, in fine orange, rose, or ratifia water; mix in 1/2 lb. of pounded
sugar; add the whites of 4 eggs (well beaten); set it over a moderate fire
in a preserving-pan; stir it one way until it is pretty hot, and when a
little cool form it into small rolls, and cut it into thin cakes; shake
some flour lightly on them, give each a light tap, put them on sugar
papers, sift a little sugar on them, and put them into a very slack oven.

=Cakes, Rout.= _Prep._ From flour, 2 lbs.; butter, sugar, and currants, of
each 1 lb.; 3 eggs; 1/2 pint of milk; 2 glasses of white wine; and 1 glass
of brandy; drop them on a tin plate, and bake them.

=Cakes, Savoy.= _Prep._ From flour and sifted sugar, of each 1 lb.; 10
eggs; and the rind of a lemon (grated); form a batter by degrees, put it
into moulds, and bake in a slack oven.

=Cake, Seed.= _Prep._ 1. (Plain.) From flour, 1/4 peck; sugar, 1/2 lb.;
allspice, 1/4 oz.; melted butter, 1/2 lb.; a little ginger; milk, 1/2
pint; yeast, 1/4 pint; add seeds or currants; and bake an hour and a half.

2. (Good.) To the preceding add of butter and sugar, of each 1/2 lb., and
wet it up with milk previously mixed with 6 eggs.

3. (Rich.) Take of flour, 1-1/2 lb.; butter and sugar, of each 1/2 lb.; 8
eggs; 2 oz. of caraway seeds, 1 grated nutmeg, and its weight in cinnamon.
Bake 2 hours in a quick oven.

4. (Scotch.) Nine eggs; sugar and butter, of each 1/2 lb.; mix well
together, then add a little cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves; 1/4 oz. of
caraway seeds; 1/2 lb. of candied citron; 1/4 lb. of candied orange peel;
1/2 lb. of blanched almonds (pounded fine); flour, 3 lbs.; and brandy, 1/4
pint.

=Cakes, Shrews'bury.= _Prep._ From flour, 3 lbs.; sugar, 1 lb.; a little
cinnamon and nutmeg; 3 eggs; a little rose water; and melted butter enough
to make it into a dough.

=Cakes, So'da.= _Prep._ 1. From flour, 1 lb.; bicarbonate of soda, 1/4
oz.; sugar and butter, of each 1/2 lb.; make a paste with milk, and add
candied orange, lemon, or citron peel, or the fresh peels grated, q. s. to
flavour.

2. To flour, 1 lb.; sugar and butter, of each 2 oz.; candied peel, 1/2
oz.; sesquicarbonate of soda, 3 dr.; milk, q. s.

_Obs._ An equal weight of carbonate of magnesia, used instead of the soda,
also makes good cakes. Both are suitable to delicate stomachs, especially
in dyspepsia, with acidity.

=Cakes, Sponge.= _Prep._ From 8 eggs; lump sugar, 3/4 lb.; flour, 1/2 lb.;
water, 1/4 pint; the yellow peel of a lemon; mix as follows:--Put the
lemon peel into the water; when about to make the cake, put the sugar into
a saucepan, pour the water and peel on it, and let it stand by the fire to
get hot. Break the eggs into a deep earthen vessel that has been made
quite hot; remove from the heat, whisk for a few minutes; make the sugar
and water boil up, and pour it very gradually boiling-hot over the eggs;
continue to whisk them briskly until they become thick and white; add the
flour (quite warm), stir it lightly in, put the paste into tins lined with
white paper, and bake them immediately in a moderately hot oven.

=Cakes, Tea.= _Syn._ BENTON CAKES. _Prep._ From flour, 1 lb.; butter, 4
oz.; and milk, q. s.; bake on a hot hearth or slow oven plate.

2. To the last add 2 table-spoonfuls of yeast.

=Cakes, Tip'sy.= _Prep._ Small sponge cakes steeped in brandy, and then
covered with grated almonds and candied peel; or almonds (cut into spikes)
are stuck in them. They are commonly piled on a dish, surrounded with a
custard, and covered with preserves drained as dry as possible.

=Cakes, Wigg.= _Prep._ From 1/2 pint of warm milk; 3/4 lb. of fine flour;
and 2 or 3 spoonfuls of light yeast. Afterwards work in 4 oz. each of
sugar and butter; make it into cakes, or wiggs, with as little flour as
possible, add a few caraway seeds, and bake them quickly.

=Cakes.= (In _medicine_.) Cakes have been used as a form of administering
medicinal substances to children, but have not been extensively employed
in this country for the purpose, unless by quacks and in domestic
practice. In preparing them the active ingredients are added in such
proportions to the common materials of a sweet cake that one or two, as
the case may be, are sufficient for a dose. See GINGERBREAD, WORM-CAKES,
&c.

=CALA'BAR BEAN.= _Syn._ PHYSOSTIGMATIS FABA. The seed of _Physostigma
venenosum_. The plant is a native of Western Africa, where the bean is
used as an ordeal poison. The bean itself is about the size of a large
horse-bean, with a very firm, hard, brittle, shining coat of a
brownish-red, pale chocolate, or ash-grey colour. It has an irregular
kidney shape, with flat surfaces and a rounded border, which is for the
most part boldly curved, and there marked with a broad furrow, with the
central raised raphe in the centre, and ending at one extremity in the
microphyle. The kernel consists of two cotyledons. It yields its
properties to alcohol, and imperfectly to water. Calabar bean has been
used in cases of strychnia poisoning and tetanus, as well as in epilepsy
and St. Vitus's dance. The dose of the powdered bean, according to Royle,
is one to four grains. Locally applied it produces contraction of the
pupil.

Until the researches of Harnack and Witkowsky the Calabar bean was
supposed to owe its activity, when internally administered, to the
presence of a powerful alkaloid called _esernia_ or _physostigma_. These
chemists, however, have lately succeeded in discovering in the bean, in
addition to eserina, another very potent alkaloid, to which they have
given the name _calabaria_ or _calabarine_.

Calabarine appears to exert a physiological action antagonistic to that of
eserine, and since the commercial preparations of the drug consist,
according to the above chemists, of mixtures of the two alkaloids in
varying proportions, the discordant effects frequently observed to follow
the administration of any of the various preparations of the bean, admit
of ready explanation. Wherever eserine predominated it appeared to
suppress the effects of calabarine; on the other hand, if this latter
preponderated, the paralysing effect on the spinal cord otherwise
exercised by eserine would fail to be produced.

The necessity of having preparations of calabar free from calabarine, in
cases where the drug is administered for tetanus, will be apparent when it
is stated that calabarine itself induces the disease.

We quote the following from 'New Remedies' for June, 1877:--

"The well-known manufacturing chemist, E. Merk, in Darmstadt, has
heretofore prepared and sold a substance which was supposed to be the only
active principle of calabar, and which he called calabarine, but which was
really eserine or physostigmine. He now accepts and confirms the results
of Harnack's and Witkowsky's researches, and has put both of the active
principles upon the market labelled with their correct name, viz.
'_Physostigmin_' (or eserine, being the same substance which he formerly
sold as calabarine), and '_Calabarin_,' distinguished by the addition of
Harnack's name (Harnack's 'Calabarine'). _The attention of physicians and
pharmacists is particularly directed to the change of appellations._"

Calabar bean is a powerful poison. The antidotes are:--Diffusible
stimulants; the hypodermic injection of the 1/50th of a grain of sulphate
of atropia, to be repeated if necessary at the end of two hours; and
artificial respiration. See ESERINE.

=CAL'AMINE.= See ZINC (Carbonate of).

=CALCINA'TION.= The operation of burning or roasting any solid body to
expel its more volatile parts, as the conversion of chalk into lime by the
expulsion of carbonic anhydride. The roasting of the ores in the first
stage of the Welsh process of copper smelting and in the Silesian mode of
extracting zinc is technically termed CALCINATION.

The method of conducting the process of calcination depends on the nature
of the body operated on. Many substances, for delicate experiments, are
calcined over a spirit lamp in a platinum spoon or crucible; others, in
iron vessels or earthen crucibles, placed in a common furnace. When the
action of the air proves injurious, as in the manufacture of charcoal, the
process is performed in close vessels or chambers. In some cases the fuel
is mixed with the articles, and they are both burnt together, as in the
manufacture of lime, the roasting of ores, &c. The process of drying
salts, or driving off their water of crystallisation by heat, is also
frequently called CALCINATION; thus we have calcined copperas, alum, &c.

=CAL''CINER.= A reverberatory furnace used for the calcination of metallic
ores, particularly those of COPPER and ZINC (which _see_).

=CAL'CIUM.= [Eng., L.] Ca. The metal of which LIME is an oxide. Though it
is a chemical curiosity when isolated, it is one of the most abundant
substances in nature, forming a very large portion of the crust of the
earth. It occurs in combination with fluorine as fluor-spar; with oxygen
and carbonic acid as chalk, limestone, and marble; and with oxygen and
sulphuric acid as gypsum. The metal was first obtained from lime by Sir H.
Davy in 1808; but little was known of its properties until Dr Matthiessen
formed it by the electrolytic decomposition of the chloride of calcium.

_Prep._ 1. By the action of a powerful voltaic current upon a paste of
pure lime in contact with mercury, as in the original method of preparing
barium.

2. By the electrolysis of chloride of calcium in a state of fusion.

3. (Caron.) Fused chloride of calcium in powder, 300 parts; distilled
zinc, finely granulated, 400 parts; sodium, in small pieces, 100 parts;
the whole placed in a crucible and heated to redness in an ordinary
furnace. The action is very feeble at first, but after some time zinc
flames arise. The heat must now be moderated to prevent the volatilisation
of the zinc, but at the same time it must be maintained as high as
possible. When the crucible has remained in this state for about a quarter
of an hour it may be withdrawn. On cooling, a metallic button will be
found at the bottom. This alloy of zinc and calcium, which generally
contains from 10 to 15% of the latter metal, must be placed in a coke
crucible and heated until the whole of the zinc is driven off. The alloy
should be in pieces as large as possible. When proper precautions have
been observed a button of CALCIUM is obtained, only contaminated with the
foreign metals contained in the zinc.

_Prop., &c._ The metal belongs to the group which includes BARIUM,
STRONTIUM, and MAGNESIUM; it is of a light yellow colour; is rather harder
than lead, and very malleable. It melts at a red heat. It tarnishes in a
day or two, even in dry air, and in contact with moist air it breaks up
like ordinary lime. Its sp. gr. is 1.55.

_Tests._ Salts of calcium in solution produce a white precipitate with
carbonate of ammonium; it becomes far less voluminous on heating the
solution, and dissolves very readily in hydrochloric acid. Sulphuric acid,
when added to concentrated solutions, gives an immediate white
precipitate; if the solution is not concentrated, the precipitate may
separate gradually, in minute crystals; and if it is very dilute, no
precipitation will take place, because sulphate of lime is soluble in
about 500 times its weight of water. With neutral solutions, even when
very dilute, oxalate of ammonium gives a copious white precipitate,
soluble in most dilute acids.

=Calcium, Acetate of.= Add prepared chalk to acetic (or purified
pyroligneous) acid till fully saturated; filter and evaporate, that
crystals may form. Diuretic. _Dose_, 10 to 20 grains.

=Calcium, Acid Phosphate of.= _Syn._ SUPERPHOSPHATE OF LIME, SOLUBLE ACID
PHOSPHATE. CaH_{4},2PO_{4}. This may be procured by treating bone-earth
with two thirds of its weight of oil of vitriol, as in the preliminary
stage of the extraction of phosphorus. It is extensively used as a manure
for turnips.

=Calcium, Bibasic Phosphate.= Ca_{2}H_{2}P_{2}O_{8} + 3H_{2}O. Dissolve
608 grams of crystallised calcium chloride in 1000 grams of distilled
water, and add gradually to this solution 1000 grams of sodium phosphate,
dissolved in 10,000 grams of water. Allow the precipitate to deposit, and
wash it five or six times with 10 litres of water each time; drain the
precipitate on a moistened cloth. As soon as its consistence permits,
detach from it irregular pieces, and place them to dry in the open air
upon filtering paper; the spontaneous desiccation is sufficiently rapid.

From 'Formulae for New Medicaments adopted by the Paris Pharmaceutical
Society.'

=Calcium, Bro'mide of.= CaBr_{2}. _Syn._ CAL'CII BROMI'DUM, L. _Prep._
(Magendie.) To a solution of bromide of iron add hydrate of calcium in
slight excess; filter, evaporate to dryness, redissolve in water, and
again filter, and evaporate.

=Calcium, Carbonate of.= See CHALK.

=Calcium, Chlo''ride of.= CaCl_{2}. _Syn._ CAL'CII CHLORI'DUM (B. P.).
_Prep._ Hydrochloric acid and water, of each 10 fl. oz.; chalk, 5 oz.;
evaporate the solution until the salt becomes solid, and dry the residue
at about 400 deg. F.

It is obtained in solution as a residuum in making several preparations of
ammonia, as the liquor and carbonate, and in making carbonic acid by the
action of hydrochloric acid on marble. The residuum is concentrated and
set aside to crystallise, or evaporated to dryness.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ This salt crystallises in colourless, striated,
hexagonal prisms, terminated by very acute points. It is very soluble in
alcohol and water, the latter even at 32 deg. dissolving more than its own
weight, and at 60 deg. three or four times its weight of this salt. When
heated, the crystals undergo watery fusion. When dissolved in water, they
produce great cold; and hence are frequently employed as an ingredient in
FREEZING MIXTURES. These crystals contain nearly half their weight of
water. They are very deliquescent, passing readily into the liquid state,
and forming what used to be called oleum calcis, or oil of lime. The
anhydrous chloride is hard and friable; slightly translucent; totally and
readily soluble in water, and, like the crystallised salt, very
deliquescent. In the laboratory chloride of calcium, either fused or
merely dried, is continually used for drying gases and for absorbing the
water from ethereal and oily liquids in organic analysis. The unfused is
now generally preferred for this purpose, as it is more porous than the
fused. The salt is also used in the rectification of alcohol, and to form
a bath for heating stoneware stills and other apparatus liable to be
cracked on the sand bath. As a chemical reagent it is employed chiefly in
detecting certain organic acids. As a medicine it has been given in some
scrofulous and glandular diseases. _Dose_, 10 to 20 gr. See SOLUTIONS.

=Calcium, Flu'oride of.= CaF_{2}. _Syn._ HYDROFLU'ORATE OF LIME. This
occurs native as the mineral called fluor-spar. It is found in beautiful
crystals in the lead mines of Alston Moor and Derbyshire, and in the
concretionary crystalline masses known as Blue John or Derbyshire spar at
Castleton. It may be prepared by the action of hydrofluoric acid upon
lime, as directed under BARIUM, FLUORIDE OF.

=Calcium Hypophosphite.= CaP_{2}H_{4}O_{4}. Mix milk of lime (1 in 5) in
porcelain capsule placed in a sand bath, with half its weight of
phosphorus in small pieces, and heat it to ebullition, operating in the
open air or under a chimney with a good draught. Spontaneously inflammable
phosphuretted hydrogen is given off, the vapour of which should be
avoided. Add from time to time a little warm water, to replace that which
has evaporated. Discontinue the heat when the phosphorus has
disappeared--that is, when inflammable bubbles cease to be produced. If
the phosphorus remain in excess, add more milk of lime, and continue the
heat until the complete disappearance of the metalloid. Allow the liquor
to cool and then filter; then saturate it with a current of carbonic acid
gas to eliminate any excess of lime remaining uncombined. Filter again,
and concentrate the liquor in a water bath to dryness, keeping the
temperature below 100 deg. C., to avoid detonations. Preserve the salt from
the air in well-closed bottles.

From 'Formulae for New Medicaments adopted by the Paris Pharmaceutical
Society.'

=Calcium, I'odide of.= CaI_{2}. _Syn._ HYDRI'ODATE OF LIME; CAL'CII
IODI'DUM, CALCIS HYDRIO'DAS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Magendie.) From a solution of
protiodide of iron and hydrate of calcium, as directed under iodide of
barium.

2. Dissolve lime or carbonate of lime in hydriodic acid.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ It is a deliquescent salt, easily soluble in water, and
has a bitterish taste. It has been used in scrofulous affections,
internally, in doses ranging from 1/8 to 2 gr., thrice daily, and
externally in ointments containing 2 dr. or less to the oz.

=Calcium, Lactophosphate.= This product ought not to be employed except in
the state of solution in water or in syrup. In the pasty or solid state
its solubility varies, and it is always an indefinite compound.

_Solution._ Bibasic phosphate of lime, 17 grams; concentrated lactic acid,
as little as possible; distilled water, 964 grams. Suspend the phosphate
carefully in the distilled water, add the lactic acid, allow solution to
go on for some minutes, and filter.

From 'Formulae for New Medicaments adopted by the Paris Pharmaceutical
Society.'

=Calcium, Oxide of.= See LIME.

=Calcium, Phosphate of.= _Syn._ CALCIS PHOSPHAS (Ph. B.). Digest bone-ash,
4 _oz._, in hydrochloric acid, 6 _fl. oz._, diluted with a pint of water,
until it is dissolved.

Filter the solution, if necessary; add water, 1 pint, and afterwards
solution of ammonia (Ph. B.), 12 _fl. oz._, or a sufficient quantity,
until the mixture acquires an alkaline reaction, and having collected the
precipitate on a calico filter, wash it with boiling distilled water as
long as the liquid which passes through occasions a precipitate when
dropped into solution of nitrate of silver acidulated with nitric acid.
Dry the washed product at a temperature not exceeding 212 deg. F.

=Calcium, Phos'phide of.= _Syn._ PHOSPHU'RET OF LIME; CAL'CII
PHOSPHURE'TUM, C. PHOSPHI'DUM, L. _Prep._ By passing the vapour of
phosphorus over lime (in small fragments) heated to redness in a porcelain
tube. A brownish substance, supposed to be a mere mechanical mixture of
phosphide and phosphate of calcium. Thrown into water, it suffers instant
decomposition, and phosphuretted hydrogen gas escapes.

=Calcium, Sulphides of.= Calcium forms with sulphur at least three
different compounds:--

=1. Calcium, Protosul'phide of.= CaS. _Prep._--_a._ From sulphate of lime,
exposed at a high temperature to a stream of hydrogen gas.--_b._ From
dried gypsum, 25 parts; lampblack or finely powdered charcoal, 4 parts;
calcined together at a strong heat in a covered crucible.

=2. Calcium, Bisulphide of.= CaS_{2}. _Prep._ From sulphur and quick-lime,
equal parts; water, q. s.; slake the lime, add the sulphur, and boil until
a solution is obtained, which on cooling deposits crystals.

=3. Calcium, Pentasulphide of.= CaS_{5}. _Prep._ As the last, but
increasing the quantity of sulphur, and continuing the boiling for a
longer period. Little is known about it.

=4. Calcium, Sulphate of.= See GYPSUM.

=5. Calcium, Commercial Sulphuret of.= _Syn._ COMMERCIAL SULPHIDE OF
CALCIUM. _Prep._--_a._ As 1, _b_ (_above_).

_b._ Sulphur, 1 part; hydrate of lime, 3 parts; water, 2-1/2 pints; boil
it until it solidifies on cooling, then pour it out on a cold marble slab,
and when solid break it into pieces and preserve it in a well-corked
bottle.

_c._ (Guibourt.) Quick-lime, 7 parts; sulphur, 4 parts; mix, and heat the
compound for about 2 hours in a covered crucible.

_d._ (Cottereau.) Quick-lime, 2 parts; sulphur, 1 part; water, 5 parts; as
4, _b_ (_above_).

_Obs._ The precise composition of the last three preparations is
uncertain. They are acrid, caustic, stimulant, and diaphoretic. _Dose_, 1
to 3 gr. Sulphide of calcium has been used as a depilatory by applying it
made into a paste with water, and washing it off in about 1/4 of an hour.
Made into an embrocation, it has been strongly recommended in gout,
scabies, &c. Its solution yields pure sulphur on the addition of
hydrochloric acid.

=CALCULA'TIONS= (Useful). 1. To find the Value of a Dozen Articles. Take
the price in pence as shillings, and if there are any farthings in the
price, add threepence for each. Thus 2s. 8d., or 32 pence per yard, is L1
12s. per dozen.

2. To find the Value of One Hundred Articles. For every farthing take as
many pence and twice as many shillings. Thus, 1-1/4d. each is--5d., and
10s. = 10s. 5d. per hundred.

3. To find the Value of a Pound at any price per Ounce. Take the price in
farthings as shillings, and divide by three. Thus, 5-1/4d. per ounce is 21
farthings; taken as shillings, 21 / 3 = 7s. per pound.

4. To find the Value of an Ounce at any price per Pound. Take the
shillings as farthings, and multiply by three. Thus, at 6s.--6 x 3 = 18
farthings, or 4-1/2d. per ounce.

_Obs._ By reversing Nos. 1 and 2, the price of a single article or pound
may be found from the price per dozen or hundred. For several other
calculations, useful in domestic economy, chemistry, &c., see BREWING,
DECIMALS, EQUIVALENTS, MEASURES, PER-CENTAGE, WEIGHTS.

=CAL'CULUS.= _Syn._ STONE. In _medicine_, a hard concretion formed within
the animal body by the deposition of matters which usually remain in
solution. The concretions most commonly found are those formed in the
kidneys or bladder, and termed urinary calculi, and those formed in the
gall-bladder or biliary ducts, which are called biliary calculi. Urinary
calculi are in most cases composed of substances which are constituents of
healthy urine, such as uric acid, urate of ammonia, and the phosphates of
lime and magnesia; they are, however, sometimes composed of substances
which are met with in unhealthy urine, such as oxalate of lime, cystine,
&c.

Biliary calculi, or gall-stones, usually contain from 50 to 80 per cent.
of cholesterin, a crystallisable fatty body, constituting a never failing
ingredient in healthy bile, the rest of the concretion being made up of
biliary resin and colouring matter, with a small quantity of inorganic
salts.

Calculus or stone in the bladder, which is a prevalent disease in Norfolk,
both among men and sheep, has been attributed to the use of the hard water
of the district.

Both of these give rise to very painful symptoms, and may even threaten
life. See CHOLESTERIN.

=CALEFACIENTS.= Applications that excite warmth.

=CAL'ENDAR.= _Syn._ CALENDA'RIUM, L.; CALEN'DRIER, Fr. A table of all the
days of the year, arranged in the order of days and weeks, to which are
generally added certain astronomical indications and dates of great civil
and religious events. The most remarkable calendars are the Hebrew
calendar, the calendar of the Greeks, the Roman, or Julian calendar, the
Gregorian calendar (now adopted by all Christian peoples except the Greeks
and Russians), and the French Republican calendar, which, having remained
in force about thirteen years, was abolished by Napoleon I on the 1st of
January, 1806.

=Calendar, Perpet'ual.= A table which furnishes the general indications
necessary to construct a calendar for any year, and to resolve, without
error, many difficulties connected with the verification of dates.

=CAL'ENDERING.= The process of finishing by pressure the surface of linen
or cotton goods. It is usually performed by passing the fabric between
cylinders pressed together with great force. It is necessary that one of
the cylinders, at least, shall be of a material combining considerable
hardness with a slight degree of elasticity; for this purpose the paper
cylinder is used. It is made by forcibly compressing a number of circular
discs of thick pasteboard, each with a square hole in the centre, upon an
iron axis, so as to form a solid cylinder, which is turned perfectly
smooth and true in a lathe. The paper cylinder usually works against a
hollow roller of copper or iron, heated by steam or metallic heaters.
Before the final rolling in the calendering machine the fabric is lightly
smoothed by passing over warm cylinders. Cotton goods are starched, and a
fictitious appearance of stoutness is sometimes given to them by employing
starch thickened with plaster of Paris, porcelain clay, or a mixture of
these. Watering is a beautiful effect, produced by means of a hot cylinder
with a pattern raised upon it. Glazing is produced by combined rubbing and
pressure, the rollers being made to move with unequal velocities, so that
one side of the fabric is rubbed as well as pressed by the roller whose
surface moves with the greater speed. A copper cylinder is preferred for
glazing, and is made so hot that if the machine stops it burns the goods.
The old method of glazing consisted in burnishing the surface of the
fabric with a polished flint.

=CAL'ICO.= See COTTON.

=Cal'ico Printing.= The art of producing figured patterns upon calico by
means of dyes and mordants topically applied by wooden blocks, copper
plates, or engraved cylinders. The goods are either directly printed in
colour, or receive their patterns by being run through a colouring matter
or mordant, when the dye is only produced upon that portion of the ground
previously prepared for it. Of late this system of dyeing has been
extended to silk and woollens.

The mordants are thickened with some glutinous substance, as flour,
starch, or gum, to render them adhesive and to prevent their spreading.

The following are the principal styles of calico-printing, each requiring
a different method of manipulation:--

In the madder, fast colour, or chintz style, the mordants are applied to
the white cloth, and the colours are brought out in the dye bath. This is
the method commonly followed for "permanent prints."

In the padding or plaquage style, the whole cloth is passed through a bath
of some particular mordant, and different mordants are afterwards printed
on it before submitting it to the dye bath. By this means the colour of
the ground and pattern is varied. Like the last, it is much used for gown
pieces, &c.

In the reserve or resist-paste style, white or coloured figures are
produced by covering those parts with a composition which resists the
general dye afterwards applied to form the ground of the pattern. In this
style the dye bath is indigo, or some other substantive colour.

The discharge, or rongeant style, is the reverse of the preceding; it
exhibits bright figures on a dark ground, which are produced by printing
with acidulous or discharge mordants after the cloth has been passed
through the colouring bath.

Steam-colour printing consists in printing the calico with a mixture of
dye extracts and mordants, and afterwards exposing it to the action of
steam.

Spirit-colour printing is a method by which brilliant colours are produced
by a mixture of dye extracts and solution of tin, called by the dyers
"spirits of tin."

Pigment printing consists in applying such colours as ultramarine,
magenta, or aniline purple, to the cloth, and fixing them by such agents
as casein, albumen, or solution of india rubber. This style of printing
has been developed to a great extent since the introduction of the
splendid mauves and purples obtained from aniline.

For further information on this subject the reader is referred to Ure's
'Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, and Mines,' Calvert's 'Dyeing and
Calico Printing,' edited by Stenhouse and Groves; Wagner's 'Clinical
Technology,' and Crooke's 'Practical Handbook of Dyeing and Printing,'
where he will find the several processes of calico printing fully treated
on, and most ably and accurately described. To enter largely into the
subject in this work might amuse the reader, but would be of no practical
value; as calico printing is an art only practised on the large scale, and
by men who obtain their whole knowledge of it in the laboratories and
printing rooms of the factories.

=CAL'OMEL.= See MERCURY (Chlorides of).

=CALOTRO'PIS PROCE'RA.=, =CALOTRO'PIS GIGAN'TEA.=, (Ind. Ph.). _Syn._
MUDAR.--_Habitat._ One or other of these species, everywhere in
India.--_Officinal part._ The root-bark, dried (_calotropis cortex_).
Small flat or arched pieces, brownish externally, yellow-greyish
internally, peculiar smell, and mucilaginous, nauseous, acrid taste. Its
activity appears to reside in a peculiar extractive matter named
_mudarine_.--_Properties._ Alterative tonic; diaphoretic, and, in large
doses, emetic.--_Therapeutic uses._ In leprosy, constitutional syphilis,
mercurial cachexia, syphilitic and idiopathic ulcerations, in dysentery,
diarrh[oe]a, and chronic rheumatism, it has been used with alleged
benefit.

=Powder of Mudar.= (_Pulvis Calotropis._) Take of the roots of mudar,
collected in the months of April and May from sandy soils, a sufficiency;
carefully remove, by washing, all particles of sand and dirt, and dry in
the open air, without exposure to the sun, until the milky juice contained
in it becomes so far inspissated that it ceases to flow on incisions being
made in it. The bark is then to be carefully removed, dried, and reduced
to powder. Preserve in well-corked bottles.--_Dose._ As an alterative
tonic, 3 grains, gradually increased to 10 grains or more, thrice daily.
As an emetic, from 1/2 to 1 drachm.

=CAL'OTYPE.= See PHOTOGRAPHY.

=CALUM'BA.= _Syn._ CALUMBAE RADIX, B. P. CALUM'BA-ROOT; KALUMB, Hind. The
root of a plant of Eastern Africa, extensively used in _medicine_ as a
stomachic and mild tonic. _Dose_, 10 to 20 grains, three or four times a
day. The botanical name of this plant is _Jateorhiza palmata_, or
_Cocculus palmatus_. See CALUMBINE (_below_); also INFUSIONS and
TINCTURES.

=CALUM'BA WOOD.= This wood, which is used as a tonic by the Cingalese, is
not the produce of the true calumba plant, but of _Menispermum
fenestratum_. It contains the alkaloid BERBERINE (which _see_).

=CALUM'BINE.= _Syn._ CALOM'BINE, _Calum'bina_. A bitter substance
discovered by Wittstock in calumba root.

_Prep._ 1. Digest calumba root (in coarse powder) in water acidulated with
acetic acid; express, filter, boil to one half, again filter, add
carbonate of calcium, in slight excess, and evaporate to dryness in a
water bath; reduce the residuum to powder, and digest it in boiling
alcohol; the latter will deposit crystals of CALUMBINE on cooling.

2. (Wittstock.) Evaporate tincture of calumba root (made with rectified
spirit) to dryness; dissolve the residuum in water, and agitate the
solution with an equal bulk of ether; after repose for a short time,
decant the ethereal portion, distil off most of the ether, and set the
liquid aside to crystallise.

_Prop., &c._ Impure calumbine occurs as a yellow-brown mass; when pure, it
forms rhombic prismatic crystals or delicate white needles; it is only
slightly soluble in alcohol, ether, and water; 40 parts of boiling
rectified spirit take up only 1 part of calumbine. Its best solvent is
acetic acid; it is also soluble in acidulated and alkalised water. Neither
nut-galls nor metallic salts affect its solution. Concentrated sulphuric
acid dissolves it, and assumes first a yellow, and then a red colour. Its
properties indicate that weak vinegar or sour wine would be the best
menstruum for extracting the medicinal virtues of calumba root. _Dose_, 1
to 3 gr. twice a day as a tonic and stomachic, in dyspepsia, debilitated
stomach, bilious vomiting, &c.; and in the later periods of dysentery and
diarrh[oe]a.

=CALX.= This term was formerly applied to the residuum of the combustion
of any substance; or to any substance which had been exposed to a strong
heat. See CALCINATION, LIME, &c.

=CAMBOGE'.= See GAMBOGE.

=CAM'ERA LU'CIDA.= [L. and Eng.] When a ray of light (_r_) falls upon a
quadrangular glass prism (_a_), it is bent by two reflections (at _c_ and
_d_), and thrown upwards where it may be received by the eye, to which it
will appear described on the table or sheet of paper (_f_) placed to
receive it. The point of a pencil used to trace any object on the paper
can also be seen, and by its means the picture can be easily copied. When
the prism is mounted on a stand, and a thin brass plate with a small hole
through it for the eyepiece adjusted thereto, it forms the CAMERA LUCIDA
of the opticians. The image may be magnified or lessened by placing a lens
so as either to intercept the rays before they strike the prism, or before
they reach the eye. An ingenious person will readily be able to set up
this instrument, than which a more useful one cannot exist.

[Illustration]

=CAM'ERA OBSCU''RA.= [L. and Eng.] An optical instrument for producing
upon a screen the image of a field of view more or less extensive. It was
invented by Baptista Porta in the 16th century. The principles and
construction of the camera obscura may be thus described:--A convex lens
(_B_) is placed in a hole admitting the light into a darkened box or
chamber (_A_), which, falling on a white ground (_D_), produces an
inverted picture of every object within its range. The image thus formed
may be restored to its natural position, by allowing the rays of light to
pass through two lenses instead of one, or by receiving the rays on a
mirror placed at an angle of 45 deg., when the image will be thrown on the
floor in its original position. The picture may be viewed through an
oblong aperture cut in the box, or the experiment may be performed in a
darkened room, by placing the lens in a hole in the shutter, and allowing
the image to fall on the wall, or on a sheet of white paper stretched to
receive it.

[Illustration]

In the simplest form, when intended for taking views or portraits, the
image is thrown upon a mirror placed at an angle of 45 deg., and resting on
the bottom of the box, by which means it is thrown upwards against a plate
of glass, also placed at a similar angle. On this is laid a piece of
semi-transparent tracing paper, on which the object is distinctly seen
painted, and may be traced out with a pencil. When the camera is used in
photography, slides are provided to retain the sensitive paper in the
proper position in the box or dark chamber to receive the image, and the
whole apparatus is adjusted with screws, and slides of the most delicate
description. Achromatic glasses are also employed. See PHOTOGRAPHY.

=CAM'PHINE.= The name given by the trade to rectified oil of turpentine
when sold for burning in lamps, in order that purchasers may not be aware
of the inflammable character of the liquid. Since the introduction of the
hydro-carbon oils from coal, shale, and petroleum, camphine has been
little used for burning. To rectify the turpentine, it is passed in vapour
through a solution of caustic potash, soda, or lime; or through sulphuric
acid.

=CAM'PHOR.= C_{10}H_{16}O. _Syn._ CAM'PHIRE, LAU'REL CAM'PHOR; CAMPHO'RA,
B. P. A crystalline substance found in many plants; though only obtained
in large quantities from two, namely, _Camphora officinarum_ and
_Dryobalanops aromatica_. The first, commonly known as the laurel camphor
tree of China and Japan, yields the camphor of commerce; the latter, the
Sumatra or Borneo camphor, and the peculiar fluid known as liquid camphor.

It is found that several of the essential oils, by carefully distilling
off about one third their volume, yield a species of camphor. By
collecting this, and redistilling the remainder of the oil 2 or 3 times,
a farther quantity of camphor may be obtained. Oil of rosemary, treated in
this way, yields about 10% of camphor; oil of sweet marjoram the same; oil
of sage yields 13%; oil of lavender, 25%. By keeping the oils loosely
corked, and in a cool place, they produce a larger portion of this
camphor. Aniseed camphor is the congealable portion of oil of aniseed,
separated from the liquid oil, which it resembles in odour and flavour.

=Camphor, Am'ber.= See PYRETINE (Crystallised).

=Camphor, Com'mercial (Crude).= The produce of the laurel camphor tree,
brought to Europe chiefly from China and the island of Formosa, in the
form of greyish grains, aggregated into crumbling cakes.--_Prep._ The
Chinese and Japanese extract the camphor by cutting the wood into small
pieces, and boiling it with water in iron vessels, which are covered with
large earthen capitals or domes, lined with rice straw. As the water
boils, the camphor is volatilised along with the steam, and condenses on
the straw.

=Cam'phor, Commercial (Refined).= _Syn._ WHITE CAMPHOR; CAMPHO'RA, B. P.
_Prep._ 100 parts of crude camphor are mixed with 2 parts each of
quick-lime and animal charcoal, both in powder, and the mixture is placed
in a thin, globular, glass vessel, sunk in a sand bath. The heat is then
cautiously applied, and the vessel gradually and carefully raised out of
the sand as the sublimation goes on. When the process is complete, the
subliming vessel is removed and allowed to cool.

_Obs._ The whole process of refining camphor requires great care and
experience to ensure its success. If conducted too slowly, or at a heat
under 375 deg. Fahr., the product is found to be flaky, and consequently
unsaleable, without remelting or subliming. An improvement on the common
method is simply to sublime the above mixture in any convenient vessel
furnished with a large and well-cooled receiver, and to remelt the product
in close vessels under pressure, and to cool the liquid mass as rapidly as
possible.

_Prop., &c._ A white, semi-crystalline solid, very volatile at common
temperatures; freely soluble in alcohol, ether, bisulphuret of carbon,
benzol, oils, and acetic acid, and sufficiently so in water (about 1-1/4
gr. to 1 oz.), to impart its characteristic smell and taste; 100 parts of
alcohol (sp. gr. .806) dissolve 120 parts of camphor; concentrated acetic
acid dissolves twice its weight of camphor; average sp. gr. .990. It fuses
at 347 deg., boils at 400 deg. Fahr., and when set fire to, burns with a bright
flame. It evaporates slowly at ordinary temperatures, and crystallises on
the inside of bottles. While floating on water it undergoes a curious
rotatory movement.

_Uses, &c._ Camphor is sedative, narcotic, anodyne, diaphoretic, and
anaphrodisiac. _Dose_, 2 to 10 gr. in the form of pill or bolus, or made
into an emulsion with yolk of egg, mucilage, or almonds. In overdoses it
is poisonous. The best antidote is opium or wine, preceded by an emetic.
It is also used externally in ointments, liniments, and embrocations.

Camphor is frequently put into wardrobes and clothes-trunks, to keep away
insects; it is used to make the white stars and fire of the pyrotechnist;
and by the varnish-maker to increase the solubility of copal and other
gums. Mixed with six times its weight of clay, and distilled, it suffers
decomposition, and yields a yellow, aromatic, volatile oil, smelling
strongly of thyme and rosemary, which is much used by the wholesale
druggists and perfumers to adulterate some of the more costly essential
oils, and by the fancy soap-makers to scent their soaps.

Camphor may be beaten in a mortar for some time, without being reduced to
powder, but if it be first broken with the pestle, and then sprinkled with
a few drops of rectified spirit of wine, it may be readily pulverised. By
adding water to an alcoholic or ethereal solution of camphor, this drug is
precipitated under the form of an impalpable powder of exquisite
whiteness.

_Tests._ Pure camphor is entirely soluble in rectified spirit, oils, and
strong acetic acid; a fragment placed on a heated spoon or in a warm
situation will wholly disappear, and the evolved fumes will be highly
fragrant (camphoraceous), and be free from an acid or terebinthinate
odour. In an alcoholic solution of natural camphor ammonia gives but a
slight precipitate, which is dissolved on shaking the mixture; a similar
solution of artificial camphor under the like treatment gives a flocculent
precipitate, which remains undissolved. See CAMPHOR, FACTITIOUS (_below_).

=Camphor, Facti''tious.= _Syn._ HYDROCHLORATE OF TUR'PENTINE,
HYDROCHLORATE OF CAMPHENE, ARTIFICIAL CAMPHOR. Prepared by passing dry
hydrochloric acid gas into pure oil of turpentine, cooled by a freezing
mixture or pounded ice. After a time a white, crystalline mass is formed,
which must be drained, and dried by pressure between folds of bibulous
paper. It may be purified by solution in alcohol.

_Prop., &c._ It has a camphoraceous taste and odour; burns with a
greenish, sooty flame, and when blown out evolves a terebinthinate odour;
heated a little above the boiling-point of water, slight fumes of
hydrochloric acid gas are perceptible.

=Camphor, Hydrochlo''rate of.= _Syn._ MU''RIATE OF CAMPHOR; CAMPHO'RAE
HYDROCHLO''RAS, L. By passing hydrochloric acid gas over camphor, in small
fragments, until it ceases to be absorbed.

=Camphor, Liq'uid.= _Syn._ CAMPHOR OIL; O'LEUM CAMPHO'RAE, L. A pale
yellowish, limpid fluid, which exudes from _Dryobalanops aromatica_, a
tree growing in Sumatra and Borneo, when deep incisions are made in the
trunk. It is supposed that the crystalline SUMATRA CAMPHOR (see _below_)
is deposited from this fluid. The liquid camphor has somewhat the odour of
CAJEPUT OIL, and might, no doubt, be beneficially employed for the same
purpose. It is sometimes imported into Europe.

=Camphor, Monobromated.= C_{10}H_{15}O_{1}Br. Coarsely powdered camphor is
introduced into a flask of about ten times the capacity of the amount it
is intended to prepare. A fine stream of bromine is then allowed to fall
upon the powder with continual agitation; the addition of bromine ceases
when the camphor is liquefied. A large long abductor tube is then fitted
to the flask, and the other end plunged into an alkaline solution, which
will absorb the vapour that would otherwise incommode the operator. The
flask is placed in a water bath that is raised to ebullition, when the
reaction soon commences. This is at first rather active, there being an
abundant evolution of hydrobromic gas, and some vapour of bromine and
undecomposed camphor. The liquid, which is at first dark brown in colour,
acquires an amber colour and the evolution of gas suddenly slackens. The
operation should be carried out at a temperature between 80 deg. and 90 deg. C.
The amber-coloured liquid that remains in the flask solidifies upon
cooling, and appears then as a slightly citrine-coloured friable mass. It
is purified by treating it several times with boiling 90 deg. to 95 deg. alcohol,
filtering the liquor, and leaving it to crystallise. The crystals are to
be dried in the air upon unsized paper.

Dr Bourneville advises monobromated camphor to be administered either in
the form of pills, made up with conserve of roses, or of a mixture rubbed
up with mucilage of gum arabic and syrup. He gives it in doses varying
from twelve to thirty centigrams daily. Where it cannot be taken by the
mouth he injects the following solution subcutaneously:--Monobromated
camphor 3 gr., alcohol 35 gr., glycerin 22 gr.

=Camphor, Nitrate of.= _Syn._ CAMPHOR OIL; O'LEUM CAMPHO'RAE FACTI''TIUM,
L. Prepared by dissolving camphor in nitric acid, in the cold.

=Camphor, Sul'phite of.= From camphor and sulphurous acid gas, as
hydrochlorate of camphor.

=Camphor, Suma'tra.= _Syn._ BOR'NEO CAMPHOR, HARD C., DRAGON'S BRAIN
PERFUME. Obtained from _Dryobalanops aromatica_, being found in natural
fissures or crevices of the wood. It resembles ordinary camphor in most
properties, but its odour is not of so diffusible a nature. This kind is
not seen in European commerce.

=CAMPHOR CAKES.= See BALLS (Camphor).

=CAMPHOR'IC ACID.= H_{2}C_{10}H_{14}O_{4}. _Syn._ ACIDUM CAMPHOR'ICUM, L.
_Prep._ From camphor, 1 part; and nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.33), 4 parts;
distilled together in a glass retort, with a gradually increasing heat,
until vapours cease to be evolved; the camphor that has volatilised is
then added to that in the retort, along with 4 or 5 parts more of nitric
acid, and the process repeated again and again, until 20 parts of acid
have been consumed, when crude camphoric acid crystallises out of the
remaining liquor on cooling. The crystals are purified by washing with
cold distilled water, solution in boiling water, and evaporating the
solution until a pellicle forms; crystals of pure camphoric acid are
formed as the liquid cools.

_Prop., &c._ Small, colourless, lamellar or acicular crystals; acid;
bitter; fusible at 158 deg. Fahr.; sparingly soluble in water; soluble in
alcohol; alcoholic solution not precipitated by water, which distinguishes
camphoric acid from benzoic acid. Its salts are called CAMPHORATES. The
soluble camphorates may be made by digesting the carbonate or hydrate of
the metal in a hot solution of the acid, and the insoluble camphorates by
double decomposition. By distillation, camphoric acid yields a colourless,
crystalline, neutral substance, which has been improperly called anhydrous
camphoric acid.

=CAM'WOOD.= This dye-stuff resembles Brazil wood in its properties, and is
used in a similar manner.

=CAN'ADA BALSAM.= _Syn._ BAL'SAMUM CANADEN'SE, TEREBINTH'INA CANADEN'SIS,
L. A thick, viscid oleo-resin obtained from the _Abies balsamea_
(Lindley), a tree of common growth in Canada and the State of Maine. It is
much employed as a medium for mounting microscopic objects. When pure it
is perfectly transparent, has an agreeable odour (not terebinthinate), and
is wholly soluble in rectified oil of turpentine, with which it forms a
beautiful glassy and colourless varnish, much used for preparing a
semi-transparent copying paper.

A mixture of 3 parts of Canada balsam and one of wax, if added to pile
masses, is said to have the effect of binding together the component parts
of the mass, and of keeping the piles made from it soft and in good shape.

=Canada Balsam, Facti''tious.= _Syn._ BALSAMUM CANADENSE FACTI''TIUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. Yellow resin, 3 lbs.; oil of turpentine, 1 gall.; dissolve, and
add essence of lemon, 2 dr.; oil of rosemary, 1-1/4 dr.

2. To the last add of nut oil, 1 pint. Both are sold in the shops for
Canada balsam.

=CAN'DIES.= See CANDYING.

=CAN'DLES.= Candle-making, once a rude and noisome trade, has, since the
researches of Chevreul and Branconnot into the nature of the fats,
developed into one of the most important branches of scientific industry,
the progressive improvements in which, accompanied by a corresponding
cheapening and immensely increased efficiency in one of our chief means of
artificial illumination, have added greatly to the comfort and enjoyment
of every civilised community. Candles are either dipped, moulded, or
rolled. The cheaper sorts of tallow candles are formed by the first
process, and wax candles by the last; all the other kinds are moulded. The
moulds are tubes of pewter, well polished on the inside, eight or more
being fitted into a frame, the upper part of which forms a trough to
receive the melted candle material. When in the moulds the candles are
inverted; in other words, the bottom of each mould corresponds to the top
of the candle. The wick passes through a small hole at the lower extremity
of the tube, and is held in the axis by a little bar placed across the
top. At the factories of Price's Patent Candle Company the frames of
moulds are ranged close together in long benches, and are filled with hot
candle material from cars running along little railways above them. When
quite cold the candles are withdrawn. The plan of pulling them out one by
one with the aid of a bodkin has been superseded at the factories above
mentioned, by the ingenious device of blowing them out with compressed
air.

The wicks of ordinary tallow candles are made of the rovings of Turkey
skein-cotton, 4 or more of which, according to the intended thickness of
the wick, are wound on a reel, from which they are again run off, and cut
into the proper lengths. Of late years the wicks of the best candles have
been made in such a way that they do not require snuffing. This object is
effected by causing the wick to bend over, and its end to fall outside the
flame, where it is exposed to the oxygen of the air. This bending over is
variously brought about.--1. By twisting the wick with one strand shorter
than the rest, which, being slightly stretched during the moulding of the
candle, contracts again and bends the wick when the fat melts. 2. By
plaiting the cotton into a flat wick, which naturally takes the required
curve. Such a wick is generally dipped in a solution of borax, which
preserves it from being acted upon by the flame except at its extreme
point at the edge of the flame. A very fine wire is sometimes included in
the plaited wick. 3. In Palmer's patent two-wicked candles, which were
formerly much used in lamps, the wicks are saturated with subnitrate of
bismuth ground up with oil; they are then twisted tightly round a wire,
which is withdrawn after the candle is moulded. In burning, the ends
gradually untwist and stand out of the flame on either side. Other devices
are said to be employed.

The wicks of candles should be free from knots and inequalities, as well
as from adhering particles of cotton, the presence of all of which are the
cause of the "guttering" one frequently sees in a burning candle. The
finer the thread of which the wick is composed the more complete will be
the combustion of the melted fatty material. Unless the above precautions
are attended to, in selecting the wick, it will not be so entirely
consumed as it ought to be.

=Candles, Com'posite.= Mould candles formed of a mixture of the hard fatty
acid obtained from palm oil and the stearine of cocoa-nut oil. They were
introduced in 1840. Other compositions are occasionally used, such as a
mixture of spermaceti and hard white tallow, to which a little bleached
resin is added.

=Candles, Med'icated.= These have been proposed as a convenient means of
diffusing the active principles of certain volatile substances through the
atmosphere, and for complete and partial fumigations. They are seldom
employed in England.

=Candles, Mercu''rial.= From the red sulphide or the grey oxide of mercury
mixed with wax, and a wick of cotton inserted therein. Recommended by Mr
Colles for partial mercurial fumigation. They are burnt under a glass
funnel with a curved neck, the upper orifice of which is directed to the
diseased part.

=Candles, Par'affin.= From the beautiful translucent substance paraffin
(which _see_). These candles surpass all others in elegance, and are
entirely free from odour and greasiness. The light produced by 98 lbs. of
paraffin candles is equal to that of 120 lbs. of spermaceti, or 138 lbs.
of wax, or 144 lbs. of stearic, or 155 lbs. of the best composite candles
(Letheby). They are sometimes delicately tinted with red, mauve, violet,
crimson, and rose colour. Aniline colours will not dissolve in paraffin.
Stearic acid, however, is a solvent for them, and accordingly when the
candles are tinted with the coal-tar colours these are previously
dissolved in the stearic acid, always mixed with the paraffin. This
insolubility of the aniline colours in paraffin has been suggested as a
test for the purity of this hydrocarbon, and of its freedom from stearic
or other fatty acids. For colouring paraffin candles black the paraffin is
heated nearly to the boiling point with anacardium shells or nuts, which
dissolve readily in the heated paraffin. The Belmontine Candles of Price's
Patent Candle Company are formed of the paraffin of Rangoon tar.

Previous to the paraffin being made into candles, it is necessary that it
should be purified and bleached. Many processes for effecting these ends
have been devised. In the works of Price's Candle Company the method known
as "Hodge's" is had recourse to. This consists in first freeing the crude
paraffin from the coarser impurities, melting it, casting it into cakes,
and allowing it to cool sufficiently slowly, so as to form well-defined
crystals. The cakes are then placed upon a bed of some porous and
absorbent material, and subjected to a temperature not sufficient to melt
the paraffin, but only the liquid hydrocarbons and other more easily fused
bodies, the latter running off from between the crystals of the paraffin,
and being absorbed by the porous substance upon which the paraffin rests.
This process is repeated until the removal of the liquid hydrocarbons from
the solid paraffin has been satisfactorily accomplished. If it be
requisite to subject the paraffin to further purification, the following
method is frequently adopted. The paraffin, previously melted by steam, is
placed in a tank, with from 5 to 10 per cent. of strong sulphuric acid,
and the mixture agitated for some hours by means of air (the time
depending on the quality of the paraffin), the sulphurous acid fumes
resulting from the reaction being carried off by a suitable contrivance.
After the agitation is completed, the paraffin, after being allowed to
stand for some time, is decanted into a suitable vessel containing animal
charcoal, with which it is digested for some hours. Upon the subsidence of
the charcoal the paraffin is drawn off if at all turbid, and is passed
through a funnel heated by means of a steam jacket.

Another method, the invention of Messrs Fordred, Lambe, & Sterry, for the
decolorisation of the paraffin employed in candle manufacture, consists in
digesting the paraffin at a temperature of 230 deg. F. with about 12% of
powdered fuller's earth. Of late this process has supplanted the charcoal
one; and it may be employed, no matter by what means the previous
purification of the paraffin has been carried out. The paraffin and
fuller's earth are to be well agitated together, and when the latter has
fallen down the clear paraffin is decanted from it. The inventors affirm
that their process answers quite as well if marl clay, or any other
similarly constituted and equally abundant natural substance be
substituted for fuller's earth; and that no matter which of these bodies
is employed, they may be re-used, and any adhering paraffin be removed by
washing with agitation, or by other suitable contrivances.

Messrs Smith & Field's patent for the removal of the colouring matters of
the paraffin consists in the employment of silicite of magnesium. The
patentees state that the successful issue of the operation depends not
only upon the careful preparation of the salt used, but upon its being
dried at a temperature of as exactly as possible 212 deg. F. The careful
preparation before insisted on of the magnesium salt, which is procured by
the double decomposition of magnesium, sulphate, and sodium silicate,
includes its thorough washing from adhering sodium sulphate previous to
its desiccation. If this precaution be neglected, the porosity of the
silicate will be impaired, and its bleaching effect more or less
interfered with; and further, the patentees state that if the washed
silicate be heated to redness, its decolourising power will also be lost.

It appears that the paraffin employed in making the candles consists of a
mixture of paraffins having different melting points. The following are
the melting points of some of the chief varieties of paraffin:--

  Paraffin from Boghead coal at     45 deg. to 52 deg. C.
      "      "   Brown coal  "      56 deg. C.
      "      "   Peat        "      46.7 deg. C.
      "      "   Rangoon oil or tar 61 deg. C.
      "      "   Ozokerit           65.5 deg. C.

Paraffin candles contain from 5{?} to 15 per cent. of stearin, this
addition being made for the purpose of diluting the paraffin as well as
for raising the melting point of the paraffin where this is low. The
stearin, moreover, serves to preserve the rigidity of the candle in the
candlestick, and to prevent its bending out of the upright position.
Paraffin candles are always moulded, but previous to this being done the
moulds must be heated to a temperature above the melting point of the
paraffin; this may vary from 60 deg., 70 deg., and 87 deg. C., according to the
paraffin employed. The moulds having been filled with the melted paraffin
are, after one or two moments only, plunged into cold water, when the
candle immediately becomes solid. Unless this were done the candle would
be spoilt, owing to the crystallisation of the paraffin. A thin wick is
required for paraffin candles.

=Candles, Spermace'ti.= From spermaceti (which _see_). These are very
delicate in appearance, but rather expensive. They burn well, but as the
melting point of spermaceti is low, 120 deg. Fahr., they will not bear
carrying about in the hand without guttering. They are generally
adulterated with stearic acid or hard white tallow.

In candle-making "spermaceti is usually mixed with 3 per cent. of wax or
paraffin to destroy its highly crystalline structure; it is moulded in the
usual way with plaited wicks that require no snuffing. Occasionally the
spermaceti candles are cast without any admixture of wax, the moulds being
raised to a higher temperature just as with stearic acid. Some
manufacturers, in order to make the spermaceti appear like wax, use
gamboge to give the desired tint; such candles are known as transparent
wax."[236] Spermaceti candles are largely consumed in India.

[Footnote 236: 'Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and Analytical.']

=Candles, Stear'ic.= Under this head we may place the various sorts of
candles moulded from the hard fatty acids of both animal and vegetable
origin. The principal sources whence British manufacturers derive their
acids are tallow, palm oil, and cocoa-nut oil. The processes employed for
separating them are generally described under Stearic Acid. Candles formed
of the fatty acids can now be prepared so as to imitate and almost rival
those of wax and spermaceti; and they are quite as cheap as the nearly
obsolete mould candles formed of common tallow. They are extremely hard;
they do not grease the hands, and they burn away brightly and steadily,
without giving off any offensive odour. Uncoloured, they are snowy white,
but a yellow tint is frequently given them by gamboge.

=Candles, Tal'low.= From ordinary tallow or from tallow which has been
freed from much of its oleic acid by pressure. These have so unpleasant an
odour and are so apt to gutter, that they will probably ultimately
disappear from use. They are, however, sold at so low a price, that among
the lower classes they must long retain their hold. For dip candles the
wicks are immersed in melted tallow, and after rubbing with the hands are
placed straight and allowed to harden, after which they are arranged upon
the "broaches" ready for dipping. For mould candles the last operation is
omitted. Great care is taken to select a cotton that yields the least
possible quantity of ash after burning.

In the process of "dipping," the "dipping cistern" being filled with
tallow of a proper temperature from the boiler, one of the broaches
covered with wicks is placed upon the end of the "dipping beam," and
pressed down gently into the melted fat; it is then withdrawn, the bottoms
of the candles just touched against a board placed on one side of the
cistern for the purpose, and the frame removed to the rack. This operation
is repeated until the candles acquire a sufficient size, when they are
finally cooled, sorted, weighed, and strung in pounds for sale.

The mould candles once in common use were made of the finer kinds of
tallow only; a mixture of 3 parts of sheep, with 1 part of ox suet, being
preferred. See WAX.

=Candles, Wax.= These are most frequently made by pouring melted white wax
on to the wicks, which are hung upon frames and covered with metal tags at
the ends to protect the cotton from the wax in those parts. The frames are
made to turn round, and melted white wax is poured first down one wick,
and then the next, and so on. When the wicks have been subjected to this
operation once and have become sufficiently cooled, they have a second,
and then a third coat given them, until they are of the required
thickness. The candles are next rolled into proper shape on a marble slab
or wooden board. The conical top is moulded by properly-shaped tubes, and
the bottoms are cut off and trimmed. Wax candles are now seldom moulded,
but if so the same processes are followed as for stearic and paraffin
candles. The large altar candles, which frequently weigh from thirty to
forty pounds, are made by hand.

=Wax Tapers.= These, which are of various degrees of thickness, are not
made of pure wax, but of wax (usually vegetable wax) and tallow, the
latter being added to give them flexibility. When they are required to be
coloured, resin and turpentine are added to the tallow. For further
particulars, consult Wagner's 'Chemical Technology,' "CANDLE-MAKING."

=CANDLE NUTS.= The kernels of the _alearites triloba_, the candleberry
tree, a plant growing in most tropical countries. The nuts when dried, and
stuck upon a reed, are used by the natives of the Polynesian Islands as a
substitute for candles. They contain a large amount of pure palatable oil,
which is sometimes used by artists as a drying oil. After the expression
of this oil the cake has been used as a food for cattle; also as a manure.

The following is the composition of the nuts:--

             _Shells._

  Water                3.71
  Organic matter      89.90
  Mineral matter       6.39

            _Kernels._

  Water               5.27
  Fat                62.97
  Cellulose          28.99
  Mineral matter      2.79

        _Ash of Kernel._

  Lime               18.69
  Magnesia            6.01
  Potash             11.33
  Phosphoric acid    29.30

=CAN'DLESTICKS.= Metallic, earthenware, and porcelain candlesticks,
snuffers, and snuffer-stands, are recommended to be cleaned by pouring
boiling hot water on them (previously placed in an earthen pan), and,
after wiping them quite dry with a cloth, to clean them with a piece of
wash leather; those made of silver, or of plated copper, may be finally
polished with a little plate powder; those of white metal, with a little
whiting or fine chalk, and those of brass, with a little rotten-stone or
one of the polishing pastes. For articles of this kind, made of bronze and
papier mache, the water should be used only hot enough to melt the tallow,
and they should be only gently dabbed or rubbed off with a very soft cloth
or leather. The common practice of placing candlesticks before the fire to
melt off the grease is injudicious, as the solder or japan about them is
almost certain to be injured. Hence the common annoyance of damaged or
"crippled" candlesticks in houses where there are careless servants.

=CAN'DYING.= When the object is simply to form a confection or sweetmeat,
imbued with the aroma, flavour, or medicinal property of any substance,
candies are generally prepared by simply boiling lump sugar with a
sufficient quantity of the infusion, decoction, tincture, expressed juice,
or sometimes even the powder of the particular article, until a portion
taken out and cooled becomes quite solid, when it is either poured out on
a marble slab, or into tin, marble, or paper moulds, dusted with powdered
lump sugar.

When the object is to preserve the form and character of the vegetable in
the candy, the substance is boiled in water until soft, and then suspended
in concentrated syrup (in the cold), until they become transparent; after
which they are either dried in a current of warm air, or in a stove, at a
heat not exceeding 120 deg. Fahr. The syrup must be kept fully saturated with
sugar by reboiling it once or twice during the process.

Another method occasionally employed by confectioners for almonds and the
like is to put the substances into a syrup boiled until it forms a small
thread between the opening fingers, and to stir the whole until it is
nearly set. See SUGAR BOILING.

The following are the principal candied articles kept at the shops:--

=Candied Al'monds.= From blanched almonds, roasted and halved.

=Candied Angel'ica.= _Prep._ 1. From the root. Boil the fresh roots (after
slicing them and removing the pith) in water, to deprive them of part of
their bitterness and aroma; then drain them and put them into syrup boiled
to a full candy height, and boiling hot; let them remain until nearly
cold, when they may be taken out and carefully dried.

2. From the stems. From the tender stems, stalks, and midribs of the
leaves, as last. Used as a sweetmeat and dessert. It is said to be
cordial, stomachic, tonic, and aphrodisiac.

=Candied A'pricots.= From the fruit, scarcely ripe, either whole or cut
into quarters, immersed in the syrup (hot), without any further
preparation.

=Candied Cit'rons.= From the peels.

=Candied Erin'go.= From the roots, slit and washed.

=Candied Gin'ger.= From the roots of green ginger.

=Candied Hore'hound.= From a strong decoction or infusion of the root, and
lump sugar, 1 pint to 8 or 10 lbs. may be used. Boil the mixture to a
candy height, and pour it whilst warm into moulds or small paper cases
well dusted with finely powdered lump sugar; or pour it on a dusted slab
and cut it into squares.

=Candied Lem'on Peel.= As Candied Citron.

=Candied Or'ange Flow'ers.= From the flowers deprived of their cups,
stamina, and pistils (2 oz. to each lb. of sugar), as Candied Almonds, but
poured out on a slab.

=Candied Or'ange Peel.= From the peel of the Seville orange, or common
orange, as Candied Citron.

=Candied Su'gar.= See SUGAR BOILING. The following are articles of a more
special character.

=Candy, Car'away.= 1. From caraway seeds (in fine powder), 1/2 oz.; sugar,
1 lb.

2. Oil of Caraway, 1 dr.; sugar, 1 lb.

=Candy, Diges'tive.= _Syn._ LIVE-LONG CANDY. _Prep._ 1. Rhubarb and
bicarbonate of soda, of each 1 dr.; ginger, 1/2 dr.; cinnamon, 20 gr. (all
in fine powder); heavy magnesia, 1 oz.; powdered sugar, 2 oz.; mucilage of
tragacanth, q. s. to form a lozenge mass; to be divided into small squares
of 18 or 20 gr. each.

2. As the last, but adding finely powdered caraways, 1 dr.; oil of
caraway, 15 drops; and sugar, 1 oz. Both are used as heartburn and
digestive lozenges.

=Candy, Gin'ger.= _Prep._ 1. From ginger (in coarse powder), 3 oz.;
boiling water, 1-1/4 pint; macerate in a warm place for 2 hours, strain,
add lump and moist sugar, of each 5 lbs., and boil to a candy.

2. Ginger (in very fine powder), 1 oz.; powdered sugar, 2 lbs.; syrup, q.
s. to make a paste. Stomachic and carminative.

For various sweetmeats which might come under the head of CANDY, see
CONFECTIONS, DROPS.

=CANKER.= This disease consists in a depraved condition of that part of
the sensitive foot of the horse which secretes the horny frog and sole. It
mostly occurs in coarsely-bred animals, and is the result of filth, damp,
and bad ventilation. The treatment consists in first removing all loose
horn, and allowing all pent-up matter to escape; the exuberant
granulations must be carefully cut away, and the parts then washed with a
tepid lotion of sulphate or chloride of zinc; after drying the surface
dust it with oxide of zinc; apply tow dipped in a mixture of tar and lime,
and "keep it in firm contact with the parts by means of a leather sole or
strips of hoop iron underneath a shoe lightly tacked on. Dress in this
manner daily, keeping up the dry pressure for a week." (Finlay Dun.)

=CAN'NON METAL.= See GUN METAL.

=CANTHAR'IDES.= _Syn._ SPANISH FLIES, BLISTERING F., LYT'TAE; CANTHAR'IS,
B. P. The _Cantharis vesicatoria_ of Latreille, commonly known as the
Spanish fly, is an insect of the order Coleoptera; it abounds in the south
of France, Spain, and Italy; and has spread into Germany and the south of
Russia. When alive it exudes a strong fetid and penetrating odour.

_Pur., &c._ These insects should be preserved in well-closed bottles or
tin canisters. The addition of a few drops of oil of cloves, or of strong
acetic acid, or even of a few cloves in substance, will preserve them
unchanged for a length of time in closed vessels. The best proof of their
goodness is the smell. The powder is constantly adulterated. The plan of
the wholesale druggists is to sort out the most worthless flies for
powdering, and to compensate for their deficiency of vesicating power by
adding 1 lb. of euphorbium to every 12 or 13 lbs. of flies. When a
superior article is required, liquorice powder is added (4 or 5 lbs. to
every 14 lbs.), along with about 1 lb. of euphorbium, and sufficient blue
black or charcoal to turn the yellow of the liquorice to a greenish
colour. The best mode of detecting this adulteration is by the microscope.
It should be borne in mind that only those flies which have attained their
full growth possess blistering properties. The immature or undersized
insects are destitute of epigastric power.

_Ant._ An emetic of sulphate of zinc, followed by the stomach-pump, if
necessary. The vomiting may be promoted by copiously drinking warm bland
diluents, such as broth, linseed tea, milk, &c. Friction on the spine,
with volatile liniment and laudanum, and the subsequent administration of
draughts containing musk, opium, and camphorated emulsion, have been
strongly recommended.

_Tests._ By the microscope very minute particles may be discovered in the
stomach and intestines, on a post-mortem examination. Orfila thus found
particles of cantharides in a body that had been interred nine months.

_Uses, &c._ Spanish flies are used externally to raise blisters, and
internally as a stimulant and diuretic, generally in the form of tincture.
In excess they produce strangury, bloody urine, satyriasis, delirium,
convulsions, and death. See TINCTURES, VESICANTS, &c.

=CANTHARI'DIN.= C_{5}H_{12}O_{2}. Isomeric with picrotoxin. This substance
is found in, and is the vesicating principle of, the Spanish fly, Chinese
blistering fly, and other coleopterous insects. _Prep._ Pulverised
cantharides are allowed to remain in contact for 24 hours with twice their
weight of chloroform, in a displacement apparatus. The chloroform is then
drained off, and finally displaced by alcohol, and the solution is left to
evaporate. The cantharidin crystallises out, saturated with green oil. In
order to purify the cantharidin it is laid on bibulous paper, which
absorbs the greater part of the oil, and then crystallised out of a
mixture of alcohol and chloroform. (Procter.)

_Prop._ Prismatic crystals, melts at 200 deg. C., volatilises in white fumes,
which strongly irritate the eyes, nose, and throat, and condenses in
rectangular prisms. Cantharidin is insoluble in water, but soluble in
alcohol, ether, chloroform, acetic acid, and in the fixed and volatile
oils. Its solution in any of the liquids above mentioned possesses
vesicating properties, which, however, is not exhibited by solid
cantharidin.

=CAOUT'CHOUC.= _Syn._ INDIA RUBBER, ELASTIC GUM. India rubber is the
concrete juice of the _Ficus elastica_, _Siphonia elastica_, the _Urceola
elastica_, and many other tropical plants. The fresh milky juice is spread
over moulds of unbaked clay, and is then exposed to the heat and smoke of
a fire, or torches, to dry it, whence it derives its dark colour.
Successive coats of juice are laid on, and the operation of drying
repeated until the bottles acquire sufficient thickness. When it has
become thoroughly hard and dry, the clay is beaten out. In this form it is
commonly imported.

_Prop., &c._ The general properties of india rubber, as well as its
numerous applications, are well known. The fresh juice has a cream-like
appearance and consistence, is coagulated by heat, and is miscible with
water, alcohol, and wood naphtha; sp. gr. 1.012 to 1.041; it yields from
18% to 45% of solid caoutchouc, either by heat or evaporation. By
excluding it from the air it may be preserved unchanged for a considerable
period.

Solid caoutchouc has a sp. gr. ranging between .919 and .941; it melts at
248 deg. Fahr. into a viscid mass, which does not again harden on cooling; it
is unaltered by chlorine, hydrochloric acid, sulphurous acid, fluosilicic
acid, ammonia, caustic alkaline lyes (even when boiling), and most similar
substances; nitric acid and sulphuric acid act on it only by long contact
when concentrated. Some specimens of caoutchouc are harder than gutta
percha itself, and equally inelastic, whilst others never perfectly
solidify, but remain in a condition resembling that of birdlime or
printers' varnish.

The best solvents of caoutchouc are rectified sulphuric ether (which has
been washed with water to remove alcohol and acidity), chloroform,
bisulphide of carbon, a mixture of bisulphide of carbon and absolute
alcohol (94 of the first to 6 or 7 of the last), and caoutchoucin. All
these liquids dissolve india rubber rapidly in the cold, and leave it
unaltered on evaporation. The first two are, however, too expensive to be
generally employed. The others have a disagreeable odour, but are much
cheaper than the rest, and possess the advantage of leaving the film of
caoutchouc in a firmer and stronger condition than other solvents.
Pyrogenous oil of turpentine is another cheap and good solvent. Benzol,
rectified mineral or coal-tar naphtha, crude petroleum, and oil of
turpentine dissolve india rubber by long digestion and trituration (with
heat), otherwise they merely form with it a glutinous jelly that dries
very slowly and imperfectly, leaving it much reduced in hardness and
elasticity. The fats and fixed oils also readily dissolve caoutchouc (with
heat), forming permanently glutinous solutions or pastes; so also do most
of the volatile oils, but the solutions with the majority of them dry with
difficulty.

One of the most remarkable properties of india rubber is the great amount
of heat which is disengaged during its condensation by pressure or in the
exercise of its elasticity. During the process of kneading the raw
caoutchouc in the "masticators," the cold water thrown in to reduce the
temperature soon becomes boiling hot. When no water is added, a
temperature so high is often reached as to occasion the melting of the
rubber. This is particularly the case during the process of "dry kneading"
with quick-lime. A tube 2-1/4 inches in diameter, impactly secured, was
subjected to a force of 200 tons. The result was a compression amounting
to 1-10th; great heat was evolved, and the excessive elasticity of the
substance caused a fly-wheel weighing five tons to recoil with alarming
violence. Mr Brockedon states that he succeeded in raising the temperature
of an ounce of water 2 deg. in about fifteen minutes by collecting the heat
evolved by the extension of a small thread of caoutchouc. He refers this
effect to the change in specific gravity, and contends that the heat thus
produced is not due to friction, because the same amount of friction is
occasioned in the contraction as in the extension of the substance, and
the result of this contraction is to reduce the caoutchouc thus acted upon
to its original temperature.

The edges and surfaces of india rubber are readily and perfectly joined by
mere contact and intense pressure. On the small scale the edges may be
moistened with ether, naphtha, oil of turpentine, or some other solvent,
or by long boiling in water, and immediately pressed tight together and
held in contact for some time.

Elastic tubes are readily formed of india rubber by cutting it into
uniform slips of proper thickness and winding them round rods of polished
glass or metal, so that the edges are in close contact or "overlapping." A
piece of tape is then wound round outside it, and the whole boiled in
water for 2 or 3 hours, after which time the edges will be found to be
sufficiently adherent. A better plan is to immerse the "rubber" in a
mixture formed of bisulphide of carbon, 95 parts, and rectified spirit, 5
parts, until it swells into a pasty mass, which may then be moulded into
any desired form or passed through the die of a tubing machine. For
chemical purposes, brewing, &c., vulcanised india-rubber tubing has now
taken the place formerly occupied by the unprepared material.

The once celebrated "Mackintoshes" are made by spreading two or more coats
of a paste made of caoutchouc and rectified coal-tar naphtha over the
surface of the stuff or cloth, and, when it has become partially dry,
pressing two such surfaces evenly together by passing the goods between a
pair of cylinders or rollers. The articles are then placed in a stove room
for the composition to harden, and to remove the odour of the naphtha. Of
late years vulcanised or mineralised rubber (coloured) has been used for
this purpose, and being spread on the outside of the stuff instead of the
inside forms an ornamental and thoroughly waterproof material.

India-rubber thread is prepared by stretching it (previously cut into
coarse filaments) to 5 or 6 times its length in boiling water or hot air,
in which state it is allowed to cool slowly. This process is repeated
again and again until it reaches 16,000 or 17,000 times its original
length, when it is glazed by agitating it with powdered sulphur or French
chalk. This thread is readily joined or "pieced," as it is called, by
paring the ends obliquely with a pair of scissors or a knife, and then
pressing the clean ends strongly together with the fingers. When the
coarse filaments from the cutting machine are simply stretched with the
moistened thumb and finger in the act of "reeling" to about 8 or 9 times
their length, they are said to be "inelasticated," and are ready to be
made into elastic braces, elastic web, and other like elastic tissues and
fabrics in the braiding machine.

=Caoutchouc, Vul'canised.= _Syn._ VULCANISED INDIA RUBBER, MINERALISED I.
R., SULPHURETTED I. R. The discovery of the singular action of sulphur and
the mineral sulphides on caoutchouc was made by Mr Charles Goodyear, of
New York, in 1842, at which date the manufacture of vulcanised india
rubber may be said to have commenced. In 1843 Mr Thomas Hancock patented a
process for vulcanised india rubber in these countries, founded on that of
Mr Goodyear. A sheet of caoutchouc immersed in melted sulphur absorbs a
portion of it, and at the same time undergoes important changes in many of
its leading characteristics. So prepared, it is no longer affected by
changes of temperature; it is neither hardened by cold nor softened by any
heat insufficient to destroy it. It loses its solubility in the solvents
of ordinary caoutchouc, whilst its elasticity is greatly augmented, and
has become permanent.

The same effect is produced when sulphur is kneaded into caoutchouc in a
masticator, or by means of powerful rollers, as well as when common
solvents (naphtha, spirit of turpentine, &c.) are charged with a
sufficient amount of sulphur in solution to become a compound solvent of
the rubber. In these cases articles may be made of any required form
before heating them for the change of condition technically termed
"vulcanisation." It is necessary, however, for this purpose that the form
should be carefully maintained both before and during the exposure to the
heat.

"A vulcanised solid sphere of 2-1/2 inches in diameter, when forced
between two rollers 1/4 inch apart, was found to maintain its form
uninjured. In fact, it is the exclusive property of vulcanised caoutchouc
to be able to retain any form impressed upon it, and to return to that
form on the removal of any disturbing force which has been brought to act
upon it." (Brockedon.)

Caoutchouc combines with from 12% to 15% of sulphur; the quantity of
sulphur added to the naphtha paste should not, therefore, exceed 10% or
12% of its weight.

The temperatures for vulcanisation by the common method range from 320 deg. to
330 deg.; and the period required is one hour or more, according to the
temperature. A much lower temperature is, however, sufficient if the
duration of the exposure is much extended or the compound mass is softened
with any of the common solvents of india rubber.

The process of sulphuring, or mineralisation, is differently conducted in
different manufactories. Under Mr Burke's patent, oxysulphide or amorphous
sulphide of antimony (formed by decomposing a solution of crude antimony
in a lye of potash or soda with hydrochloric acid) is employed. This
powder he combines with either india rubber or gutta percha, or mixtures
of them, by kneading in a "masticator" for 2 or 3 hours, and after strong
compression in a mould whilst still warm, he exposes the mass to a steam
heat ranging from 250 deg. to 280 deg. Fahr. The block, so prepared, is afterwards
cut into sheets, &c. The advantages possessed by the product are that it
possesses no unpleasant odour, nor does the sulphur effloresce on its
surface, as in ordinary vulcanised india rubber.

Under Mr Christopher Nickel's patent (1849) 1 part of sulphur is kneaded
with 6 parts of caoutchouc, and then pressed into moulds, as before. He
also vulcanises rubber by exposing it in a cylinder heated in a steam
jacket to the fumes of sulphur or to sulphuretted gases, given off from a
retort connected with the apparatus. The rubber thus prepared he next
subjects to hydraulic pressure in moulds, at a temperature ranging between
220 deg. and 250 deg. Fahr.

Small articles or sheets of india rubber may be extemporaneously
vulcanised at common temperatures by simple immersion, for a minute or
two, in a mixture of bisulphide of carbon, 97-1/2 parts, and protochloride
of sulphur, 2-1/2 parts; after which they must be well washed first in
weak alkaline lye, and next in pure water. Mr Parkes employs 100 instead
of 97-1/2 parts of the bisulphide. This method is termed "cold
sulphuring."

An excellent method of vulcanisation, recommended by Mr Parkes,
particularly applicable to small articles, consists in immersing them for
about 3 hours in a close vessel containing a solution of polysulphide of
potassium at 25 deg. Baume (sp. gr. 1.197), and of the temperature of 240 deg.
Fahr. It is afterwards washed in an alkaline lye, then in pure water, and
dried.

Among the many applications of vulcanised india rubber those connected
with its elasticity and its enormous contractile power when extended are
particularly striking. Under Mr E. Smith's patent, "torsion springs" for
roller blinds, door springs, clock springs, carriage springs, &c., are
made of it. Mr Hodges, in another patent, has availed himself of the same
property as a new mechanical power. Short lengths of caoutchouc, which he
terms "vulcanised power purchases," are successively drawn down from or
lifted to a fixed bearing, and attached to any weight which it is required
to raise; when a sufficient number of these power purchases are fixed to
the weight, their combined elastic force lifts it from the ground. Thus,
10 purchases of the elastic strength each of 50 lbs. raise 500 lbs. Each
purchase is 6 inches long, and contains about 1-1/2 oz. of vulcanised
caoutchouc. These 10 purchases, if stretched to the limit of their
elasticity (not of their cohesive strength), will lift a weight exceeding
650 lbs.

The same principle has been applied to relieve and equalise the strain on
ships' cables, especially where several boats are towing one vessel; and
as a projectile force. A number of power purchases, attached to the barrel
of a gun constructed to project harpoons, will exert a power, if suddenly
relieved, proportioned to their aggregate forces. By similar contrivances
balls may be projected 200 yards or more, and a charge of No. 4 shot can
be thrown 120 yards. A bow, in which the string alone is elastic (the
reverse of the usual form), has been contrived which throws a 30-inch
arrow 170 yards.

The last great improvement in the manufacture of caoutchouc is the
discovery that by continuing the process of vulcanisation for a longer
time at an increased heat and under pressure, a hard black substance is
obtained, which can be turned in a lathe like ebony. This substance has
already been applied to an extraordinary number of uses. See VULCANITE.

An exceedingly useful combination of cork and india rubber has lately been
introduced. See KAMPTULICON.

=Caoutchouc, Facti''tious.= See OIL, CONSOLIDATED.

=CAOUT'CHOUCIN.= An extremely light fluid obtained by distilling india
rubber.

_Prep._ (Barnard's patent process.) A highly volatile fluid, discovered by
Mr Barnard. India rubber or caoutchouc, as imported, cut into small lumps,
containing about 2 cubic inches each, is thrown into a cast-iron still,
connected with a well-cooled worm-tub (any flat vessel with a large
evaporating surface will do, the entire top of which can be removed for
the purpose of cleaning it out); and heat is applied in the usual way,
until the thermometer ranges to about 600 deg. Fahr., when nothing is left in
the still but dirt and charcoal. The dark coloured fetid oil which has
distilled over is next rectified along with 1/3rd its weight of water,
once or oftener; and at each rectification becomes brighter and paler,
until at about sp. gr. .680 it is colourless, and slightly volatile. The
product is then shaken up with nitro-hydrochloric acid, or chlorine, in
the proportion of a 1/4 of a pint of the acid to 1 gallon of the liquid.
To enable the dirt to be the more easily removed from the bottom of the
still, common solder, to the depth of about 1/2 an inch, is thrown
in.--_Prod._ 80%.

_Prop., &c._ Mixed with alcohol, caoutchoucin dissolves gums and resins,
especially copal and india rubber, at the common temperature of the
atmosphere, and it speedily evaporates, leaving them again in the solid
state. It mixes with the oils in all proportions. It has been used in the
manufacture of varnishes, and for liquefying oil paints, instead of
turpentine. It is very volatile, and requires to be kept in close vessels.
According to the researches of Himly, Gregory, and Bouchardat, the
caoutchoucin of Barnard consists of several liquids, some of which have
the composition of olefiant gas, and others that of oil of turpentine.

=CA''PERS.= The flower buds of various species of _Capparis_, particularly
_C. spinosa_, caper tree, preserved in vinegar. They are chiefly imported
from Spain, Italy, and the south of France, where the caper tree is
largely cultivated for the purpose. The flower-buds are picked daily, and
thrown into a cask of strong pickling vinegar, until it becomes full, when
it is sold to the dealers by the collector. The former sort them into
different sizes by means of copper sieves, in a similar way to that
adopted for lead shot and gunpowder. In this way they are divided into
nonpareilles, capuchins, capotes, seconds, and thirds, of which the
former, or smallest, are regarded as the best; but much depends upon the
quality of the vinegar.

The bright green colour of capers, so much valued by the ignorant, arises
chiefly from the presence of copper derived from the sieves used in
sorting them. In many cases, copper coin, as sous and halfpence, are added
for the purpose. Thus the eye is gratified at the sacrifice of the
stomach, and an insidious poison introduced into the system, simply to
give an unnatural appearance to a condiment which tastes better without
it. See COPPER.

=CAPILLAIRE'.= [Fr.] Simple syrup, or a concentrated solution of sugar in
water, flavoured with orange-flower water, or some other similar aromatic.
The name was originally given to a mucilaginous syrup, prepared by adding
to an infusion of maiden-hair (_Adiantum capillus Veneris_) some sugar and
orange-flower water.

=CAP'NOMOR.= See KAPNOMOR.

=CAP'RIC ACID.= HC_{10}H_{19}O_{2}. _Syn._ RU'TIC ACID; ACIDUM CAP'RICUM,
L. An acid discovered by Chevreul, and obtained by decomposing caprate of
barium with dilute sulphuric acid, or primarily by the saponification of
butter or cocoa-nut oil, when it appears combined with butyric, caproic
and caprylic acids. It is also procured by acting upon oleic acid or oil
of rue with nitric acid.

_Obs._ When butter is saponified with caustic potassa or soda, and the
resulting soap decomposed by adding an acid, in excess, and distilling the
mixture, the four acids above named pass over into the receiver, in
combination with water. The mixed acids may be separated by saturating
them collectively with baryta, and by taking advantage of the unequal
solubility of the newly formed barium salts. The less soluble portion
(equal to about 1/20th of the dry mass) contains capric and caprylic acid;
the larger and more soluble portion, butyric and caproic acid. On the same
plan the two groups are resolved into their separate acids. These acids
are deprived of their uncombined water by means of chloride of calcium. It
is advisable to employ the term rutic acid, as the older term is easily
confounded with caproic and caprylic.

_Prop._ Capric or rutic acid crystallises in fine needles, which fuse at
86 deg. Fahr., giving out an odour resembling that of a goat. It is sparingly
soluble in boiling water.

_Prep._ (Miller.) Castor oil is saponified by means of potassa or soda,
and afterwards an excess of the hydrated alkali is added, amounting to one
half the oil used. The mass is heated in a retort, and an oily liquid
covered with water distils over. This oily liquid, which is the octylic
alcohol, is rectified several times with potassa until the residue is no
longer coloured brown.--_Prop._ A colourless liquid, of powerful aromatic
odour; insoluble in water, but dissolving readily in acetic acid, ether,
and alcohol. Its boiling point is 356 deg. Fr., its sp. gr, .823. The
caprylate of ethyl, erroneously termed caprylic ether, is a colourless
liquid, with an agreeable odour of pine-apples.

=CAPSAICIN.= Until the researches of Mr Thresh proved to the contrary the
active principle of the capsicum fruit, or cayenne pepper, and the one to
which it was thought it owed its acrid and pungent properties, was
believed to be an alkaloid, and was named capsicine in consequence. Mr
Thresh succeeded in obtaining an alkaloid from the capsicum, but this was
entirely wanting in acridity and pungency. Its discoverer states that
capsaicin occurs only in the pericarp of the fruit. The details of the
process by which it may be obtained are given in the 'Year Book of
Pharmacy' for 1876-77, from which it will be seen that the substance may
also be procured by preparing a strong tincture of capsicum, and
submitting it to dialysis. Capsaicin when cautiously heated to 138 deg. F.,
melts to a transparent oily fluid, and if then allowed to cool rapidly, it
becomes solid, assuming a crystalline condition in doing so. It
volatilises at 240 deg. F., without suffering decomposition. Strong nitric
acid acts violently on it, decomposing and dissolving it. The crystals
dissolve very readily in ether, amylic, alcohol, acetic ether, benzine,
and fixed oils, and still more readily in alcohol, and in rectified and
proof spirit. In turpentine and carbon disulphide it dissolves much more
slowly. It is not affected by boiling for some considerable time in dilute
sulphuric acid, and the acid liquor shows no signs of glucose.

A specimen of capsaicin which Mr Thresh believes to have been in a pure
condition was sent to Dr Flueckiger's laboratory for analysis, and Dr Buri,
by whom the combustion was made, reports that it gave the following
composition:--C_{19}H_{14}O_{2}, a result which Mr Thresh found to agree
very fairly with some capsaicin derived from a specimen fruit obtained
from a different source from that sent to Dr Flueckiger. Administered
internally in doses of the 1/25th of a gram, capsaicin gave rise to
violent griping and purging; and when a lotion consisting of one part
diluted with forty of glycerin and spirit was placed on the arm, it soon
gave rise to such pain, and caused so much inflammation, that the lint
which was wetted with the solution had to be removed very shortly after
being applied.

=CAP'SICUM.= [L. and Eng.] _Syn._ CHIL'I, RED PEPPER. A genus of plants
belonging to the natural order Solanaceae, species of which yield the
fruits which are used to form Cayenne pepper and Chili vinegar. The
officinal capsicum of B. P. is the fruit of the species _C. fastigiatum_.
See PEPPER, TINCTURES, VINEGARS.

=CAP'SULES.= This term is now commonly applied to small egg-shaped or
spherical vessels, in which medicines are placed, for the purpose of
covering their nauseous taste at the time of swallowing them. They are
commonly made of gelatin, mixtures of sugar and gelatin, or animal
membrane.

=Capsules, Gel'atin.= _Prep._ 1. By dipping the bulbous extremity of an
oiled metallic rod into a strong solution of gelatin. When the rod is
withdrawn, it is rotated, in order to diffuse the fluid jelly equally over
its surface. As soon as the gelatinous film has partially hardened, it is
removed from the mould and placed on pins, furnished with suitable heads,
and fixed on a cork table. When sufficiently dry, the capsules are placed
upright in little cells, made in the table to receive them, and the liquid
with which they are to be filled is then introduced by means of a small
glass tube. They are next closed by dropping some of the melted gelatin on
the orifice of each. Six parts of gelatin, and one part sugar, are now the
common proportions.

2. (Simonin.) Oval balls of wax, of the requisite size, are prepared by
pouring wax, into a wooden mould, consisting of two parts, and arranged
for the reception of a row of these balls. These are afterwards stuck on
iron needles, affixed to rods of convenient size, in rows. The balls are
now uniformly coated all at once by dipping in the usual manner, then
removed from the needles, and are next placed with the needle holes
downwards, on a gently heated plate, when the wax flows out, and a round
capsule is left behind.

=Cap'sules, Gel'atin and Su'gar.= _Prep._ (Giraud.) Gelatin, 6 parts;
solution of gum and simple syrup, of each 1 part; water, 5 parts; melt in
a water bath, remove the scum, and proceed as before.

=Capsules, Glut'en.= These, which form the subject of a French patent, are
said to be formed of the gluten of wheat flour, a substance which is
insoluble, although softened, by water. We have placed these capsules for
twenty-four hours in warm water, and found them, at the expiration of that
time, still unbroken, the enclosed medicine being completely enveloped.
The mode of preparation is kept secret.

=Capsules, Mem'branous.= _Syn._ ORGAN'IC CAPSULES. From gut-skin moistened
and stretched over an oiled bulb of glass or metal, and filled in the
common way. These have been patented, but they do not appear to be an
improvement on the common capsule of gelatin.

_Obs._ The common capsules usually hold about 10 or 12 gr. of balsam of
copaiba. Those of the shops in nine cases out of ten, are filled with
adulterated copaiba, and at least 4-5ths of them are filled with train oil
or linseed oil, to which a few drops only of the balsam are added.

Balsam of copaiba (capivi) and oil of cubebs, or a mixture of them, castor
oil and cod-liver oil, are the substances most usually administered in
this way. _Baccae copaiferae factitiae_ are officinal in the Ph. Castr. Ruth.
Ratier has proposed to grease them and administer them per anum. Ricord
has strongly recommended capsules of copaiba, coated with extract of
rhatany, as much superior to the common ones of copaiba alone, in the
treatment of gleet and gonorrh[oe]a. They may be easily prepared by either
of the following methods:

1. By immersing, for an instant, the common capsule in a mixture of
extract of rhatany (newly prepared from the root), 3 parts; syrup of moist
sugar, 1 part; mucilage of gum Arabic, 1 part; melted together in a water
bath.

2. By forming the bodies of the capsules with the above mixture or
composition, instead of with gelatin, and then following the same
manipulations as for the manufacture of the common gelatin capsules.

These capsules are said to sit well upon the stomach, the tone of which
they contribute to improve, and to act with greater certainty than those
made of copaiba and gelatin alone.

=CAR'AMEL.= A dark-brown substance obtained by heating sugar. It is formed
during the roasting of all materials containing sugar, such as coffee and
malt. It is much used for colouring soups, wines, spirits, and other
liquids.

=Caramel, Crude.= _Syn._ SPIRIT COLOURING, BURNT SUGAR. _Prep._ From cane
sugar, by heating it to from 410 deg. to 428 deg. Fahr., as long as aqueous vapour
is formed; dissolving the product in water, and concentrating the solution
by evaporation.

=Caramel, Pure.= _Prep._ 1. (Graham.) Crude caramel, obtained as above, is
placed on a parchment-paper dialyser. The undecomposed sugar and certain
intermediate compounds diffuse out with considerable facility, and what
ultimately remains on the dialyser possesses five times the colouring
power of the original crude caramel, weight for weight. See DIALYSIS.

2. (Peligot.) Add strong alcohol to a filtered aqueous solution of crude
caramel until it ceases to produce a precipitate; collect the precipitate,
which is caramel, on a filter, wash with alcohol, and dry. Graham
recommends that the product should be dissolved and precipitated four or
five times, or till the mass thrown down, from being plastic at first,
becomes pulverulent.

3. (J. J. Pohl.) Cane sugar is heated in a spacious metallic vessel by
means of an oil bath to 410 deg. or 419 deg. Fahr. as long as aqueous vapours
escape, the mass being occasionally stirred with a spatula. The mass is
then finely powdered and digested with alcohol for two or three hours; the
digestion is repeated until the fluid no longer tastes bitter.

_Prop._ A solution containing 10% of purified caramel is gummy, and forms
a tremulous jelly on standing. Evaporated in vacuo, it dries up into a
black shining mass soluble in water; but if the solution be evaporated to
dryness by the heat of a water bath, the whole matter is rendered
insoluble in hot or cold water. A very small proportion of caramel
suffices to give a rich sepia tint to water.

=CAR'AT.= A weight of 4 grains used in weighing diamonds, which are spoken
of as of so many carats weight. Among assayers, a carat is a weight of 12
grains; but more commonly a proportional weight or term, representing the
number of parts of pure gold in 24 parts of the alloy; pure gold being
spoken of as of 24 carats fine. It is commonly the 24th part of the "assay
pound," and is nominally subdivided into 4 assay grains, and these again
into quarters. See ASSAYING.

=CAR'AWAY.= _Syn._ CARAWAY SEED; SE'MENA CARUI, L.; CARUI, B. P. The fruit
of the _Carum Carui_ (Linn.), an umbelliferous plant, common in England
and other parts of Europe. These fruits, commonly called "seeds," form an
agreeable and useful aromatic and carminative, and are especially esteemed
in the flatulent colic of children. They are also largely employed as an
adjuvant or corrective in various officinal preparations; and as a
flavoring ingredient in cakes, biscuits, cordials, confectionery, &c. See
ESSENCES.

=CARBAZOT'IC ACID.= See PICRIC ACID.

=CARBOL'IC ACID.= H.C_{6}H_{5}O. _Syn._ PHENYLIC ACID, PHENIC ACID,
PHENOL, PHENYLIC ALCOHOL, HYDRATE OF PHENYLE, HYDRATED OXIDE OF PHENYLE. A
powerful antiseptic substance obtained from coal-tar oil.

_Prep._ Crude, heavy coal oil is agitated with milk of lime, allowed to
stand, and the aqueous portion separated from the undissolved oil and
decomposed by hydrochloric acid. The oily liquid obtained is purified by
distillation.

1. Crude coal oil is distilled in a retort furnished with a thermometer,
and the portion which passes over when the heat ranges between 300 deg. and
400 deg. Fahr., is collected apart, and mixed with a hot saturated solution of
caustic potassa; after standing for some time, a semi crystalline pasty
mass forms, from which the supernatant liquid is decanted; the pasty mass
is now agitated with a small quantity of water until dissolved; the
solution thus formed separates into two portions, the denser of which
contains carbolate of potassa; this being separated by decantation, is
decomposed by hydrochloric acid. The solution of carbolic acid which rises
to the surface is digested with chloride of calcium, to remove water, and
purified by distillation; the distillate, by refrigeration, furnishes
crystals of the acid, which must be drained, dried, and preserved from the
air.

2. From salicylic acid. Mix intimately together equal weights of salicylic
acid and powdered glass; introduce the mixture into a good German retort,
and heat on a sand bath, gradually raising the heat till it becomes red
hot at the bottom. The vapour is condensed in any convenient receiver. If
the materials are perfectly dry, it solidifies to a mass of crystals as
soon as it condenses, but if there be a trace of water present it remains
liquid. The slower it distils over the lighter will be the colour, while
if a high temperature be employed it comes over nearly black. It may be
rendered colourless and anhydrous by rectification over quick-lime.

Of late years the manufacture of carbolic acid has increased to a great
extent, and is generally found in a pale yellow clear solution, instead of
as a dark hazy liquid. The pure anhydrous acid is in long, colourless,
prismatic crystals, often, however, on keeping turning a beautiful pink,
rose, or crimson, and which rapidly deliquesce in moist air, becoming
converted into a colourless refractive liquid, having a faint odour of
roses and tar. At 95 deg. F. they become an oily liquid, having an odour and
taste like creosote. Sp. gr. 1.065, boiling point 370 deg. F. Exposed to the
air the crystals absorb moisture and liquefy. The acid is slightly soluble
in water, but freely soluble in glycerin, alcohol, and ether. Carbolic
acid is poisonous, and is a powerful antiseptic.

_Tests._--About a grain of hypochlorite of calcium, added to a little
aqueous solution of carbolic acid, placed in a test-tube, produces after
agitation, the addition of a few drops of ammonia, and the application of
a gentle heat, a bright blue colour with a tinge of green. One drachm of
the acid if pure completely dissolves on being shaken with half a pint of
warm water.

_Uses._ The extraordinary antiseptic properties of carbolic acid have long
been known, but its extended use has been delayed, owing to the difficulty
experienced in obtaining it in considerable quantities. It is now,
however, principally owing to the labours of the late Dr F. Crace Calvert,
produced on a large scale, and this chemist has proposed its application
to many valuable purposes. As a medical agent it seems to have all the
useful properties of creosote in an exalted degree, with some peculiar
actions of its own, and is being applied with marked success in the
Manchester Royal Infirmary and similar institutions, in cases of chronic
diarrh[oe]a, obstinate vomiting (even after creosote has failed), and as a
disinfecting wash for ill-conditioned ulcers and gangrenous sores. It has
been said to have been used with marked success internally as a remedy
for hooping-cough. It has also been applied successfully in cases of
foot-rot, a disease which annually carries off large numbers of sheep. It
has been employed for the preservation of gelatin solutions and
preparations of size made with starch, flour, and similar materials, and
of skins and other animal substances. It appears to act strongly as an
antiferment, and Dr Calvert states that it is one of the most powerful
preventives of putrefaction with which he is acquainted. Commercial
creosote is frequently nothing more than hydrated carbolic acid.

Professor Lister, of Edinburgh, adopting the germ theory of putrefaction,
and regarding the putrid discharge from wounds as the result of the
presence of atmospheric organisms which find a suitable nidus in the
decomposing animal tissue exposed by the wound, seeks to exclude the
access of these germs by the use of antiseptics, particularly of carbolic
acid, the destructive action of which on living organisms is well known.
He applies to the wounds dressings of gauze previously prepared with
carbolic acid, additionally using as a lotion the acid, well diluted with
water; whilst during the dressing of the wounds and the performance of
surgical operations carbolic acid is diffused in the form of spray into
the surrounding atmosphere with the object of destroying the germs
floating in it.

_Antidotes._--Calcined magnesia, or bicarbonate of soda, in milk after
short intervals. In the absence of these, chalk, soap and water, or the
plaster from the ceiling. Olive oil additionally. More than fifty per
cent. of the carbolic acid manufactured is used for the purpose of
preparing the following pigments and dye materials:--

1. Picric acid. 2. Phenyl brown. 3. Grenat soluble. 4. Coralline. 5.
Azuline. These will be found described under TAR COLOURS.

=CAR'BON.= C. _Syn._ CARBO'NIUM, CAR'BO, L.; CHARBON, Fr.; KOHLENSTOFF,
Ger. An elementary or simple non-metallic solid body, very widely diffused
through nature. Its purest and rarest form is that of the diamond. Nearly
pure, it occurs very abundantly in the forms of graphite and anthracite.
In combination with oxygen, as carbonic acid, it exists in the atmosphere
and in the waters of most springs, also in limestone, marble, chalk, and
dolomite. Combined with hydrogen, it enters largely into coal, peat, and
lignite. It is an essential constituent of organic matter, and hence it
has been termed the "organic element." Charcoal, lamp-black, and coke, are
more or less pure forms of carbon. By strongly igniting lamp-black in a
covered crucible the element is obtained sufficiently pure for most
chemical purposes.

It is best obtained purest by burning a jet of pure olefiant gas in an
atmosphere of pure chloride, collecting the amorphous carbon deposited,
and igniting in vacuo at a red heat.

Forms several chlorides, sulphides, &c., of which the following are the
chief:--

=Carbon, Protochloride of.= Obtained from the sesquichloride by subliming
it repeatedly through a tube filled with fragments of glass heated to
redness. A transparent colourless liquid, with aromatic odour.

=Carbon, Sesquichloride of.= C_{2}Cl_{6}. Obtained by exposing Dutch
liquid with chlorine, in a glass vessel, to the direct rays of the sun,
taking care to renew the chlorine as long as it is absorbed. The liquid is
ultimately converted into the sesquichloride of carbon, which is a white
crystalline, volatile substance.

=Carbon, Tetrachloride of.= _Syn._ BICHLORIDE OF CARBON. It may be
obtained by passing chlorine (desiccated by being made to pass through a
tube wetted with strong sulphuric acid), through a bottle containing
bisulphide of carbon, and afterwards through a porcelain tube, wrapped in
sheet copper, and filled with fragments of broken porcelain, maintained at
a red heat, by a charcoal or gas furnace, and condensing the product in a
bottle surrounded by ice. A mixture of tetrachloride of carbon and
chloride of sulphur is thus obtained. By shaking this mixture with
solution of potash, the chloride of sulphur is decomposed and dissolved,
whilst the tetrachloride of carbon separates, and falls to the bottom. The
upper layer having been poured off, the tetrachloride may be purified by
distillation.

Tetrachloride of carbon is a colourless liquid, having a sp. gr. 1.6, and
boiling at 172 deg. F. It is insoluble in water, but dissolves in alcohol and
ether. Its vapour, diluted with air, is employed as an anaesthetic.

=Carbon, Oxychloride of.= COCl_{2}. _Syn._ CHLO'ROCARBON'IC ACID, PHOSGENE
GAS, CHLORIDE OF CARBONYL. Equal measures of carbonic oxide and chlorine
are exposed to the direct rays of the sun; they combine, and become
condensed to half their volume. It is a colourless, suffocating gas, which
is immediately decomposed by water into carbonic and hydrochloric acids.

=Carbon, Sulphide of.= CS_{2}. _Syn._ BISULPHIDE OF CARBON, CARBON
DISULPHIDE, SULPHURET OF CARBON. Bisulphide of iron (iron pyrites), 5
parts, and fresh dry charcoal, 1 part, are heated together in a stoneware
retort, furnished with a glass tube, having the end bent, and passing
nearly to the bottom of a bottle or receiver filled with pounded ice. The
bisulphide of carbon collects at the bottom of the receiver, and is then
purified from adhering moisture and sulphur by distilling it, at a low
temperature, from fused chloride of calcium.

By passing the vapour of sulphur over fragments of charcoal, heated to
bright redness in a porcelain tube, and collecting the product as before.

Sulphide of carbon is best manufactured by means of Peroncele's apparatus
figured in the accompanying drawing.

[Illustration]

A is a fire-clay gas retort supported on the fire-clay block B; E and E
are openings, one being that of a porcelain tube firmly cemented into the
cover of A, serving for the introduction of sulphur; the other opening is
for the introduction of pieces of coke, with which before the operation
commences the retort is filled. The vapours of the sulphide of carbon pass
through the tubes H and I into the vessel J, wherein part of the sulphide
is condensed, and flows through K into the flask L, filled with water,
thence through M into O, finally being run off by the tap N. Any vapours
not condensed in J pass through P P into the worm T, the condensed
sulphide being collected in S. The crude sulphide is rectified by
redistillation over zinc or perchloride of mercury by means of a steam or
water bath. If the perchloride is employed it should remain in contact
with the crude sulphide for at least 24 hours before redistillation.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ A colourless, pungent, fetid liquid, having the sp. gr.
1.27. It is exceedingly volatile, boiling at 118.5 deg. Fahr., and has never
been frozen. It is highly inflammable, burning with a pale-blue flame, and
giving off sulphurous and carbonic-acid gases. It freely dissolves sulphur
and phosphorus, and by spontaneous evaporation deposits the first in
beautiful crystals. The solution of phosphorus is much used in
electrotyping objects, which are coated with a conducting film by its
means. Its refractive power is remarkably high, and on this account it is
employed to fill hollow lenses for spectroscopes and other optical
instruments. It produces intense cold by its evaporation. A spirit
thermometer, having its bulb covered with cotton, if dipped into this
fluid and suspended in the air, rapidly sinks from 60 deg. to 0 deg., and if put
into the receiver of an air-pump it will fall to -81 deg. Fahr. A mixture of
sulphide of carbon and solid carbonic anhydride forms almost the most
powerful frigorific agent known. Sulphide of carbon is now prepared on the
large scale, and extensively employed as a solvent.

It is thus used for extracting from the cake of fruits and seeds the oil
remaining in them after they have been submitted to pressure. The sulphide
is subsequently separated from the oil by distillation. In Algiers it is
used for obtaining the essential oils contained in the rose, jessamine,
and lavender. It is also employed for dissolving the fat from bones, and
from the crude wool. Furthermore, it is an excellent solvent for
caoutchouc, as well as for the ordinary resins.

Its vapour is employed by agriculturists to kill the larvae infesting
grain. Latterly, it has been employed as a disinfectant.

_a._ _Carbon Bisulphide as an Antiseptic._ By P. Zoeller ('Deut. Chem. Ges.
Berl.,' ix, 1080-1084). The author has continued his experiments on this
subject with the object of determining (1) the minimum quantity of
bisulphide required, and (2) whether articles of food preserved by means
of it are fit for human consumption.

As regards the first point, he found that meat of all kinds, and even
entire animals, in quantities up to 20 kilograms, kept perfectly well for
several weeks in vessels of sheet zinc, into which 5 grams of carbon
bisulphide had been introduced, the meat being either simply hung on hooks
or wrapped in cloths and laid on perforated shelves in the vessels.
Probably a smaller quantity of the bisulphide would suffice. Meat also
kept well for 62 days in a vessel in which carbon bisulphide was liberated
by introducing potassium xanthate and dilute sulphuric acid. Freshly baked
bread, vegetables, and fruits of all kinds (asparagus, radishes, young
beans, cucumbers, strawberries, raspberries, currants, cherries, peaches,
apricots, lemons, &c.), and juices of fruits kept perfectly well in glass
vessels, into which carbon bisulphide has been introduced, in the
proportion of 5-10 drops for each litre of capacity.

Bread, vegetables, and fruit thus preserved are fit to eat after simple
exposure to the air, and cannot be distinguished by taste or other
qualities (except a slight loss of colour in some fruits) from fresh
bread, &c. Meat retains even after exposure to air the disagreeable odour
of carbon bisulphide. But besides this odour, which disappears on boiling
or roasting, the meat has a slight smell of the volatile fatty acids and
the taste of game. To most people, however, this taste is not unpleasant.
The presence of fatty acids is to be attributed to decomposition taking
place in the interior of the meat, and not preventable by the carbon
bisulphide, the function of which is merely to kill germs present in the
air or on the surface of substances submitted to its influence.

_b._ By Hugo Schiff ('Deut. Chem. Ges. Ber.,' ix, 828). Cocoons of
silkworms which had been killed by exposure to the vapours of carbon
disulphide underwent no change during six months' keeping in flasks in the
laboratory. The bodies of some pigs which had been used for physiological
experiments were put into a stoppered vessel with a few c. c. of carbon
disulphide in 1869, and have been perfectly preserved without
decomposition. The same result was obtained with a lizard 35-45
centimetres long, which had been suffocated accidentally in 1869, and was
bottled whole. In this case a small quantity of liquid collected at the
bottom of the vessel, and the green hue of the skin became a dirty greyish
green, but not the slightest putrefaction occurred. Similar results were
obtained with the intestines of poultry immersed in water in 1872 with a
little carbon disulphide, in a bottle with a greased stopper; with a lump
of beef weighing 200 grams; and with the body of a finch killed with
paraconine. The beef yielded a normal flesh fluid, and was eaten by a dog
without hesitation even after several months.

_Purification._--1. It is stated that the odour of sulphide of carbon can
be readily removed by allowing it to stand over mercury or corrosive
sublimate for some time, and then redistilling.

2. The following method by Kern is stated by him to be the best for
purifying sulphide of carbon:--The impure product is well mixed in a tall
glass vessel with some lead nitrate, and with a small quantity of metallic
lead. When the salt turns dark the liquid is poured into another vessel
with a fresh quantity of the lead salt; and so on until the salt remains
nearly white while mixed with the liquor. The sulphide of carbon is then
placed in a retort, and distilled over into a well-cooled receiver.

3. M. Yvon proposes a process which consists in adding copper turnings to
the sulphide; no slaking is necessary. The sulphide soon becomes nearly
colourless, and loses its usually unpleasant odour. Miller says reduced
copper produces the same result.

Carbon sulphide is employed therapeutically in doses of 2 drops, gradually
increased to 5, as a sudorific in rheumatism. It is also dropped (40 to 50
drops) on the part, to promote the reduction of strangulated hernia.
Externally, it is employed in liniments for rheumatic pains.

=CAR'BONATE=, a salt in which the hydrogen of (hypothetical) carbonic acid
(H_{2}CO_{3}) is replaced by a metal or other basic radical.

_Prep., &c._ The processes by which the commercial carbonates and many
others are prepared are described under the respective bases. Most of the
earthy carbonates are found abundantly in nature. In general the salts of
this class may be formed by adding an alkaline carbonate to a salt of the
metal in solution by double decomposition.

_Prop._ The carbonates of the alkalies are soluble in water; those of the
other bases are for the most part insoluble, except the water is highly
charged with carbonic acid. From most of them carbonic anhydride or
anhydrous carbonic acid can be easily expelled by heat.

_Tests._ The carbonates are easily distinguished by the following
reactions:--They dissolve with effervescence in hydrochloric acid and in
most other acids; in some cases a gentle heat is required to promote the
disengagement of the gas.--The gas evolved in the last, passed into lime
water and baryta water, occasions white precipitates, which redissolve in
acids with effervescence, and after the solution has been boiled are not
reprecipitated by liquor of ammonia.--Chloride of calcium and chloride of
barium give white precipitates in solutions of the neutral alkaline
carbonates, but in solutions of the alkaline bicarbonates only after
ebullition; and the precipitates are readily soluble with effervescence in
acetic acid.

_Estim._ The quantity of the metal in an alkaline or earthy carbonate may
be easily determined by the ordinary volumetric methods of alkalimetry
(which _see_), and the quantity of carbonic acid, by the method of
Fresenius and Will (see ALKALIMETRY). The apparatus figured on next page,
or preferably that shown in the article on ALKALIMETRY, may be used
instead of the more complicated contrivance of the German chemists.

A weighed sample of the carbonate to be examined is placed in the flask
_a_ along with a little water, and the small tube, _b_, filled with either
sulphuric or hydrochloric acid, is carefully introduced. The cork, with
its chloride of calcium tube, _d_, is then fitted to the flask, and the
whole apparatus very accurately weighed.

On inclining the apparatus the acid escapes over the side of the small
tube, and mixing with the liquor in the flask, expels the carbonic
acid of the carbonate, which is then dried by passing over the chloride of
calcium. After effervescence has ceased heat should be applied to the
bottom of the flask, until it be filled with steam, to expel the carbonic
gas it contains. The loss of weight gives the weight of the carbonic acid
gas that was contained in the sample. The quantity of carbonic acid in the
carbonates of the metals that do not contain water may be determined by
heating them to redness in a platina crucible.

[Illustration: _a_, Flask containing the sample of carbonate for
examination, stopped by a closely fitting cork, through which passes the
bent tube _c_.

_b_, A small tube, sufficiently long to maintain a slanting position
without falling, filled with sulphuric or hydrochloric acid.

_c_, A bent tube, connecting the flask with _d_.

_d_, Horizontal tube, filled with small fragments of fused or dried
chloride of calcium, with a fine orifice at the extremity _e_.]

=CARBONIC ACID.= H_{2}CO_{3}. True carbonic acid has not yet been obtained
in any satisfactory condition, although the solution of carbonic anhydride
(often called carbonic acid), or anhydrous carbonic acid, is generally
regarded as such. It forms with bases an important series of salts, called
the carbonates, by double decomposition.

=CARBONIC ANHYDRIDE.= CO_{2}. _Syn._ CARBONIC ACID, CARBON DIOXIDE, FIXED
AIR, CHOKE DAMP; ACIDE CARBONIQUE, Fr.; KOHLEN SAeURE, Ger. A compound
formed by the chemical union of carbon and oxygen.

_Hist._ Van Helmont recognised carbonic acid as a peculiar gas. Dr Black,
in 1757, proved that it was a constituent of limestone, and gave it the
name of fixed air; he also showed that the causticity of alkalies depended
on its absence. Bergmann first described it as an acid, applying to it the
term aerial acid. Lavoisier, in 1776, established its true nature, and
gave it the name it now bears. Faraday, in 1823, by pressure at an
extremely low temperature, reduced carbonic acid to a liquid, and a few
years later Thiloria and Brunel obtained it in the solid form.

_Nat. Hist._ Carbonic acid is a constituent of the atmosphere, its
presence being essential to the existence of vegetable life on the globe.
It issues from the earth in many situations, as the Grotto del Cane in
Italy, the Valley of Poison in Java, and near the Lake of Laach in
Germany. It gives to many mineral springs their sparkling brilliancy, and
is held in solution by all natural waters. Combined with the bases, lime
and magnesia especially, it exists in large quantities in the crust of the
earth. It is the chief product of combustion, and one of the products of
fermentation. It is always being exhaled by animals in the process of
respiration, and in smaller quantities by plants at night or in the shade.
It forms the terrible "choke-damp" or "after-damp" of the coal mines. It
is the gas disengaged during the effervescence of soda water and other
aerated drinks, and the cause of the freshness of newly-drawn beer.

_Prep._ Hydrochloric acid, 1 part, diluted with water, 4 or 5 parts, is
poured upon fragments of white marble, previously placed in a suitable
generating apparatus.[237]

[Footnote 237: A large flask, provided with a bent glass tube for
conveying the gas, and a tube-funnel for introducing the acid, is the most
convenient form of apparatus. A tubulated retort may be used, but the
generating flask or bottle is to be preferred.]

Carbonic acid is rapidly evolved, and may be collected, with some loss,
over water in the pneumatic trough. If required dry, the gas must be
passed over fragments of fused chloride of calcium, placed in a large
tube, or through a small quantity of concentrated sulphuric acid, and
collected by displacement or over mercury.

From oil of vitriol, 1 part; water, 6 parts; and chalk or whiting, 1-1/4
part; mixed in a suitable vessel, applying agitation.

_Prop._ Under ordinary conditions carbonic acid is a colourless,
non-inflammable, irrespirable gas, possessing a slightly pungent odour,
and an acidulous taste. Water absorbs its own volume of this gas, and by
pressure may be made to take up enormous quantities, forming carbonated or
aerated water. Its sp. gr. is 1.520; hence it may be poured from one
vessel to another like water. By a pressure of thirty atmospheres at 32 deg.
Fahr. it is liquefied, the pressure required decreasing as the temperature
gets lower. At -94 deg. Fahr. it solidifies into a vitreous transparent mass.

Carbonic acid, even when greatly diluted with air, cannot be inhaled
without insensibility following. An atmosphere containing more than its
natural quantity of gas (1 part in 2500 parts by measure) acts upon the
system as a narcotic poison; hence the danger of over-crowded rooms. It is
a non-supporter of combustion, at once extinguishing a lighted candle,
gas-jet, or even a piece of burning phosphorus, when these are placed in a
jar of the gas.

_Tests._ It feebly reddens litmus paper, extinguishes the flame of a
burning taper, and forms a white precipitate in aqueous solutions of lime
and baryta, which is soluble in acetic acid. By the last test a very small
quantity of this gas may be easily detected in the atmosphere of rooms,
&c. A lighted candle is generally used to test an atmosphere suspected to
contain carbonic acid: but it is found that air that will support
combustion will contain sufficient of this gas to cause insensibility.

_Ant., &c._ The patient should be immediately removed into the open air,
and placed on his back with the head slightly raised. Cold water should be
dashed over the body, hot water or mustard poultices applied to the feet,
and ammonia (carefully) to the nostrils. Brandy-and-water and other
stimulants may be administered. Continued friction on the surface of the
body is also very useful. If the patient has ceased to breathe artificial
respiration should be attempted. This may be done by gently pressing down
the ribs, and forcing up the diaphragm, and then suddenly withdrawing the
pressure. The inhalation of air, mixed with very little chlorine gas, has
also been recommended. Wells, cellars, or other underground apartments,
containing carbonic acid in poisonous quantities, may be freed from this
gas by pumping it out in the same way as water, observing to allow the
suction hose to fully reach the floor or bottom of the place. Fresh slaked
lime or milk of lime, copiously thrown in, will have a like effect, by
absorbing the gas. Free ventilation, whenever it can be established, is,
however, not only the cheapest, but the most efficient remedy. See
ASPHYXIA.

=CARBON'IC OXIDE.= CO. _Syn._ PROTOXIDE OF CARBON, CARBON MONOXIDE,
GA'SEOUS OXIDE OF CARBON; OXY'DUM CARBON'ICUM, L. A gaseous compound of
carbon and oxygen, containing less oxygen than is contained in carbonic
acid.

_Prep._ 1. From carbonic acid gas passed over fragments of charcoal,
heated to redness in a tube of porcelain or iron.

2. From crystallised oxalic acid, gently heated with 5 or 6 times its
weight of strong sulphuric acid in a glass retort.

3. From ferrocyanide of potassium in fine powder, and 8 or 10 times its
weight of concentrated sulphuric acid, heated together in a glass retort.

_Obs._ All the processes except the last give a mixture of carbonic acid
and oxide. It is therefore necessary to pass the gas through a caustic
alkaline solution or milk of lime to deprive it of carbonic acid. It may
then be passed over dried chloride of calcium, to deprive it of moisture.
It may be collected either over mercury or water, as the latter absorbs
very little of this gas.

_Prop._ Carbonic oxide is colourless, inodorous, neutral, inflammable, and
irrespirable. It is extremely poisonous, 1% mixed with air being
sufficient to cause dangerous drowsiness. The deaths produced by the
combustion of charcoal in close rooms are now attributed to this gas. The
antidotes, &c., are the same as for poisoning from inhaling carbonic acid.

=CAR'BUNCLE.= A larger sized and dangerous form of boil, attended by
extensive sloughing. The treatment consists in lancing, poulticing, and
the adoption of a generous diet, with wine and stimulants. The safer plan,
however, is to seek the advice of a medical man.

=CAR'BURETTED HY'DROGEN.= See HYDROGEN.

=CARD'AMOM.= _Syn._ CARD'AMUM; CARDAMO'MUM, B. P. The seed or fruit of the
_Elettaria Cardamomum_ forms the officinal cardamom. It is warm, pungent,
carminative, and stomachic, and is largely used as a condiment in the
East, and in Europe as an adjuvant in other medicines. Several kinds of
cardamoms used medicinally and as spices are produced by the genus
_Amomum_, belonging to the natural order Zingiberaceae, the Ginger family.

=CARD'BOARD.= Cardboard, or sized pasteboard, is made of two to fifteen
sheets of sized paper, pressed and stained. There are varieties of
cardboard known as Bristol-board, London-board, the former being largely
used for water-colour drawings, mounting-board, ornamental board, &c.

=CAR'MINATIVES.= Medicines that allay flatulency and spasmodic pains.
Among the principal carminatives are ANISEED, CARAWAY SEED, CARDAMOMS,
CASSIA, CINNAMON, GINGER, PEPPERMINT, and the PEPPERS. To these may be
added ARDENT SPIRITS, and most of the AROMATIC ESSENCES and TINCTURES. See
MIXTURES, PATENT MEDICINES, &c.

=CAR'MINE.= _Syn._ CARMINE RED, VEGETABLE SCARLET; CARMI'NUM, L. A
beautiful red pigment prepared from the cochineal insect.

_Prep._ The preparation of carmine is little understood, but success in
its manufacture depends less on any mystery connected with the process
than on the employment of the purest water and the best materials, and the
exercise of moderate care, dexterity, and patience. The following forms
will produce carmine of the richest hues down to ordinary and common,
according to the skill possessed by the manipulator.

1. (_Madame Cenette's process._) Cochineal (in powder), 2 lbs., is boiled
in pure river water, 15 galls., for 2 hours, when refined saltpetre
(bruised), 3 oz., is added to the decoction, and the whole boiled for 3 or
4 minutes longer; salt of sorrel, 4 oz., is next added, and the boiling
again renewed for 10 or 12 minutes; the heat is now removed, and the
liquid allowed to settle for about 4 hours, after which time it is
decanted with a syphon into shallow plate-like vessels, and set aside for
three weeks. At the end of this time the film of mould which has formed on
the surface is dexterously and carefully removed, without breaking it or
disturbing the liquid beneath it. The remaining fluid is next very
carefully removed with a syphon, and the adhering moisture, as far as
possible, drained off, or sucked up with a pipette. The residuum, which is
the carmine, is dried in the shade, and possesses extraordinary lustre
and beauty.

2. (Alxon or _Langlois' process_.) Powdered cochineal, 1 lb., is boiled in
river water, 4 galls., for 10 minutes, when carbonate of soda, 3/4 oz.,
dissolved in water, 1 pint, is added, and the whole again boiled for 1/2
hour longer; when the decoction is cold, alum (in fine powder), 3/4 oz.,
is thrown in, and the liquid agitated rapidly until it is entirely
dissolved; after 20 minutes' repose it is decanted into another vessel,
and clarified by heating it with the whites of 2 eggs; the perfectly clear
liquid is then allowed to repose for 40 minutes or longer, when it is
decanted, and the carmine which it has deposited is collected, drained on
a filter, and dried on shallow plates covered with silver paper. The
product by either of the above processes varies from 9-1/2 to 10% on the
weight of the cochineal employed in them.

3. (_China_ or _Spirit process._) Cochineal, 1 lb., is boiled for 15
minutes, in water, 3 galls., powdered alum, 1 dr., is next added, and the
whole again boiled for 5 or 6 minutes; when the liquid has become cold,
the clear portion is decanted, and again heated, the solution of tin
(spirits of tin) cautiously dropped in until all the carmine is
precipitated; it is collected, drained, and dried, as before. _Prod._
1-1/2 oz.

3. (_French process._) From cochineal (in powder), 1 lb., boiled for 15
minutes, in water, 3 galls.; cream of tartar (in powder), 1 oz., is then
added, the boiling further continued for 10 minutes, and powdered alum
1-1/2 oz., thrown in; after another 2 minutes' boil the heat is withdrawn,
and in 5 or 6 minutes more the clear portion is decanted into porcelain
vessels, which are set aside until the carmine falls down.

4. (_German process._) Powdered cochineal, 1 lb., water, 4 galls.; boil 15
minutes, add powdered alum, 1 oz.; boil 3 minutes longer, remove the heat,
allow the liquor to settle for 5 minutes, pour off the clear portion into
porcelain or earthenware vessels, and set them aside for 3 or 4 days. The
carmine is found deposited on the bottom of the vessel, and must be now
carefully drained and dried, as before. The decanted liquor yields more
carmine by standing in fresh vessels. _Product._ About 1-1/2 oz.; besides
1/2 oz., or more, of an inferior quality obtained as a second deposit.

5. (_English process._) From cochineal, 1 lb., and carbonate of potash,
1/2 oz., boiled in water, 7 galls., for 15 minutes; the vessel is then
removed from the fire, and powdered alum, 1 oz., added; the liquor is then
well agitated and allowed to settle for about 15 minutes longer; the clear
liquid is next decanted into a clean copper, and isinglass, 1/2 oz.,
dissolved in water, 1 pint (and strained), added; as soon as a coagulum
forms upon the surface, the heat is removed, and the liquid is strongly
agitated with a bone or silver spatula, after which it is allowed to
repose for 20 or 30 minutes. The deposited carmine must be drained and
dried, as before.

_Obs._ The best black cochineal is generally used for the preparation of
carmine. For ordinary qualities spirits of tin (bichloride) is added to
the decoction as a precipitant, and the liquid being put into suitable
vessels (wash-hand basins answer very well), a deposit of carmine slowly
takes place. Neither exposure to solar light nor artificial heat is
advisable during the drying, but the latter must nevertheless be effected
with all possible expedition. Hence the finer shades of carmine can only
be successfully made during certain states of weather; as in very hot
weather the liquid rapidly sours or ferments, and the deposit is more or
less dissolved; whilst in dull, damp weather it is difficult to dry the
precipitate sufficiently, which is then apt to become mouldy, and to lose
colour. The researches of Pelletier and Caventou tend to show that the
solution of tin used as a precipitant should be at the maximum of
oxidation or chlorination, to produce the richest shades of carmine. That
first deposited is, in all cases, the most beautiful, and the quality
gradually deteriorates as the process proceeds. 6 or 7 dr. only of carmine
of the very finest quality can hence be obtained from 1 lb. of cochineal.

_Prop., &c._ Pure carmine is a very light, lustrous, scarlet powder,
entirely soluble in ammonia, a test by which its purity is readily
determined. Mr Warren De la Rue says the pure colouring principle of
cochineal is carminic acid. By digesting ammonia on carmine until all the
colour is taken up, filtering and adding acetic acid and alcohol, till the
whole is precipitated; and lastly, carefully washing the precipitate with
spirit of wine, at proof, and drying in the shade, carmine of the richest
and most lustrous hue may be obtained even from samples of inferior
quality.

_Uses, &c._ As a pigment in velvet and miniature painting, and for tinting
artificial flowers, and as rouge for the complexion. The powdered
cochineal (carmine grounds), from which the coloured liquor (liquid rouge,
carmine liquor) has been decanted, is used by the paper stainers, and both
are used in the preparation of carminated lake.

=Carmine, Blue.= See INDIGO.

=Carmine, Li'quid.= _Syn._ FLUID CARMINE, LIQUID ROUGE, CARMINE INK.
_Prep._ 1. A solution of carmine in ammonia water, or spirits of
hartshorn. Very rich and beautiful.

2. The residual liquor of the process of making carmine. Inferior. The
first is used in velvet and miniature painting, and for tinting artificial
flowers; the second for common purposes, as a stain or wash.

=Carmine, Pur'ple.= See MUREXIDE.

=CARMIN'IC ACID.= C_{14}H_{14}O_{8}. _Prep._ (W. De la Rue.) The powdered
insect, after treatment with ether to remove the fat, is digested in
water. The decoction of cochineal is precipitated by adding a solution of
acetate of lead, and the impure carminate of lead thus formed, after
being washed with water, is suspended in water, and decomposed by a stream
of sulphuretted hydrogen; the whole process is repeated with the decanted
solution so obtained; the second solution is then evaporated to dryness
(in vacuo over sulphuric acid), dissolved in absolute alcohol, digested on
some washed crude carminate of lead (to separate a little phosphoric
acid), and, lastly, mixed with ether (to precipitate some nitrogenised
matter); the residuum obtained by careful evaporation (in vacuo) is pure
carminic acid.

_Prop., &c._ A purple-brown mass, yielding a rich-red powder; it is freely
soluble in water and alcohol; slightly soluble in ether; and without
decomposition in oil of vitriol; it is feebly acid; its salts are termed
carminates, only two or three of which have been examined. According to Mr
De la Rue, this acid constitutes the pure colouring matter of cochineal.

=CARNAUBA ROOT.= The root of the _corypha cerifera_, a wax-bearing palm,
growing on the shores of the Rio Francisco, in Brazil. Dr C. Symes (see
'Pharmaceutical Journal,' 3rd series, v, 661) says:--Two bales of this
root have been imported into Liverpool, with the following remarks in
Portuguese:--"This root is recognised by the professor as an excellent
purifying agent, and has been successfully applied in the cure of various
diseases arising from impurity of the blood. We are indeed astonished that
it is not more widely known, as its therapeutic qualities, which are
worthy of full credence, rival those of sarsaparilla. The carnauba root
likewise has a diuretic power, and possesses unusual efficacy, in the cure
of acute and chronic blennorrh[oe]as. It is, furthermore, very cooling,
and displays a vigorous action in purifying the blood." Mr Cleaver, who
submitted the root to analysis, found it to contain very minute quantities
of an alkaloid, an acrid resinous body, a red colouring matter, a variety
of tannic acid, and a small portion of volatile oil.

=CAROBA.= The leaves of a tree belonging to the family _Bignoniaceae_,
employed in Brazil as a diaphoretic, diuretic, and alterative tonic. Dr
Alt states that he has used them extensively, and with much success, in
old-standing cases of syphilitic eruptions, and after a course of
mercurial treatment. They are usually administered either in the form of
powder or decoction.

=CAROT'INE.= C_{18}H_{24}O. A crystalline, copper-red substance, obtained
from the root of the _Daucus carota_ (_sativa_) or garden carrot. It is
tasteless; odourless; neutral; fusible; inflammable; insoluble in ether
and water; slightly soluble in alcohol; and very soluble in the mixed and
volatile oils.

=CAR'PETS.= Consideration of cleanliness and economy demand a few words on
carpets and hearth-rugs. We are assured by an experienced person that
before proceeding to sweep a carpet, a few handfuls of waste tea-leaves
should be sprinkled over it (say some five or six minutes before). A stiff
hair broom or hair brush only should be employed unless the carpet be very
dirty, when a whisk or carpet-broom may be used first, followed by another
made of hair, to take off the loose dust. The frequent use of a stiff
"carpet-broom" (those made of cane or birch are here alluded to) soon
wears off the beauty of the best carpet. An ordinary clothes-brush, or a
clean one, resembling the dirt brush used for shoes, is best adapted for
superior carpets. When carpets are very dirty they should be cleaned by
shaking and beating. "If you must have a carpet, take it up two or three
times a year, instead of once. A dirty carpet literally infects the room:
if you consider the enormous quantity of organic matter from the feet of
people coming in, which must saturate it this is by no means surprising."
(Miss Nightingale.) In laying down carpets it is very advisable, at first,
to cover the floor beneath them with large sheets of thick paper, so as to
prevent dust from rising between the boards. Old drugget, sacking,
matting, or any similar substance, will effect the same purpose, and will,
moreover, materially increase the durability of the carpet, by preserving
it from the contact of the hard floor.

BRUSSELS CARPETS may be cleaned with ox-gall (1 pint to a pailful of
water), and a scrubbing-brush, and floor-cloth; afterwards rinsing them in
fresh water applied in the same way. They should be previously perfectly
freed from dust by beating, and should be nailed down before commencing
the above operations. Great care should be taken to rub them as dry as
possible with a clean dry floor-cloth. A small portion only should be done
at a time, and a dry windy day selected for the purpose. A carpet treated
in this manner will be greatly refreshed in colour, particularly the
greens.

KIDDERMINSTER CARPETS will scarcely bear the above treatment without
becoming so soft as to get speedily dirty again. This may in some measure
be prevented by brushing them over with a hot weak solution of size in
water, to which a little alum has been added. Curd soap, dissolved in hot
water, may be used instead of ox-gall, but it is more likely to injure the
colours if produced by false dyes. When there are spots of grease on the
carpeting they may be covered with curd soap, dissolved in boiling water,
and rubbed with a brush until the stains are removed, when they must be
cleaned with warm water as before. The addition of a little gall to the
soap renders it more efficacious. Some persons employ a mixture of soap,
fuller's earth, and turpentine, for the same purpose. Benzol rapidly
removes the grease stains, and may be advantageously substituted for
preparations of soap.

=CAR'RAGEEN.= _Syn._ I''RISH MOSS; CHONDRUS, L. The _Chondrus crispus_ of
botanists, a well-known alga or seaweed. It contains a large proportion of
a peculiar jelly, called carrageen'in or pect'in. This may be purified by
agitation with dilute alcohol and filtration. The jelly forms an agreeable
article of diet. It is used to a limited extent for thickening colours in
calico printing. In _medicine_, carrageen is used in the form of a jelly
and decoction as a demulcent, and is often prescribed in pulmonary
complaints. See FIXATURE, ALGAE, PASTE, SYRUP.

=CAR'ROT.= _Syn._ CARO'TA, L. The seed is carminative and diuretic; the
expressed juice of the root is anthelmintic. Scraped raw carrot is
sometimes employed as a stimulant application to sore nipples; the boiled
root as a poultice to sores and tumours. As an article of food, unless
young and well dressed, carrots are rather indigestible. Carrots can be
kept for many months if the tops are cut out, and they are then placed in
damp sand.

_Analysis of Carrots._

  Water                         87.30
  Albumenoids                    0.66
  Cellular tissue, gum, and
    non-nitrogenous substance    2.56
  Sugar                          5.54
  Fibre                          3.20
  Mineral matters                 .74

                               100.00

=CAR'THAMIN.= C_{14}H_{16}O_{7}. _Syn._ PURE ROUGE, SAF'FLOWER CARMINE,
SAFFLOWER LAKE. The red colouring matter of _Carthamus tinctorius_ or
safflower, formerly much used as a dye, particularly in the form of pink
saucers for dyeing stockings.

_Prep._ 1. Safflower, exhausted by washing it with water (or with water
acidulated with acetic acid), is dried, coarsely pulverised, and the
powder digested in a weak solution of carbonate of sodium; pieces of clean
white cotton or calico are then immersed in the solution, and acetic acid
gradually added in slight excess; the cotton is next washed, dried, and
digested in a fresh quantity of dilute solution of carbonate of sodium,
and agitation employed until the whole of the colour is again dissolved;
the new solution is filtered and slightly super-saturated with citric acid
(or acetic acid); the carthamin, which falls down in rich carmine-red
flocks, is lastly washed with cold distilled water, and dried.

2. Washed safflower (dried and powdered), any quantity; aqueous solution
of carbonate of sodium (containing 15% of carbonate), q. s. to form a
thick paste; after some hours press out the red liquor, nearly neutralise
it with acetic acid, put in cotton as before, and add acetic acid in
slight excess; the next day remove the cotton and wash it in water holding
in solution 5% of carbonate of sodium, until the colour is dissolved out,
after which precipitate with citric acid, as before.

_Prop., &c._ An amorphous, brilliant, greenish powder; nearly insoluble in
water, soluble in alcohol, forming a gorgeous purple solution, and in weak
alkaline lyes giving an equally beautiful red one.

=CAR'THAMUS.= _Syn._ SAF'FLOWER. In _botany_, a genus of composite plants,
the most important species of which is _Carthamus tinctorius_, the
safflower. The florets of this yield a beautiful pink dye (see _above_),
and are sometimes used to adulterate hay saffron. The "cake saffron" of
the shops consists entirely of safflower and mucilage. The fruits,
commonly called "seeds," yield by expression the useful oil known in India
as Koosum oil.

=CARUM (PTYCHOTIS) AJOWAN.= Ind. Ph. _Syn._ AJWAIN or OMUM PLANT.
_Habitat._ Tropical Africa? Much cultivated in India.--_Officinal part._
The fruit (_Fructus Ptychotis_, _Ajwain fruit_). Occurs in the form of
minute umbelliferous fruits, which, examined with a lens, are seen to be
covered with prominent tubercles, extremely aromatic, evolving, when
rubbed, a strong odour resembling that of common thyme. Taste somewhat
bitter, and very pungent. Its virtues reside in a volatile
oil.--_Properties._ Valuable stimulant, carminative, and
antispasmodic.--_Therapeutic uses._ In flatulence, flatulent colic, atonic
dyspepsia, and diarrh[oe]a, it is a remedy of much value.

OIL OF AJWAIN, or OMUM (_Oleum Ptychotis_). The oil obtained by
distillation from the fruit. Recently prepared, colourless, but soon
acquires a yellowish tinge. It has the odour of the fruit, and an acrid
burning taste. Sp. gr. about 0.88.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 drops on sugar or in
emulsion.

AJWAIN, OR OMUM WATER (_Aqua Ptychotis_). Take of ajwain fruit, bruised,
20 oz.; water, 2 galls. Distil a gallon.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fluid ounces. A
valuable carminative; also useful in disguising the taste of disagreeable
drugs, especially castor oil, and obviating their tendency to cause nausea
and griping.

=CARYOPH'YLLIN.= C_{10}H_{16}O. _Syn._ CLOVE CAMPHOR, CLOVE RESIN. A
crystalline substance, isomeric with ordinary camphor, which deposits from
oil of cloves in needles.

=CARYOPH'YLLUS.= See CLOVE.

=CASCARIL'LA.= _Syn._ CASCARILLAE CORTEX (B. P.), L. The bark of _Croton
eleutheria_ or the seaside balsam, a tree growing in the Bahamas and
Jamaica. It is an aromatic bitter, stomachic, and tonic--_Dose_, 10 gr. to
30 gr., in the form of powder, infusion, or tincture; in diarrh[oe]a,
dysentery, dyspepsia, low fevers, intermittents, &c.

=CASCARIL'LINE.= _Syn._ CASCARIL'LINA. _Prep._ (Duval.) Cascarilla is
exhausted with cold water by percolation, precipitated with acetate of
lead, and the filtrate treated with sulphuretted hydrogen; the filtered
liquid, after agitation with animal charcoal and filtration, is gently
evaporated to dryness. The powder is redissolved in boiling alcohol and
crystallised by very slow or by spontaneous evaporation. It has a bitter
taste and acid reaction; its aqueous solution is unaffected by the ferric
salts and tincture of galls.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 gr.; in dyspepsia, &c.

=CASE-HARD'ENING.= _Syn._ STEEL SUR'FACING. The operation of giving a
surface of steel to iron goods. Tools, fire-irons, fenders, keys, &c., are
usually case-hardened.

_Process._ 1. The goods (finished in every respect but polishing) are put
into an iron box, and covered with animal or vegetable charcoal, and
"cemented" at a red heat for a period varying with the size and
description of the articles operated on: these, when taken out, are
hardened by plunging into water, or oil, if they are of a delicate nature.

2. (Moxon.) Cow's horn or hoof is baked or thoroughly dried and
pulverised; to this is added an equal quantity of bay salt, and the whole
is made into a paste with stale chamber-lye, or white wine vinegar; the
iron is covered with this mixture, and bedded in it, in loam, or inclosed
in an iron box. In this form it is laid on the hearth of the forge to dry
and harden, then it is put into the fire, and blown till the lump has a
blood-red heat (no higher). It is hardened as before.

3. Coat the goods with a paste made of a concentrated solution of
prussiate of potash and loam; then expose them to a strong red heat, and
when it has fallen to a dull red, plunge the whole into cold water.

4. The goods, previously polished and finished, are heated to a
bright-red, and rubbed or sprinkled over with prussiate of potash. As soon
as the prussiate appears to be decomposed and dissipated the articles are
plunged into cold water.

_Obs._ The process of case-hardening has been well conducted when the
surface of the metal proves sufficiently hard to resist a file. The last
two plans are a great improvement upon the common method. By the topical
application of prussiate of potash (ferrocyanide of potassium) any part of
a piece of iron may be case-hardened without interfering with the rest.

=Case-hardening Powders.= _Syn._ CASE-HARDENING COMPOSITIONS. 1. Prussiate
of potash, dried and powdered.

2. Prussiate of potash, 3 parts; sal-ammoniac, 1 part; mix.

3. Sal-ammoniac and bone-dust, of each 2 parts; prussiate of potash, 1
part. (See _above_.)

=CA'SEIN.= _Syn._ CA'SEUM, CA'SEIN, LACTALBU'MEN, ALBUMEN OF MILK. The
nitrogenous principle of milk. Cheese made from skimmed milk and well
pressed is nearly pure casein. (Liebig.)

_Prep._ 1. The curd obtained by adding dilute sulphuric acid to milk is
well washed and dissolved in carbonate of soda. It is allowed to stand for
24 hours, to let the oil rise to the surface, and when this is properly
skimmed off, the casein is precipitated by an acid. The process is
repeated a second time, and the coagulum digested with alcohol and ether,
and dried. With all these precautions the casein still contains some
saline matter which cannot be removed.

2. Milk is coagulated by hydrochloric acid, and the curd then well washed
with dilute acid, and finally with pure water. The curd so prepared is
dissolved by digestion at 110 deg. Fahr., with a large quantity of water; the
solution, after filtration, is coagulated with carbonate of ammonia; the
coagulum is washed with water, ether, and alcohol, and finally dried.

_Prop., &c._ Coagulated casein is readily dissolved by the alkalies and
alkaline carbonates. The most remarkable property of casein is its
coagulation by certain animal membranes, as in the process of
cheese-making with rennet. See LACTARIN.

=CASKS.= The care and management of casks is an important affair in a
large establishment. It is found that they last longest when stored either
in a dry situation, or in one uniformly very moist. Continual variations
from the one to the other speedily rot them. As soon as casks are emptied
they should be bunged down quite air-tight, with as much care as if they
were full, by which means they will be preserved both sweet and sound.
Should any of the hoops become loose they should be immediately driven up
tight, which will at once prevent the liability of their being lost or
misplaced, as well as the casks fouling or becoming musty from the
admission of air. For this purpose those out of use should be occasionally
hauled over and examined.

Numerous plans are adopted for CLEANING and PURIFYING CASKS, among which
are the following:--

1. Wash them well out with oil of vitriol, diluted with an equal weight of
water.

2. Wash them first with a little chloride of lime and warm water, and then
with water soured with oil of vitriol.

3. Match them with sulphur, or with sulphur mixed with a little saltpetre.

4. Unhead them and whitewash them with fresh milk of lime, made pretty
strong. This plan is commonly followed for brewers' vats.

5. Remove the heads, and char the insides of the staves by the aid of a
fire of shavings kindled within them.

6. A simpler, safer, and more effectual method of charring them than the
last is to wash the dry casks out with strong oil of vitriol (sp. gr.
1.854). This not only purifies the surfaces of the staves, but penetrates
into all the cracks, some of which might escape the action of the fire.

7. Steam has lately been applied to the insides of casks with great
advantage. High-pressure steam is driven in at the bung-hole, at the same
time that the cask is violently agitated (a heavy chain having been
previously put into it), until all the dirt and bad smell is removed.

8. A lye of pearlash or soda, mixed with milk of lime, as well as strong
hot brine, and other similar liquors, have been adopted by some persons,
and are highly spoken of.

9. The coopers boil the staves for gin casks in a strong lye of alum
before placing them together, to prevent their colouring the spirit, but
washing with oil of vitriol is a better plan.

10. Some persons fill musty casks with water and add 3 or 4 lbs. of
coarsely powdered fresh burnt charcoal, and agitate well for a few days.

11. Wash with bisulphite of lime.

_Obs._ In all the above processes the greatest care must be taken to scald
or soak and well rinse out the casks after the treatment described. See
BREWING UTENSILS, SPOROKTON, MATCHES, &c.

=CAS'SAREEP.= The expressed juice of the sweet cassava, concentrated by
heat and flavoured with aromatics. It is used in the West Indies as a
condiment. (See _below_.)

=CAS'SAVA.= A poisonous shrub cultivated in the West Indies and in many
parts of South America for the sake of the starchy matter contained in its
roots. It belongs to the natural order Euphorbiaceae, and is known to
botanists under the names _Manihot utilissima_ (Pohl), _Janipha manihot_
(Humboldt), and _Jatropha manihot_ (Linn.), the former being that now
generally adopted. The name "bitter cassava" is commonly given to it in
the West Indies, to distinguish it from another species of the same genus,
_Manihot aipi_ (Pohl), which, from having no poisonous properties, is
named the "sweet cassava." The roots of both species yield the starch, but
those of the poisonous plant are the richer.

The roots, after being well washed and scraped, are rasped or grated, and
the pulp thus formed is subjected to strong pressure, to expel the
poisonous juice which it contains. The compressed pulp is next thoroughly
dried over the fire, being constantly stirred the whole time, by which any
remaining portion of the noxious juice is either volatilised or
decomposed. It now forms CASSAVA MEAL. When it is further prepared by
grinding, it forms FINE CASSAVA MEAL or CASSAVA FLOUR. When the compressed
pulp is baked on a hot plate, it forms CASSAVA BREAD or CASSAVA CAKES, the
flavour of which greatly resembles that of Scotch oat-cakes. See TAPIOCA.

=CAS'SIA.= In _botany_, a genus of the natural order Leguminosae, including
several important medicinal plants. The "purging cassia," _Cassia fistula_
(Linn.), produces pods containing a soft, blackish pulp. (See _below_,
also SENNA.)

=Cassia Pulp.= _Syn._ CASSIA PRAEPARA'TA, CASSIAE PULPA (B. P.), L. _Prep._
The cassia (pods or fruit), broken lengthwise, are macerated in sufficient
distilled water to cover them for six hours, constantly stirring; and the
purified pulp strained through a hair sieve, and evaporated to the
consistence of a confection in a water bath.--_Dose._ As a mild laxative,
1 to 2 dr.; as a purgative, 3/4 oz. to 1-1/2 oz.

=CAS'SOLETTES= (Scented). See PASTILLES and PERFUMERY.

=CAS'TOR.= _Syn._ CASTO''REUM, L. (B. P.) "The follicles of the prepuce of
the _Castor fiber_ or _beaver_, filled with a peculiar secretion." (Ph.
L.) "A peculiar secretion from the praeputial follicles." (Ph. E. and D.)
It is often sophisticated; a fraud readily detected by the "absence of the
membranous partition in the interior of the bags, as well as by the
altered smell and taste." (Ure.) Russian castor, which is very rare, may
be distinguished by a tincture of 1-16th part in alcohol, being of the
colour of deep sherry, while that with American castor is of the colour of
London porter. (Pereira.)--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dr. or more, in powder or made
into pills; in nervous and spasmodic affections, especially in hysteria,
epilepsy, and other like diseases of females.

=CASTOR CAKE.= The crushed and closely-pressed seeds of the _Ricinus
communis_, after the expression of the oil, are said to be sometimes
employed as a cattle food, and have the following composition:--

  Moisture                          9.95
  Organic matter                   81.07
  Phosphate of lime and magnesia    4.49
  Alkaline salts                    1.80
  Sand                              2.69

                                  100.00

This cake, even when mixed with large quantities of linseed cake, &c., is
intensely poisonous. A pupil of the Editor states, however, that in India
castor cake, after exposure to the sun, is commonly and safely used as a
food for cattle.

=CAS'TOR OIL.= See OILS.

=CAS'TORIN.= _Syn._ CASTORIN'A, CASTOREUM CAMPHOR. When castor is cut into
small pieces and boiled in about 6 times its weight of alcohol,
crystalline substance (_castorin_) is deposited by the filtered tincture
in cooling. By re-solution in alcohol it may be obtained under the form of
colourless, prismatic, acicular crystals.

_Obs._ Genuine Russian castor, although the most expensive, must be
employed in the above process, as scarcely any castorin can be obtained
from the American variety.

_Prop., &c._ Castorin has the odour of castor, and a coppery taste; it is
inflammable, and is soluble both in ether and hot alcohol.

=CASTS.= In preparing casts and moulds with gelatin, wax, fusible metal,
and similar substances, it is important to use them at the lowest
temperature compatible with fluidity; as when only a few degrees hotter
the water which adheres to the things from which the casts are taken is
converted into vapour, and produces bubbles. Fusible metal may be allowed
to cool in a teacup until just ready to set at the edges, and then poured
into the moulds. In this way beautiful casts from moulds of wood, or of
other similar substances, may be procured. When taking impressions from
gems, seals, &c., the fused alloy should be placed on paper or pasteboard,
and stirred about till it becomes pasty, from incipient cooling, at which
moment the gem, die, or seal should be suddenly stamped on it, and a very
sharp impression will then be obtained.

=CATALEP'SY.= _Syn._ TRANCE; CATALEP'SIS, CATALEP'SIA, L. A disease in
which the organs of sense and motion cease to exercise their functions,
and the heart and lungs feebly perform their offices, and in a scarcely
perceptible manner. The paroxysm generally comes on without previous
warning, and its duration varies from a few minutes to several days, and
if medical reports are to be credited, sometimes for a much longer period.
Dr Cullen seriously affirms that this disease is always counterfeited.

_Treat._ Ammoniacal stimulants applied to the nostrils, and spirituous
liquors injected into the stomach, with general friction of the body, and
free access to pure air are the best remedies. Electricity and galvanism
should also be had recourse to when the necessary apparatus is at hand.

=CAT'APLASMS.= See POULTICES.

=CAT'ARACT.= An opaque condition of the lens of the eye. It is a common
cause of blindness. It can only be cured by a surgical operation.

=CATARRH'.= _Syn._ CATARRH'US, L. The "cold in the head," or "cold on the
chest," of domestic medicine. Influenza is a severer form of this
complaint, and has been called epidemic catarrh.

The common symptoms of catarrh are a copious discharge from the eyes and
nose, a hoarseness, and generally a cough, more or less severe. The
exciting causes are sudden changes of temperature and exposure to currents
of cold air while the body is heated; hence the frequency of colds in hot
and changeable weather.

_Treat._ A light diet should be adopted, and animal food and fermented and
spirituous liquors should be particularly avoided. Some mild aperient
should be administered; and when the symptoms are severe, or fever or
headache is present, small diaphoretic doses of antimonials, accompanied
by copious draughts of diluents, as barley water, weak tea, or gruel
should be taken. This treatment, except in very bad cases, will generally
effect a cure.

In HORSES catarrh is caused by sudden changes of temperature, draughts,
and faulty ventilation. Let the animal have plenty of cool fresh air, the
body being kept warm by means of horse-cloths and bandages. If necessary,
give a mild physic-ball, or a clyster; keep it on a soft, laxative diet,
and give it an ounce of nitre daily. Should there be sore throat or
troublesome cough apply a mild blister of cantharides or mustard.

The following will be found a serviceable mixture:--Mendererus spirit,
1-1/2 oz.; sweet spirit of nitre, 2 drachms; syrup of sugar, 1/2 oz.;
camphor mixture, enough to make a 6-oz. mixture. An adult may take two
table-spoonfuls of this mixture every 3 or 4 hours. Should the cold in the
head be severe and accompanied with cough, it has been recommended to
inhale the vapour of pure washed ether by drawing it alternately into the
nostrils from a wide-mouthed bottle holding about an ounce, and clutching
it in the warm hand until about a fourth of the ounce has been
volatilised. This repeated two, three, or four times in 48 hours is said
to effect a cure within that time. Persons liable to colds are advised to
use the cold bath.

_Dr Ferrier's Remedy for a Cold in the Head._--Hydrochlorate of morphia, 2
gr.; powdered gum Arabic, 2 drachms; subnitrate of bismuth, 6 drachms.
Mix. Let a very small quantity be sniffed up the nose every five minutes
for 20 or 30 minutes.

Another remedy: Carbolic acid, 10 drops; tincture iodine; chloroform, of
each 7-1/2 grams. Place a few drops in a test-tube, and heat cautiously
over a spirit-lamp, and when it boils remove, and inhale by the nose.
Repeat after a few minutes. Two inhalations are said to be sufficient to
cure a cold in the head. ('Year-book of Pharmacy.')

=CAT'ECHIN.= _Syn._ CATECHU'IC ACID, RESINOUS TAN'NIN. When cubical gambir
or catechu, in powder, is treated with cold water, a portion remains
undissolved. This is catechin. By repeated solutions in alcohol it may be
obtained under the form of white, silky, acicular crystals.

_Prop., &c._ Catechin strikes a green colour with the salts of iron, but
does not precipitate gelatin. When dissolved in caustic potassa, and the
solution exposed to the air, it absorbs oxygen, and japonic acid is
formed. If, instead of caustic potassa, carbonate of potassa is employed,
it is converted into rutic acid.

=CAT'ECHU.= _Syn._ CAS''HEW, CUTCH, GAM'BIR; CAT'ECHU (Ph. L. E. & D.),
TER'RA JAPON'ICA, L.; CACHOU, Fr. "The extract from the wood of _Acacia
Catechu_, or from the leaf of _Uncaria Gambir_." (PALE CATECHU, Catechu
Pallidum, B. P.) Also of the "kernels of _areca catechu_; probably, too,
from other plants." (Ph. E.) The term is now applied to several extracts
similar in appearance and properties to that of _Acacia Catechu_.

There are several varieties of catechu known in commerce, of which the
principal are--

CATECHU, BOMBAY. Firm, brittle, dark brown, of a uniform texture, and a
glossy, semi-resinous, and uneven fracture, Sp. gr. 1.39. Richness in
tannin, 52%.

CATECHU, BENGAL. Rusty brown colour externally; porous, and more friable
than the preceding. Sp. gr. 1.28. Richness in tannin, 49.5%.

CATECHU, MALABAR. Resembles the last in appearance, but is more brittle
and gritty. Sp. gr. 1.40. Richness in tannin, 45.5%.

Of the above varieties the first is the one generally employed in
medicine, and which commonly passes by the name of catechu. The second
popularly passes under the name of _terra Japonica_ (Japan earth), from
the old belief that it was of mineral origin.

CATECHU, PALE, is prepared at Singapore and in the Eastern Archipelago. It
generally occurs in cubical reddish-brown pieces, porous, bitter, and
astringent in taste. Entirely soluble in boiling water; the solution, when
cold, is not rendered blue by iodine. Of 100 parts, only 60 are dissolved
by cold water, and the solution is bright. Thirty parts of isinglass
precipitate the whole of the astringent matter.--_Test._ Sp. gr. 1.39.
"The pale catechu being already in the Edin., the B. P. 1864 retained it
with the black; but the black is the one adopted by all other
pharmacop[oe]ias, and is preferred in the arts and manufactures; it is
well known to be far superior to the pale in astringency, and is always to
be had of good quality; it is therefore a matter of surprise and regret
that it has been rejected from the 'British Pharmacop[oe]ia.'" (Squire.)

_Estim._ It is often of importance to the tanner and dyer to determine the
richness of this article in tannic acid or tannin. The following are two
simple methods:--

1. Exhaust a weighed sample (in powder) with ether, and evaporate by the
heat of a hot-water bath. The product, which is the tannin, must then be
accurately weighed.

2. Dissolve the sample (in powder) in hot water, let it cool out of
contact with the air, filter, and add a solution of gelatin as long as a
precipitate falls. The precipitate, after being washed and dried at a
steam heat, contains 40% of tannin.

_Uses, &c._ Catechu is extensively employed in medicine, both internally
and externally, as an astringent. It is used to flavour British brandy,
and by the tanners as a substitute for oak bark. With it the dyer
produces, inexpensively, many of his most pleasing browns. Alum mordants
are mostly employed in dyeing with catechu. "The salts of copper with
sal-ammoniac cause it to give a BRONZE COLOUR, which is very fast; the
protochloride of tin, a BROWNISH YELLOW; the perchloride of tin, with the
addition of nitrate of copper, a DEEP-BRONZE HUE; acetate of alumina,
alone, a REDDISH BROWN, and with nitrate of copper, a REDDISH-OLIVE GREY;
nitrate of iron, a DARK-BROWN GREY. For dyeing a GOLDEN COFFEE-BROWN, it
has entirely superseded madder; 1 lb. of it being equivalent to 6 lbs. of
this root." (Ure.)--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 30 gr. in solution, in water, or
made into a bolus, or sucked as a lozenge.

=CAT'GUT.= The prepared and twisted intestines of animals. _Prep._ The
guts, taken whilst warm from the animal, are thoroughly cleaned, freed
from adherent fat, and well rinsed in pure water. They are next soaked for
about 2 days in water, after which they are laid on a table and scraped
with a copper plate, having a semicircular notch, beginning the operation
at the smaller end. In this way the mucous and peritoneal membranes are
removed. The guts are then put into fresh water, and soaked until the next
day, when they are again scraped, the larger ends cut off, and after well
washing, again steeped for a night in fresh water, and then for 2 or 3
hours in a weak lye of pearlash or potash (2 oz. to the gall.) They are
lastly washed in clean water, and passed through a polished hole in a
piece of brass to smooth and equalise their surface; after which they are
twisted, and sorted, according to the purposes for which they are
intended. For many purposes the prepared gut is dyed or sulphured, and
rubbed with olive oil. It improves by age. Red or black ink, or any of the
simple dyes or stains, are used to colour it.

_Uses, &c._ Catgut is employed in several of the arts. The strings of
harps, violins, &c., are formed of this material. Whipcord is made from
catgut, which is sewed together while soft with the filandre or scrapings,
after which it is put into a frame and twisted. Bowstrings for hatmakers
are made out of the largest intestines, 4 to 12 of which are twisted
together, until the cord is extended to 15 to 25 feet in length. It is
then rubbed perfectly smooth and free from knots, half dried, sulphured
twice, again stretched and sulphured, and lastly dried in a state of
tension. Clock-makers' cords are made of the smallest intestines in a
similar manner.

The best fine catgut is made at Venice or Rome, from the intestines of
thin, sinewy sheep. That made in England is formed from the fat sheep
killed for the shamble, and is, hence, inferior. Coarse catgut, for
turning lathes, &c., is made from the intestines of horses, cut into 4 or
5 strips, by forcing a ball furnished with projecting knives placed
cross-wise along them. These strips are next twisted, dried, and rubbed
smooth with fish skin. Gutta percha and vulcanised india rubber are now
applied to many of the purposes formerly exclusively occupied by catgut.

=CATHAR'TICS.= See PURGATIVES.

=CATHAR'TIN.= The purgative principle of senna, first noticed by Lassaigne
and Fenuelle. A strong aqueous infusion of senna leaves is evaporated to
the consistence of a syrup, out of contact with the air; this fluid
extract is then digested in alcohol or rectified spirit, and the
tincture, after filtration, is evaporated to dryness by a gentle heat.

_Prop., &c._ A reddish-coloured, uncrystallisable mass; having a peculiar
odour and a bitter, nauseous taste; freely soluble in both water and
alcohol, and strongly cathartic. Two or three grs. cause nausea, griping,
and purging. It has been proposed to employ it, combined with aromatics,
as a cathartic.

=CATH'ETERS.= Small tubes introduced into the bladder for the purpose of
drawing off its contents. They may be regarded as hollow bougies.

_Prep._ 1. A piece of smooth catgut, or steel wire, bent to the proper
shape, is coated with melted wax. When cold it is dipped repeatedly into
an ethereal solution of india rubber, until a sufficient thickness is
obtained, after which it is dried by a gentle heat, and then boiled in
water to melt out the wax, and to allow the catgut to be withdrawn. A
solution of india rubber in bisulphide of carbon is now generally employed
instead of an ethereal solution.

2. From slips of india rubber, as directed under BOUGIES.

3. A smooth tissue of silk is woven over a bent wire, and then coated with
a surface of india rubber, or elastic varnish, and finished off as before.
See BOUGIES.

=CAUDLE.= Gruel enriched by various additions.

_Prep._ 1. Thick oatmeal gruel mixed with about one half its weight of
good mild ale (made hot), and as much sugar, and mace, nutmeg, or ginger,
as will make it agreeable.

2. To the last add an egg, well beaten.

3. Sugar, 3 or 4 lumps; hot water, a table-spoonful; dissolve; add 1 egg;
beat well together; further add a glass of wine and a little nutmeg or
ginger; mix well, and stir the mixture into good gruel (hot), 3/4 pint.

_Uses, &c._ A nourishing and restorative mixture during convalescence,
much used among certain classes after accouchement. It is an excellent
domestic remedy for colds, &c., unaccompanied with fever; for which
purpose it should be taken on retiring to rest at night, preceded by a
dose of castor oil during the day.

=CAULIFLOWER.= Like the cabbage, the cauliflower forms a very nutritious
article of diet; rich in albumenoids and phosphates. The ash, as will be
seen from the subjoined analysis, contains a large amount of mineral
matter:--

        _Ash of Cauliflower._

  Potash                 34.39
  Soda                   14.79
  Magnesia                2.38
  Lime                    2.96
  Phosphoric acid        25.84
  Sulphuric acid         11.16
  Silica                  1.92
  Phosphate of iron       3.67
  Chloride of sodium      2.78

=CAUS'TIC.= _Syn._ CAUS'TICUM, ESCHAROT'I-CUM, L. A substance that
corrodes or destroys the texture of organised bodies. This action is
popularly termed "burning."

The principal caustics are nitrate of silver, caustic potassa, a mixture
of caustic potassa and quick-lime, sulphate of copper, red oxide of
mercury, verdigris, tincture of sesquichloride of iron, chloride of zinc,
chloride of antimony, nitric acid, acetic acid, and carbolic acid.

_Use._ Caustics are employed to remove excrescences, morbid growths,
granulations, &c., as corns, warts, and proud flesh; and to open issues,
abscesses, &c. The first, second, and fourth are applied by gently rubbing
them on the part previously moistened with water; the third is commonly
made into a paste, with rectified spirit or glycerin, before application;
red oxide of mercury and verdigris (in the form of powder) are often
sprinkled over foul and indolent ulcers; whilst the acids and other liquid
caustics are applied with a feather, camel-hair pencil, or glass rod. The
same applies to the liquid preparations below. In all cases care should be
taken to confine the application to the affected part.

=Caustic, Ammoni'acal.= See OINTMENTS, and CAUSTIC, GONDRET'S.

=Caustic, Antimo''nial.= _Syn._ CAUSTICUM ANTIMONIA'LE, L. Chloride of
antimony.

=Caustic, Arsen'ical.= _Syn._ CAUSTICUM ARSENICA'LE, C. ARSENIO'SUM, C. A.
COMPOS'ITUM, L. _Prep._ 1. See CAUSTIC, PLUNKET'S.

2. (Cutan. Hosp.) Calomel, 2-1/2 oz.; red sulphide of mercury, 1 dr.;
arsenious acid, 1 dr. to 2 dr.

3. (Van Mons.) Arsenious acid, 6 dr.; dragon's blood, 2 dr.; animal
charcoal, 1-1/2 dr.; cinnabar, 3 oz.

4. (Ratier.) Arsenious acid, 1 part; kino, 8 parts; cinnabar, 16 parts.
The ingredients of the last three must be separately reduced to fine
powder, and then carefully mixed. They are favourite applications on the
Continent, in cases of cancer, cancerous sores, obstinate lepra, &c. They
are either dusted over the part, or are made into a paste with mucilage or
the saliva, and applied like an ointment on a piece of rag or lint; due
caution being observed, and the effects watched. The last is much used in
the French hospitals.

=Caustic, Canquoin's.= See ZINC CAUSTIC.

=Caustic, Canthar'ides.= _Syn._ CAUSTICUM CANTHAR'IDIS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Powdered cantharides made into a paste with concentrated acetic acid.

2. (Cutan. Hosp.) Tannin, 1 oz.; cantharides (powdered), 2 oz.; strong
acetic acid, 8 oz.; digest a week, and strain. Blisters.

=Caustic, Common.= See POTASSA (HYDRATE OF), and CAUSTIC OF POTASSA WITH
LIME.

CAUSTIC, DUVILLE'S. _Prep._ 1. Aloes, 5 oz.; proof spirit, 10 oz.; oil of
vitriol, 6 oz.; mix.

2. Aloes (in powder), 2-1/2 oz.; rum, 1/4 pint; mix, and the next day add,
oil of vitriol, 1 oz. A favourite caustic in veterinary practice;
especially in foot-rot.

=Caustic, Filho's.= _Prep._ From caustic potassa, 2 parts; quick-lime (in
powder), 1 part; melt together in a ladle, mix well, and pour it into
small leaden tubes, the size of a large swan-quill. When cold, coat each
piece with melted beeswax, to exclude the air. Used as a strong caustic in
veterinary practice. It is applied like nitrate of silver.

=Caustic, Golden.= _Syn._ CAUSTIC OF CHLORIDE OF GOLD; CAUSTICUM AUR'EUM,
C. AUR''II CHLOR'IDI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Recamier.) Terchloride of gold, 6
gr.; nitro-hydrochloric acid, 1 oz.; dissolve.

2. (Legrand.) As the last, but using nitric acid. Both are recommended as
caustics in syphilitic, scrofulous, and scorbutic ulcers, cancerous
growths, &c.; applied by means of a dossil of lint.

=Caustic, Gondret's.= _Syn._ GONDRET'S AMMONI'ACAL CAUSTIC; POMMADE DE
GONDRET, Fr.; CAUSTICUM AMMONIACA'LE, L. _Prep._ 1. See OINTMENT,
AMMONIACAL.

2. (Original formula.) Almond oil, 2 dr.; suet, 4 dr.; lard, 6 dr.; melt
together in a wide-mouthed bottle, cool a little, add solution of ammonia,
12 dr.; and agitate until cold. A powerful rubefacient and
counter-irritant; used to produce an immediate revulsion. If covered with
a compress, it raises a blister in 4 or 5 minutes.

=Caustic, I'odine.= _Syn._ CAUSTICUM IODIN'II, L. _Prep._ (Lugol.) Iodine
and iodide of potassium, of each 1 part; water 2 parts; dissolve. Used in
similar cases to iodine paint, and to scrofulous growths and ulcers.

=Caustic, Lu''nar.= _Syn._ LA'PIS INFERNA'LIS, L. _Prep._ 1. Nitrate of
silver fused and formed into sticks by pouring it into moulds.

2. (E. R. Squibb.) Nitrate of silver fused with a small quantity of
chloride of iron, and formed into sticks or points. The chloride of iron
gives toughness to the caustic.

=Caustic, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ CAUSTIC OF NITRATE OF MERCURY; CAUSTICUM
AC'IDI HYDRAR''GYRI NITRA'TIS, C. H. DEUTRONITRATIS, L. From mercury, 1
part; commercial nitric acid, 2 parts; dissolve.

2. (Cutan. Hosp.) Mercury, 1 part; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.5), 2 parts.

3. (P. C.) As No. 1, but evaporating the solution to 3/4ths its weight.
These liquids are applied with a pencil or lint, in scrofulous and
syphilitic ulcers and eruptions, and in lupus, psoriasis, lepra, and other
obstinate skin diseases; but their use requires great care.

4. (With arsenic.--Cutan. Hosp.) Mercury, 1/2 oz.; nitric acid, 1/2 oz.;
arsenious acid, 1/2 dr.; as before.

=Caustic, Ni'tric.= _Syn._ SOLID'IFIED NITRIC ACID; CAUSTICUM NI'TRICUM,
L. _Prep._ (Dr Rivallie.) Concentrated nitric acid is gradually dropped on
a piece of lint, placed in a saucer or glass; as soon as the lint is
gelatinised, it is pressed into a suitable shape with a glass rod, and
applied to the part; it must be removed in 15 minutes. In cancerous
tumours, fungoid growths, &c.

=Caustic, O''piated.= _Syn._ CAUSTICUM OPIA'TUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Common
caustic (potassa with lime), 4 dr.; powdered opium, 1 dr.; soft soap, q.
s. to make a paste. Applied to fungous ulcers.

=Caustic, Plunket's.= Upright crowfoot and lesser spear-wort, of each 1
oz.; sulphur, 5 scrup.; white arsenic (in very fine powder), 1 dr.; beat
to a smooth paste, form it into balls, and dry them in the sun. In cancer;
a portion of one of the balls is reduced to powder, which is mixed up with
yelk of eggs, and applied on a piece of bladder.

=Caustic of Potassa with Lime.= _Syn._ VIENNA PASTE. Rub together equal
parts of hydrate of potash and quick-lime, and keep the powder in a
well-stoppered bottle.

=Caustic, Poten'tial.= Fused caustic potassa.

=Caustic, Recamier's.= See CAUSTIC, GOLDEN.

=Caustic, Sulphu''ric.= _Syn._ CAUSTICUM SULPHU''RICUM, C. AC'IDI
SULPHU''RICI, L. _Prep._ 1. Plaster of Paris made into a paste with oil of
vitriol.

2. Saffron, lint, or unsized paper, soaked in oil of vitriol, and
triturated to a plastic mass.

=Caustic, Zinc.= _Syn._ CAUSTIC OF CHLORIDE OF ZINC, DR CANQUOIN'S CANCER
CAUSTIC; CAUSTICUM ZINC'I, C. Z. CHLORID'I, L. _Prep._ 1. (Dr
Canquoin.)--_a._ From chloride of zinc, 1 dr.; flour, 2 dr.; made into a
stiff paste with water, q. s.

_b._ From chloride of zinc, 1 dr.; flour, 3 dr.; water, q. s.; as the
last.

_c._ From chloride of zinc, 1 dr.; flour, 4 dr.; water, q. s.; as before.

_d._ From chloride of zinc, 2 dr.; chloride of antimony, 1 dr.; flour, 5
dr.; as before.

Powdered opium may be mixed with either of the preceding to mitigate the
pain.

2. (Alex. Ure.) As above, but substituting plaster of Paris for the flour
there ordered.

_Uses, &c._ As a caustic in cancer, lupus, skin-marks (_naevi_), &c. It is
formed into small cakes or wafers not exceeding 1 or 2 lines in thickness,
one of which is applied to the part, and allowed to remain on from 6 to 12
hours, when it is removed, and the part covered with a poultice. It
produces an eschar, often exceeding a quarter of an inch in depth. The
chlorides must be in the form of powder, and well mixed with the flour
previously to adding the water. The last (No. 1, _d_) is recommended in
nodulated cancerous tumours.

=CAUS'TICS (Ve'terinary).= In _veterinary practice_, any of the substances
enumerated in the forgoing list may be employed; but nitric acid,
sulphuric acid, carbolic acid, chloride of zinc, and nitrate of silver,
are those most commonly used. See VETERINARY MEDICINES.

=CAV'IARE.= _Syn._ CAV'IAR, CAV'IALE. The salted roe of several species of
sturgeon. It is much esteemed by the Russians, as well as by some other
nations of northern Europe, and is occasionally eaten as a delicacy in
this country. It is, however, very oily, indigestible, and unwholesome.

=CAYENNE'.= See CAPSICUM, PEPPERS.

=CEDAR-WOOD (Oil of).= See OILS.

=Cedar-Wood (Tincture of).= See TINCTURES.

=CE'DRAT.= See LIQUEURS.

=CE'DRENE= and =CE'DROLA=. The oil of cedar-wood, by careful distillation,
is separable into two substances--a solid crystalline compound
(_cedrola_), and a volatile liquid hydrocarbon (_cedrene_). The first may
be converted into the other by distillation with phosphoric anhydride.

=CELLULARES.= In _botany_, a name given to cryptogams, or flowerless
plants, upon the supposition that they consist entirely of cells.

=CEL'LULOSE.= See LIGNIN.

=CEMENT'.= _Syn._ CEMENT'TUM, L. Any substance which, when applied to the
surfaces of other bodies, causes them to adhere together when placed in
contact. Those referred to below are amongst the most useful preparations
of this class. The term cement is also applied by builders and architects
to several species of mortars and like compositions employed either to
unite stones and bricks into masses, or as a protective covering against
the weather or water, or to make statues, cornices, and similar ornamental
articles.

In general the thinner the stratum of interposed cement, the stronger is
the junction of the surfaces operated on. This caution is necessary, as in
their anxiety to unite broken articles persons generally defeat themselves
by spreading the cement too thickly on the edges of the fracture; whereas
the least possible quantity should be used, so as to bring the edges as
close as possible together.

=Cement, Al'abaster.= 1. Prom plaster of Paris (in fine powder), made into
a cream with water, and at once applied.

2. Yellow resin, 2 parts; melt and stir in plaster of Paris, 1 part.

3. Yellow resin, beeswax, and plaster of Paris, equal parts.

4. Resin, 8 parts; wax, 1 part; melt and stir in plaster of Paris, 4
parts, or q. s.

5. Sulphur or shell-lac, melted with sufficient plaster of Paris or
colouring matter to give the desired shade. Used to join or mend pieces in
alabaster, white marble, Derbyshire spar, porphyry, and other like
substances; and to fill up cracks, supply chips out of corners, &c. The
last four are applied hot, the surfaces to be united having been
previously warmed. See CEMENT, WATERGLASS.

=Cement, Architect'ural.= 1. From paper (reduced to a smooth paste by
boiling it in water), sifted whiting, and good size, equal parts, boiled
to a proper consistence.

2. Paper paste, size, and plaster of Paris, equal parts; as before.

_Obs._ This is a species of papier-mache. It is used to make architectural
ornaments, busts, statues, columns, &c. It is very light, and receives a
good polish, but will not stand the weather unless it is well varnished or
painted.

=Cement, Arme'nian.= _Syn._ DIAMOND CEMENT, PERSIAN C., TURKISH C.,
JEWELLERS' C. The jewellers of Turkey, who are mostly Armenians, have a
singular method of ornamenting watch-cases, &c., with diamonds and other
precious stones, by simply gluing or cementing them on. The stone is set
in silver or gold, and the lower part of the metal made flat, or to
correspond with the part to which it is to be fixed; it is then gently
warmed, and the glue is applied, which is so very strong that the parts
thus cemented never separate. This glue will strongly unite pieces of
glass and china, and even polished steel, and may be applied to a variety
of useful purposes.

_Prep._ 1. (Original Armenian formula; Eton.) Dissolve five or six bits of
gum mastic, each the size of a large pea, in as much rectified spirit of
wine as will suffice to render it liquid; and, in another vessel, dissolve
as much isinglass, previously a little softened in water (though none of
the water must be used), in French brandy or good rum, as will make a
two-ounce phial of very strong glue, adding two small bits of gum galbanum
or ammoniacum, which must be rubbed or ground till they are dissolved.
Then mix the whole with a sufficient heat. Keep the glue in a phial
closely stopped, and when it is to be used set the phial in boiling water.

2. (Keller's ARMENIAN CEMENT.) Soak isinglass, 1/2 oz., in water, 4 oz.,
for 24 hours; evaporate in a water bath to 2 oz.; add rectified spirit, 2
oz., and strain through linen; mix this, whilst warm, with a solution
formed by dissolving gum mastic (best), 1/4 oz., in rectified spirit, 2
oz.; add of powdered gum ammoniac 1 dr., and triturate together until
perfectly incorporated, avoiding loss of the spirit by evaporation as much
as possible.

3. (Ure's DIAMOND CEMENT.) Isinglass, 1 oz.; distilled water, 6 oz.; boil
to 3 oz., and add rectified spirit, 1-1/2 oz.; boil for a minute or two,
strain, and add, while hot, first a milky emulsion of ammoniac, 1/2 oz.,
and then tincture of mastic, 5 dr.

4. Isinglass soaked in water and dissolved in spirit, 2 oz. (thick);
dissolve in this 10 gr. of very pale gum ammoniac (in tears), by rubbing
them together; then add 6 large tears of gum mastic, dissolved in the
least possible quantity of rectified spirit.

5. Isinglass dissolved in proof spirit (as _above_), 3 oz.; bottoms of
mastic varnish (thick, but clear), 1-1/2 oz.; mix well.

_Obs._ When carefully made, this cement resists moisture and dries
colourless. As usually met with, it is not only of very bad quality, but
sold at exorbitant prices. "Some persons have sold a composition under the
name of Armenian cement in England; but this composition is badly made; it
is much too thin, and the quantity of mastic is much too small." (Eton.)
Methylated spirit may be used instead of the pure spirit in the above
preparations. Mastic and mastic varnish are also used by jewellers as
cements.

=Cement, Beale's.= Chalk, 60 parts; lime and salt, of each 20 parts;
Barnsey sand, 10 parts; iron filings or dust, and blue or red clay, of
each 5 parts; grind together and calcine. Patented as a fire-proof cement.

=Cement, Boil'er.= _Prep._ Dried clay in powder, 6 lbs.; iron filings, 1
lb. Make into a paste with boiled linseed oil. Used to stop cracks and
leaks in iron boilers, stoves, &c. See CEMENT, IRON, STEAM-BOILER C.

=Cement, Bot'any Bay.= Yellow gum (Botany Bay gum) and brickdust, equal
parts, melted together. Used to cement coarse earthenware, &c.

=Cement, Bot'tle.= _Prep._ 1. Resin, 1 lb.; tallow or suet, 1/4 lb.; melt
together, and stir in the colouring matter.

2. Resin, 5 lbs.; beeswax, 1 lb.; colouring, q. s.; as last.

3. (Red.) To each pound of the above add whiting (dry), 3 oz., and light
red (burnt ochre), 4 oz.; or red bole, q. s. (all in fine powder).

4. (Black.)--_a._ To each pound of No. 1, or No. 2, add ivory black (bone
black), q. s.

_b._ From black pitch, 6 lbs.; ivory black and whiting of each, 1 lb.;
melted together. Used in the same way as common sealing-wax for bottle
corks, cask bungs, &c. See CEMENT, MAISSIAT'S.

=Cement, Brim'stone.= Melted brimstone, either alone, or mixed with resin
and brickdust. Cheap and useful.

=Cement, Bru'yere's.= Clay, 3 parts; slaked lime, 1 part; mix and expose
them to a full red heat for 3 hours, then grind to powder. Recommended as
an hydraulic cement.

=Cement, Build'ing.= _Syn._ ARTIFICIAL PUZZOLENE'. From a mixture of clay
or loam, broken pottery, flints, or siliceous sand, or broken bottle
glass, and wood ashes, exposed to a considerable heat in a furnace, until
it becomes partially vitrified; it is then ground to fine powder, sifted,
and mixed with one third its weight of quick-lime, also in fine powder,
after which it must be packed (tight) in casks to preserve it from the air
and moisture. For use it is mixed up with water and applied like Roman
cement.

=Cement, Cap.= _Prep._ 1. Resin, 5 lbs.; beeswax and dried Venetian red,
of each 1 lb.; melted together.

2. (C. G. Williams.) Equal weights of red lead and white lead. Used for
chemical and electrical purposes. For cementing glass tubes, necks of
balloons, &c., into metal mountings. No. 2 is preferable to white lead
alone, and may be depended on for temperature up to 212 deg..

=Cement, Cheese.= From grated cheese, 2 parts; quick-lime (in fine powder)
1 part; white of egg, q. s.; beat to a paste. Used for earthenware, &c.

=Cement, Chem'ical.= _Syn._ SOFT CEMENT. _Prep._ From yellow wax, 4 parts;
common turpentine, 2 parts; Venetian red (well dried), 1 part; melted
together. Used as a temporary stopping or lute for the ends or joints of
tubes, which are not exposed to much heat; as in alkalimetry, &c. See
CEMENT, ELECTRICAL.

=Cement, Chi'nese.= _Syn._ SHELL-LAC CEMENT, LIQUID GLUE. _Prep._ 1.
Finest pale orange shell-lac (broken small), 4 oz.; rectified spirit
(strongest), 3 oz.; digested together in a corked bottle in a warm place
until dissolved. Very strong and useful; almost odourless. It should have
about the consistence of treacle.

2. As before, but using rectified wood naphtha as the solvent. Inferior to
the last, but excellent for many purposes.

3. (Without spirit.) _Prep._ Borax, 1 oz.; water, 3/4 pint; shell-lac, 3
oz.; boil in a covered vessel until dissolved, then evaporate to a proper
consistence. Cheap and useful, but dries slowly.

4. Macerate for several hours, 6 parts of glue, in small pieces, in 16
parts of water; then add 1 part of hydrochloric acid, and 1-1/2 part of
sulphate of zinc; and let the mixture be kept for 10 or 12 hours at a
temperature of 68 deg. or 70 deg. C.

_Uses, &c._ Employed to mend glass, china, fancy work, jewelry, &c., for
which it is only inferior to Armenian cement. The first formula produces a
cement so strong that pieces of wood may be joined together, cut slopingly
across the grain, and will afterwards resist every attempt to break them
at the same place. In many of the islands of the Indian Ocean, in Japan,
China, and the East Indies, a similar cement is used to join pieces of
wood for bows, lances, &c. The fluid is thinly smeared over each face of
the joint, a piece of very thin gauze interposed, and the whole pressed
tightly together and maintained so until the next day. Joints so made will
even bear the continual flexure of a bow without separating. It is
admirably adapted for fishing rods. The product of the second formula is
commonly sold as LIQUID GLUE. That of the last is much used by the
druggists and oilmen, instead of gum, for fixing paper labels to tin, and
to glass when exposed to damp.

=Cement, Cop'persmiths'.= _Syn._ BLOOD CEMENT. From bullock's blood
thickened with finely powdered quick-lime. Used to secure the edges and
rivets of copper boilers, to mend leaks from joints, &c. It must be used
as soon as mixed, as it rapidly gets hard. It is cheap and durable, and is
suited for many other purposes.

=Cement, Curd.= _Prep._ 1. The curd of skimmed milk (obtained by the
addition of vinegar or rennet) is beaten to a paste with quick-lime, in
fine powder.

2. Add vinegar, 1/2 pint, to skimmed milk, 1/2 pint; mix the curd with
the whites of 5 eggs; well beaten and powdered quick-lime, q. s. to form a
paste. Used for mending glass and earthenware; they resist water and a
moderate degree of heat.

3. Rub from two to four parts of the curd, with a cold solution of borax,
till a thick liquid is obtained, that becomes clear on standing. This is
an excellent cement for artificial meerschaums, and may be used to give
consistency to silk goods, or to coat artificial flowers, and court
plaster, to the latter of which it imparts more adhesiveness and firmness.

=Cement, Cut'lers'.= _Prep._ 1. Black resin, 4 lbs.; beeswax, 1 lb.; melt,
and add finely powdered and well-dried brickdust, 1 lb.; mix well.

2. Equal weights of resin and brickdust, melted together.

_Use._ To fix knives and forks in their handles. It is put into the hollow
of the handle, and the metal, previously made hot enough to melt the
composition, pressed into its place whilst warm, and the whole kept
upright and still until quite cold.

=Cement, Di'amond.= See CEMENT, ARMENIAN.

=Cement, Egg.= White of egg thickened with finely powdered quick-lime.
Used to mend earthenware, glass, china, marble, alabaster, spar ornaments,
&c. It does not resist long exposure to moisture unless it has been
exposed to heat.

=Cement, Elas'tic.= _Prep._ 1. Caoutchouc (in small pieces), 1 part;
chloroform, 3 parts; dissolve.

2. (Lenher.) Caoutchouc, 5 parts; chloroform, 3 parts; dissolve, and add
gum mastic (powdered), 1 part. Elastic and transparent.

3. Gutta percha, 3 parts; caoutchouc, 1 part (both cut small); bisulphide
of carbon, 8 parts; mix in a close vessel and dissolve by the heat of a
water bath. This is to be gently warmed before it is applied.

4. Gutta percha, 1 lb.; caoutchouc, 4 oz.; pitch, 2 oz.; shell-lac, 1 oz.;
linseed oil, 2 oz.; melted together. This must be melted before being
applied.

_Obs._ The cements 1 and 2 are elastic and transparent, and are applicable
to many uses. The others, 3 and 4, are used for uniting leather, cloth,
&c.

=Cement, Elec'trical.= _Syn._ CHEMICAL CEMENT. From black resin, 7 lbs.;
red ochre, 1 lb.; plaster of Paris, 1/2 lb. (both well dried and still
warm); melted together, and the heat and agitation continued until all
frothing ceases, and the liquid runs smooth; the vessel is then withdrawn
from the fire, and the mixture stirred until cooled sufficiently. Used to
cement the plates in galvanic troughs, join chemical vessels, &c. See
CEMENT, CAP, CEMENT, SINGER'S, &c.

=Cement, Engineers''.= _Prep._ 1. Ground white lead, mixed with as much
red lead as will make it of the consistence of putty.

2. Equal weights of red lead and white lead, mixed with boiled linseed
oil, to a proper consistence. Used by engineers and others to make
metallic joints. A washer of hemp, yarn, or canvas, smeared with the
cement, is placed in the joint, which is then "brought home," or screwed
up tight. It dries as hard as stone. It also answers well for joining
broken stones, however large. Cisterns built of squares stones, put
together, while dry, with this cement, will never leak or come to repair.

=Cement, Extempora''neous.= 1. Shell-lac, melted, and run into small
sticks the size of a quill. Used to join glass, earthenware, &c. The edges
are heated sufficiently hot to melt the cement, which is then thinly
smeared over them, and the joint made while they are still hot. This is
the cement so commonly vended in the streets of London, and which used to
surprise us in our boyhood days.

2. Tears of gum mastic, used in the same way. Commonly employed by
jewellers and others.

_Cement, Fire'proof._ _Prep._ From fine river sand, 20 parts; litharge, 2
parts; quick-lime, 1 part; linseed oil, q. s. to form a thin paste.
Applied to walls, it soon acquires a stony hardness. It is also used to
mend broken pieces of stone, stone steps, &c. See CEMENT, BEALE'S, &c.

=Cement, Flour.= _Syn._ PASTE, FLOUR PASTE. This useful and well-known
article is made by mixing about a tablespoonful of wheat flour with cold
water, (say) 1/2 pint, adding the latter gradually, and thoroughly
stirring in each portion before pouring in more; the vessel is then placed
over the fire, and the whole assiduously stirred until it boils, great
care being taken to prevent caking on the bottom, or burning. Some persons
add about 1/3 of a teaspoonful of powdered alum to the water, which is
said to strengthen the product; the shoemakers add a little quantity of
powdered resin to the flour, with the same intention. The addition of a
little brown sugar and a few grains of corrosive sublimate will prevent it
turning mouldy, and is said to preserve it for years. When too hard or
dry, it may be softened by beating it up with a little hot water.

=Cement, French.= Mucilage of gum Arabic, thickened with starch powder or
farina; a little lemon-juice is sometimes added. Used by naturalists in
mounting specimens; by artificial-flower makers; and by confectioners, to
stick paper, wafer papers, ornaments, &c., on their fancy cakes. Plain
mucilage is often used in the same way.

=Cement, Gad's.= _Syn._ GAD'S HYDRAULIC CEMENT. From clay (well dried and
powdered), 3 parts; oxide of iron, 1 part; mixed together, and made into a
stiff paste with boiled oil. Used for work required to harden under water.

=Cement, Glass.= _Syn._ GLASS FLUX. _Prep._ Red lead, 3 parts; fine white
sand, 2 parts; crystallised boracic acid, 3 parts; mixed and fused; it is
levigated, and applied with thin mucilage of tragacanth. Used for mending
broken china, &c. The repaired article must be gently heated, so as
partially to fuse the cement.

=Cement, Gibbs'.= Mr Gibbs patented in 1850 various processes for making
admirable building and architectural cements, equal in hardness and
duration, and superior in colour, to the best Roman and Portland cements
at present in use. His materials are obtained from "the vast beds of
(natural) argillaceous marls and marly limestones, or marl stones, which
contain the due admixture of lime, silica, and alumina, from which
hydraulic cements and artificial stones may be manufactured." These
materials he finds in "the chalk formation, the Wealden formation, the
Purbeck beds, the lias formation, the mountain limestone, and the lowest
strata of the coal-measures." After duly choosing his materials according
to the particular object in view, he prepares them "by burning in kilns,
and grinding in mills, in the way cement is now manufactured." Marls and
limestones are to be "first dried in kilns or ovens, at a heat fit for
baking, until all moisture be driven off, and that then the calcination be
prolonged as much as possible; the heat being kept as low as is only just
sufficient to effect complete calcination--this being indispensable, to
avoid the commencement of vitrification, which would destroy the adhesive
properties of the cement."

=Cement, Glue.= _Prep._ 1. From glue, 1 lb. melted with the least possible
quantity of water, and then mixed with black resin, 1 lb., and red ochre,
4 oz.

2. Glue, melted as above, and mixed with about 1/4th of its weight each of
boiled oil and red ochre.

3. (Ure.) Melted glue (of the consistence used by carpenters), 8 parts;
linseed oil, boiled to varnish with litharge, 4 parts; incorporate
thoroughly together.

4. Glue (melted as last), 4 parts; Venice turpentine, 1 part.

_Obs._ The first three dry in about 48 hours, and are very useful to
render the joints of wooden casks, cisterns, &c., watertight; also to fix
stones in frames. The last serves to cement glass, wood, and even metal to
each other. A good cement for fixing wood to glass may be made by
dissolving isinglass in acetic acid, in such quantities that it becomes
solid when cold. When applied let it be heated. They all resist moisture
well.

=Cement, Grind'ers'.= _Prep._ 1. From pitch, 5 parts; wood ashes and hard
tallow, of each 1 part; melted together.

2. Black resin, 4 lbs.; beeswax, 1 lb. melt, and add of whiting
(previously heated red hot, and still warm), 1 lb.

3. Shell-lac, melted and applied to the pieces slightly heated. Used to
fix pieces of glass, &c., whilst grinding. The last is used for lenses and
fine work.

=Cement, Hamelin's.= _Syn._ HAMELIN'S MASTIC. From siliceous sand, 60
parts; Bath or Portland stone (in fine powder), 40 parts; lime-marl, 20
parts; litharge, 8 parts; ground together. For use it is mixed up with
linseed oil and used like mortar. When this cement is applied to the
purpose of covering buildings intended to resemble stone, the surface of
the building is first washed with linseed oil.

=Cement, Hensler's.= Litharge, 3 parts; quick-lime, 2 parts; white bole, 1
part (all in fine powder); linseed-oil varnish, q. s. to make a paste.
Used for china, glass, &c. It is very tenacious, but long in drying.

=Cement, H[oe]nle's.= Shell-lac, 2 parts; Venice turpentine, 1 part; fused
together, and formed into sticks. It is used like extemporaneous cement
for glass and earthenware.

=Cement, Hydraulic.= Hydraulic mortars or cements are those which set or
become hard under water. Common lime does not possess this property; but
limestone containing from 8% to 25% of alumina, magnesia, and silica,
yield a lime on burning, which does not slake when moistened with water,
but forms a mortar with it, which hardens in a few days when covered with
water, although it does not acquire much solidity in the air. Puzzolana,
septaria, and argillaceous or siliceous earths, burnt, either with or
without the addition of common limestone, and then ground to powder, form
excellent hydraulic cements. The reniform limestone, commonly called
"cement stone," which is found distributed in single nodules or lenticular
cakes, in beds of clay, is the substance most commonly used in this
country for the manufacture of the cements in question.

"A very good hydraulic mortar is made by slaking lime with water
containing about 2 per cent. of gypsum, and adding a little sand to the
product. The presence of the gypsum tends to delay the slaking of the
lime, and also to harden the substance formed after the slaking.

"If water containing a little lime in solution be added to burnt gypsum, a
very hard compact mass is obtained. This substance is much used as an
imitation marble, as by polishing it with pumice stone, colouring it, and
again polishing with oil, it may be made to resemble natural marble very
closely. Hardened gypsum treated with stearic acid, or paraffin, and
polished, is used as a substitute for meerschaum, which it much
resembles."[238] See GAD'S, HAMELIN'S, and PARKER'S CEMENTS, &c.

[Footnote 238: 'Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and Analytical.']

=Cement, Iron.= This cement, which is much used for closing the joints of
iron pipes and similar purposes, is formed of the borings or turnings of
cast iron, which should be clean and free from rust, mixed with a small
quantity of sal-ammoniac and flowers of sulphur. For use, it is stirred
up with just enough water to thoroughly moisten it, and it is rammed or
caulked into the joints with a blunt caulking chisel and hammer, after
which the joint is screwed up by its bolts as tightly as possible. If the
turnings and borings are very coarse they are broken by pounding in an
iron mortar, and the dust sifted off before use. The following are good
proportions:

1. Sal-ammoniac (in powder), 2 oz.; flowers of sulphur, 1 oz.; iron
borings, 5 lbs.; water, q. s. to mix.

2. Sal-ammoniac, 2 oz.; sulphur, 1 oz.; iron borings, 12 lbs.; water, q.
s. to mix.

3. Sal-ammoniac, 2 oz.; iron borings, 7 or 8 lbs.; water, q. s. to mix.

4. Iron borings, 4 lbs.; good pipeclay, 2 lbs.; powdered potsherds, 1 lb.;
make them into a paste with salt and water.

_Remarks._ The first of these forms is that generally employed for common
purposes, but formerly much more sulphur and sal-ammoniac were used. We
are told by one of the leading engineers in London that the strongest
cement is made without sulphur and with only 1 or 2 parts of sal-ammoniac
to 100 of iron borings (see the third form); but that when the work is
required to dry rapidly, as for the steam joints of machinery wanted in
haste, the quantity of sal-ammoniac is increased a little, and a very
small quantity of sulphur is added. This addition makes it set quicker,
but reduces its strength. As the power of the cement depends on the
oxidation and consequent expansion of the mass, it is evident that the
less foreign matter introduced the better. No more of this cement should
be made at a time than can be used at once, because it soon spoils. I have
seen it become quite hot by standing even a few hours, when it contained
sulphur; and I have been informed by workmen that when much sulphur is
used, and it has been left together in quantity all night, combustion has
taken place. The last form produces a cement that gets very hard when
allowed to dry slowly, and is excellent for mending cracks in iron
boilers, tanks, &c.

CEMENT, JAPANESE. _Syn._ RICE GLUE. From rice flour, mixed with a little
cold water, and boiling water gradually poured in until it acquires a
proper consistence; when it is boiled for 1 or 2 minutes in a clean
saucepan or earthen pipkin. It is beautifully white, and almost
transparent, for which reason it is well adapted for fancy paper work,
which requires a strong and colourless cement. It is superior to French
cement. (See _ante_.)

=Cement, Keene's Marble.= Baked gypsum or plaster of Paris, steeped in a
saturated solution of alum, and then recalcined, and reduced to powder.
For use it is mixed up with water, as ordinary plaster of Paris.

_Obs._ This cement has been most extensively applied as a stucco. It is
susceptible of a high polish, and when coloured produces beautiful
imitations of mosaic and other inlaid marbles, scagliola, &c. It is not
adapted to hydraulic purposes, or for exposure to the weather, but it is
admirable for internal decorations, and from its extreme hardness is very
durable. It may be coloured or tinted of any shade, by diffusing mineral
colours (levigated, if in powder) through the water used to mix up the
cement with. A pleasing tint is given to this cement by adding a little
solution of green copperas to the alum liquor.

=Cement, Laboratory.= _Syn._ CHEMICAL MASTIC. From equal parts of pitch,
resin, and plaster of Paris (thoroughly dried), mixed together. Used for
the masonry of chlorine chambers, vitriol works, &c.; and as a lining for
casks intended to hold chloride of lime.

=Cement, Letter-fixing.= _Prep._ Copal varnish, 15 parts; drying oil, 5
parts; turpentine, 3 parts; oil of turpentine, 2 parts; liquefied glue
(made with the least possible quantity of water), 5 parts; melt together
in a water bath, and add fresh slaked lime (perfectly dry, and in very
fine powder), 10 parts. Used to attach metal letters to plate glass in
shop windows, &c.

=Cement, Mahogany.= _Prep._ 1. Melt beeswax, 4 oz.; then add Indian red, 1
oz., and enough yellow ochre to produce the required tint.

2. Shell-lac, melted and coloured as above. Very hard. Both are used to
fill up holes and cracks in mahogany furniture by the cabinet makers. Red
putty is also used for the same purpose.

=Cement, Maissiat's.= India rubber is melted either with or without about
15% of either beeswax or tallow; quick-lime (in fine powder) is gradually
added; and the heat continued until change of odour shows that combination
has taken place, and until a proper consistence is obtained. Used as a
waterproof and air-tight covering for corks, bungs, &c.

=Cement, Marine.= See GLUE, MARINE, and CEMENT, ELASTIC.

=Cement, Martin's.= This is manufactured in the same way as Keene's, only
carbonate of soda or carbonate of potash is used as well as alum, and the
burning is carried on at a higher temperature.

=Cement, Opticians'.= _Prep._ 1. Shell-lac softened with rectified spirit
or wood naphtha. For fine work.

2. Beeswax, 1 oz.; resin, 15 oz.; melt and add whiting (previously made
red hot, and still warm), 4 oz.

3. Resin, 1 lb.; melt and add plaster of Paris (dry), 4 oz. The above are
used to fix glasses, stones, &c., while polishing and cutting them. The
last is a very strong cement for rough purposes.

=Cement, Oxychlo''ride of Zinc.= (Sorel.) _Prep._ In solution of chloride
of zinc, marking from 50 deg. to 60 deg. of Baume's hydrometer (_i.e._ sp. gr.
1.490 to 1.652), dissolve 3% of borax or sal-ammoniac; then add oxide of
zinc which has been heated to redness, until the mass is of a proper
consistence.

_Obs._ This cement becomes as hard as marble. It may be cast in moulds
like plaster of Paris, or used in mosaic work, &c.

=Cement, Parabol'ic.= _Syn._ UNIVERSAL CEMENT. _Prep._ Curdle skim milk
with rennet or vinegar, press out the whey, and dry the curd by a very
gentle heat, but as quickly as possible. When it has become quite dry
grind it in a coffee or pepper mill, and next triturate it in a mortar
until reduced to a very fine powder. Mix this powder with 1/10th of its
weight of new dry quick-lime, also in very fine powder, and to every ounce
of the mixture add 5 or 6 gr. of powdered camphor; triturate the whole
well together, and keep it in wide-mouth 1-oz. phials, well corked. Used
to join glass, earthenware, &c. It is made into a paste with a little
water, as wanted, and applied immediately.

=Cement, Parian.= Is prepared as Keene's, substituting a solution of borax
(1 part of borax to 9 of water) for a solution of alum.

=Cement, Park'er's.= This cement is made of the nodules of indurated and
slightly ferruginous marl, called by mineralogists "septaria," and also of
some other species of argillaceous limestone. These are burnt in conical
kilns, with pit coal, in a similar way to other limestone, care being
taken to avoid the use of too much heat, as if the pieces undergo the
slightest degree of fusion, even on the surface, they will be unfit to
form the cement. After being properly roasted the calx is reduced to a
very fine powder by grinding, and immediately packed in barrels, to keep
it from the air and moisture.

_Uses, &c._ This cement is tempered with water, and applied at once, as it
soon hardens, and will not bear being again softened down with water. For
foundations and cornices exposed to the weather it is usually mixed with
an equal quantity of clean angular sand; for use as a common mortar, with
about twice as much sand; for coating walls exposed to cold and wet, the
common proportions are 3 of sand to 2 of cement, and for walls exposed to
extreme dryness or heat, about 2-1/2 or 3 of sand to 1 of cement; for
facing cistern work, water frontages, &c., nothing but cement and water
should be employed. Under the name of compo' or Roman cement it is much
employed for facing houses, water cisterns, setting the foundations of
large edifices, &c.

=Cement, Pew's.= Quick-lime, 1 part; baked clay, 2 parts (both in powder);
mix and calcine; then add gypsum (fresh baked and in fine powder), 1 part,
to powdered baked clay, 2 parts; mix well, add the former mixture, and
incorporate them well together. Used to cover buildings. It is applied
like mortar, and is very hard and durable. See CEMENT, GIBBS,' &c.

=Cement, Plumb'ers'.= Black resin melted with about an equal weight of
brick-dust. Some times a little pitch or tallow is added.

=Cement, Port'land.= From clay and chalk, or argillaceous river-mud and
chalk or limestone, calcined together, and then ground to powder. See
CEMENT, PARKER'S.

=Cement, Ro'man.= Genuine Roman cement consists of puzzolene (a
ferruginous clay from Pozzuoli, calcined by the fires of Vesuvius), lime,
and sand. The only preparation which the puzzolene undergoes is that of
pounding and sifting. It is generally mixed up with water, like most other
cements, but occasionally with bullock's blood and oil, to give the
composition more tenacity. That used in this country is now generally
prepared from the septaria of either Harwich or Sheppy, or of the lias
formation, or from the cement stone found in the upper division of the
lias formation, or in the shale beds of the Kimmeridge clay. It is also
prepared from several artificial mixtures of ferruginous clay and lime,
calcined together. It must be kept in close vessels, and mixed with water
when used. See CEMENT, PARKER'S and GIBBS'.

=Cement, Seal Engra''vers'.= Resembles plumbers' cement. Used to fix the
pieces of metal while cutting, and also to secure seals and tools in their
handles. It grows harder and improves every time it is melted.

=Cement, Sin'ger's.= _Prep._ 1. Melt together resin, 5 lbs., and beeswax,
1 lb., and stir in finely-powdered red ochre (highly dried and still
warm), 1 lb., and plaster of Paris, 4 oz.; continuing the heat a little
above 212 deg. Fahr., and stirring constantly till all frothing ceases.

2. Resin, 6 lbs.; dried red-ochre, 1 lb.; calcined plaster of Paris, 1/2
lb.; linseed oil, 1/4 lb. Used to cement the plates in voltaic troughs, to
join chemical vessels, &c. No. 2 is specially applicable to troughs. See
CEMENT, ELECTRICAL.

=Cement, Steam-boiler.= _Prep._ Litharge, in fine powder, 2 parts; very
fine sand and quick-lime (that has been allowed to slake spontaneously in
a damp place), of each 1 part; mix and keep it from the air. Used to mend
the cracks in boilers and ovens, and to secure steam joints. It is made
into a paste with boiled oil before application.

=Cement, Steam-pipe.= _Prep._ Good linseed oil varnish is ground with
equal weights of white lead, oxide of manganese, and pipeclay.

=Cement, Stucco.= This is a compound of powdered gypsum or strong gelatin.
It is used for coating walls, and also for ornamenting ceilings. It takes
a high polish, and coloured designs can be painted on it. When employed on
walls a coarser kind is first laid on, which is followed by a coating made
of choicer specimens of gypsum, or glue, or isinglass. When this latter
and outer coat becomes dry it is polished with pumice, tripoli, and linen.
The colour is incorporated with the outer coatings of the stucco by mixing
the metallic pigments with it, and then applying it to the wall, after
which a very thin coating of gypsum and isinglass, or sometimes of oil, is
given to it, and when the whole is partially dried the tint is brought out
by polishing, as before stated. Generally the finest effect is obtained by
oil.

=Cement, Transpar'ent.= See CEMENT, ELASTIC.

=Cement, Turn'ers'.= _Prep._ Beeswax, 1 oz.; resin, 1/2 oz.; pitch, 1/2
oz.; melt, and stir in fine brickdust, q. s.

=Cement, Univers'al.= See CEMENT, PARABOLIC.

=Cement, Var'ley's.= _Syn._ VARLEY'S MASTIC. Black resin, 16 parts;
beeswax, 1 part; melt, add whiting (sifted, dried by a dull-red heat, and
allowed to cool), 16 parts; and stir until nearly cold.

=Cement, Water.= _Prep._ 1. From good grey clay, 4 parts; black oxide of
manganese, 6 parts; limestone (reduced to powder by sprinkling it with
water), 90 parts; mix, calcine, and powder.

2. Mix white iron ore (manganese iron ore), 15 parts, with lime, 85 parts;
calcine and powder as above. Both this and the preceding must be mixed up
with a little sand for use. A piece thrown into water rapidly hardens.

3. Fine clean sand, 1 cwt.; quick-lime, in powder, 28 lbs.; bone ashes, 14
lbs. The above are beat up with water for use. See CEMENT, HYDRAULIC, &c.

=Cement, Waterglass.= For glass, earthenware, porcelain, and all kinds of
stoneware, these cements are excellent. A cement for glass and marble is
prepared by rubbing together one part of fine pulverised glass, and two
parts of pulverised fluorspar, and then adding enough waterglass solution
to give it the consistency necessary in a cement.

Waterglass mixed with hydraulic cement to a thick dough makes a good
cement for the edges and joints of stone and marble slabs. It is well to
mix but little at a time, as it hardens very quickly. ('Journal of Applied
Chemistry.')

=Cement, Wa'terproof.= Several compounds of this class have been already
noticed. The celebrated "waterproof cement of Dihl" consists of porcelain
clay or pipeclay, dried by a gentle heat, and powdered, mixed up to the
consistence of a paste with boiled linseed oil, and, sometimes, a little
oil of turpentine. It is coloured by adding a little red or yellow ochre,
or any similar pigment. It is used to cover the fronts of buildings, roofs
of verandahs, &c.

_Concluding Remarks._ For mending broken CHINA, EARTHENWARE, GLASS, and
WOOD, the preparations generally used are the cements described above as
ARMENIAN, BOTANY BAY, CHEESE, CHINESE, CURD, EGG, EXTEMPORANEOUS, GLASS,
GLUE, HENSLER'S, H[OE]NLE'S, MAHOGANY, and PARABOLIC. For SPAR, MARBLE,
and similar materials, the ALABASTER CEMENT is specially adapted; the EGG
and PARABOLIC CEMENTS will, however, answer the same purpose. For CLOTH,
LEATHER, PAPER, CARD, and LIGHT FANCY WORK, the most suitable cements are
the ELASTIC, CHINESE, FLOUR, FRENCH, and JAPANESE. The cements adapted for
CHEMICAL and ELECTRICAL APPARATUS, and for SEALING BOTTLES, are also
termed BOTTLE, BRIMSTONE, CAP, CHEMICAL, ELECTRICAL, LABORATORY,
MAISSIAT'S, and VARLEY'S. The BUILDING and HYDRAULIC CEMENTS are described
under the heads ARCHITECTURAL, BEALE'S, BRUYERE'S, FIREPROOF, GAD'S,
GIBBS', HAMELIN'S, HYDRAULIC, KEENE'S, OXYCHLORIDE, PARKER'S, PEW'S,
PORTLAND, ROMAN, WATER, and WATERPROOF. The cements used for METAL-WORK,
&c., in different trades, are noticed under the heads COPPERSMITHS',
CUTLERS', ENGINEERS', GRINDERS', IRON, LETTER-FIXING, OPTICIANS',
PLUMBERS', SEAL-ENGRAVERS', STEAM-BOILER, STEAM-PIPE, and TURNER'S. See
GLUE, LUTE, MORTAR, TOOTH-CEMENT, &c.

=CEMENTA'TION.= The process of imbedding a substance in, or covering it
with, some powder or composition capable of acting on it when heated, and
in this state exposing it to a red heat. Iron is converted into steel, and
glass into Reaumur's porcelain, by cementation.

=CEN'TAURIN.= _Syn._ CENTAURIN'A. The bitter extractive matter of _Erythaea
centaurium_, or common centaury. Combined with hydrochloric acid, it has
been highly recommended as a febrifuge.

=CER'ASIN.= _Syn._ PRUN'INE. The insoluble portion of cherry-tree gum. It
is identical with bassorin. Dr John applies the term to all those gums
which, like tragacanth, swell, but do not dissolve in water. See BASSORIN.

=CE'RATE.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM, L. A thick species of ointment containing wax.
Cerates are intermediate in consistence between ointments and plasters;
but are less frequently employed than either of those preparations. The
medicinal ingredients which enter into the cerates are very numerous;
indeed, almost every kind of medicine capable of exercising a topical
effect may be prescribed in this form.

It is a general custom with the druggists to use a less quantity of wax
for their cerates than that which is necessary to give them a proper
consistence, and in many cases it is omitted altogether, and its place
supplied by hard suet, or stearine, and frequently by common resin. Lard
is also very generally substituted for olive oil. Indeed, in no class of
pharmaceutical preparations are the instructions of practitioners and the
colleges more commonly disregarded. The operation of melting the
ingredients should be performed in a water bath or steam bath, and the
liquid mass should be assiduously stirred until cold.

All the medicated cerates may be prepared by adding the active
ingredients, in the form of fine powder, soft extract, solution, &c., as
the case may be, to either simple cerate or spermaceti cerate, in the
proportions indicated under the head of "Doses" appended to every article
of importance noticed in this work. The mixture, which must be complete,
may be effected by working the articles together on a marble or glass slab
or tile, or, still better, by trituration in a clean wedgwood mortar. In
some cases the simple cerate is melted by a gentle heat, and the whole
stirred or triturated until nearly solid; in others, digestion with heat
is employed.

=Cerate.= _Syn._ SIM'PLE CERATE, SIMPLE DRES'SING; CERATUM (Ph. L.), C.
SIM'PLEX (Ph. L. 1824). _Prep._ (Ph. L.) Yellow wax, 20 oz.; melt by a
gentle heat; add olive oil, 1 pint; and stir until it begins to solidify.

Used as a simple emollient dressing. The corresponding preparations of the
other colleges will be found noticed under OINTMENTS. The _ceratum
simplex_ of the Ph. E. is SPERMACETI CERATE.

=Cerate, Ac'etate of Lead.= _Syn._ CE'RATE OF SUGAR OF LEAD; CERA'TUM
PLUM'BI ACETA'TIS (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. L.) White wax, 5 oz.; olive
oil, 18 fl. oz.; melt together; add, acetate of lead (in fine powder), 5
dr., previously triturated with olive oil, 2 fl. oz., and stir till they
unite (begin to solidify). Used as a cooling dressing to burns,
excoriations, and inflamed sores.

=Cerate, Ammoni'acal.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM AMMONIACA'LE, L. _Prep._ (Rechoux.)
Simple cerate, 1 oz.; carbonate of ammonia, 1 dr.; mix. As a
counter-irritant in croup, &c.

=Cerate, Arsen'ical.= _Syn._ CER'ATUM ARSEN'ICI, C. A'CIDI ARSENIO'SI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ph. U. S.) Arsenious acid (in very fine powder), 20 gr.;
simple cerate, 1 oz.

2. (Sir A. Cooper.) Arsenious acid and sublimed sulphur, of each 1 dr.;
spermaceti cerate, 1 oz. The above ingredients must be very carefully
triturated together. The first is used as a dressing to cancerous sores;
the second is applied on lint as a caustic in like cases.

=Cerate, Belladonn'a.= _Syn._ CERATE OF DEADLY NIGHTSHADE; CERA'TUM
BELLADONN'AE, L. _Prep._ 1. (W. Cooley.) Extract of belladonna, 3 dr.;
simple cerate, 1 oz.; olive oil, 1 dr.; triturate together in a warm
mortar, until nearly cold. Used in frictions to indolent tumours.

2. (Compound; C. B. COMPOS'ITUM, L.) _Prep._ (W. Cooley.) Belladonna
cerate, 1 oz.; iodide of gold, 12 gr.; carefully triturated together. Used
as a friction to scrofulous and syphilitic tumours, and to remove
syphilitic and rheumatic pains. A most active and excellent preparation.

=Cerate, Brown.= See PLASTERS.

=Cerate, Caca'o.= _Syn._ CACA'O POMMADE. _Prep._ Butter of cacao, white
wax, and oil of almonds, equal parts, melted together and strained. Used
as a cosmetic for chapped hands and lips, &c.

=Cerate, Cal'amine.= _Syn._ TURNER'S CERATE, HEALING SALVE; CERATUM
CALAMI'NAE (Ph. L. & E.), C. LA'PIS CALAMINA'RIS (Ph. L. 1788), L. _Prep._
1. (Ph. L.) Yellow wax, 7-1/2 oz.; olive oil, 1 pint; melt together,
remove the vessel from the fire, and when they first begin to thicken, add
prepared calamine, 7-1/2 oz., and stir constantly until they cool.

2. (P. E.) Prepared calamine, 1 part; simple cerate (Ph. E.), 5 parts;
mix.

3. (Ph. D.) See OINTMENT.

4. (Commercial.) Hard suet, 5 lbs.; lard, 3 lbs.; melt and sift in,
gradually, calamine, 4 lbs.; agitate well for a few minutes, or until the
whole is perfectly mixed, and after one minute's repose pour it off into
another vessel, the coarse sediment that has fallen to the bottom being
carefully avoided; lastly, stir assiduously, until it is nearly cold. This
forms the TURNER'S CERATE of the wholesale druggists. In many cases
nothing but lard and calamine are used.

_Uses, &c._ When honestly prepared with genuine calamine, it is a most
valuable desiccant and astringent application to excoriations, ulcers,
burns, scalds, sore nipples, &c. It has long been held in popular esteem
as a drying and healing dressing for sores.

=Cerate, Cal'amine with Mercury.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM CALAMI'NAE CUM
HYDRAR'GYRO, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Chirur.) Calamine cerate, 1 lb.; red oxide of
mercury, 1 oz.; mix. Used as a stimulant application to foul and indolent
ulcers, psorophthalmia, &c.

=Cerate, Cal'omel.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM CALOMELA'NOS, C. HYDRAR'GYRI
CHLOR'IDI, L. _Prep._ 1. Calomel, 1 dr.; spermaceti cerate, 7 dr. In
herpes, and some other skin diseases.

2. (Compound; C. C. COMPOS'ITUM, L.) Calomel, 2 dr.; calamine cerate, 1
oz.; olive oil, 1 dr.

=Cerate, Cam'phor.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM CAMPHORA'TUM, C. CAMPHOR'AE, L.;
POMMADE DU FRERE COSME, Fr. _Prep._ Olive oil, 1 lb.; white wax, 1/2 lb.;
camphor, 3 dr. As an application to chaps, chilblains, abrasions,
excoriations, and slight wounds. See BALLS, CAMPHOR.

=Cerate, Canthar'ides.= _Syn._ BLISTERING CERATE; CERA'TUM LYTT'AE, C.
CANTHAR'IDIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Cantharides (in very fine powder), 1
oz.; spermaceti cerate, 6 oz.; mix.

2. (Parrish.) Cantharides, 12 parts; lard, 10 parts; yellow wax and resin,
of each 7 parts; incorporated by fusion. Irritant; used to keep blisters
open, and to stimulate issues, and indolent ulcers and tumours.

=Cerate, Chalk.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM CRE'TAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Chalk (thoroughly
dried, and in fine powder), 2 dr.; simple cerate, 6 dr.; almond oil, 3 dr.
Used in piles and foul ulcers.

2. (Acetated.) See CERATE, KIRKLAND'S NEUTRAL.

3. (Compound; CERA'TUM CRE'TAE COMPOS'ITUM, L.)--_a._ To simple chalk
cerate, 1 oz., add powdered catechu, 1/2 dr. In piles, and foul and
indolent ulcers.

_b._ (U.S. Hospital.) Lead plaster and olive oil, of each 8 oz.; white
wax, 3 oz.; melt together; add solution of subacetate of lead, 6 oz.;
thoroughly incorporate, and then further add, chalk (in fine powder), 5
oz. Cooling and astringent. Useful in inflamed sores, excoriations, piles,
&c.

=Cerate, Cher'ry-laur'el.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM LAURO-CERASI, C. CALMANS, L.
_Prep._ (Roux.) Simple cerate, 1 oz.; cherry-laurel water, 1/2 oz. As an
application to burns.

=Cerate, Cincho'na.= _Syn._ BARK CERATE; CERA'TUM CINCHO'NAE:, L. _Prep._
1. Extract of bark, 2 dr.; simple cerate, 1 oz.

2. (Van Mons.) Simple cerate, 8 oz.; camphor, 1-1/2 dr.; melt together by
a gentle heat, then add gradually, decoction of Peruvian bark
(concentrated), 1 oz., and triturate until cold. Used as a dressing for
ill-conditioned ulcers.

=Cerate, Cin'nabar.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM RU'BRUM, C. CINNABA'RIS, C.
HYDRAR'GYRI SULPHURE'TI RU'BRI, L. _Prep._ 1. Camphor, 20 gr.; vermilion,
60 gr.; simple cerate, 1 oz. This is Alibert's "ANTIHERPETIC POMMADE."

2. (Ph. Chirur.) Yellow wax and lard, of each 1/2 lb.; yellow resin, 1/2
oz.; red sulphide of mercury, 1 dr. Used as a common dressing.

=Cerate, Cit'rine.= See CERATE, RESIN, NITRATE OF MERCURY C.

=Cerate, Copai'ba.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM COPAI'BAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Spermaceti
cerate, 3 oz.; melt by a gentle heat, then add, balsam of copaiba, 1 oz.

2. (Dr Houlton.) White wax, 1 oz.; balsam of copaiba, 2 oz.; mix, as last.
Both the above have been recommended as topical applications to wounds and
ulcers of the rectum, vagina, and urethra; especially in those of a
fistulous character; and in piles, &c.

=Cerate, Cop'per.= _Syn._ CUPRIA'TED CERATE; CERA'TUM CU'PRI; C. C.
AMMONIA'TI, L. _Prep._ (Swediaur.) Simple cerate, 8 parts; melt, and add
solution of ammoniuret of copper, 1 part. As a stimulant dressing for
indolent ulcers; and in psorophthalmia, &c.

=Cerate, Cosmet'ic.= _Syn._ COLD CREAM, CERATE OF GA'LEN; CERA'TUM
COSMET'ICUM, C. GALENI, CREMOR FRIGIDA, L.; POMMADE EN CREME, Fr. _Prep._
1. Oil of sweet almonds, 1 lb.; white wax and spermaceti, of each 2 oz.;
melt, pour the mixture into a marble or wedgwood mortar, which has been
heated by standing for some time in boiling water; add, gradually, rose
water, 10 fl. oz., assiduously stirring until an emulsion is formed; then
further add, oil of bergamot, 1/2 oz.; oil of lavender, 1 dr.; and
continue the stirring or trituration until the whole has become cold.

2. To the last add otto of roses, 1 dr.; oil of rosemary, 15 drops.

3. Oil of almonds, 5 oz.; spermaceti, 5 dr.; white wax, 4 dr.; rose water,
3-1/2 oz.; balm of Mecca (genuine), 8 drops.

4. As the last, with essence of vanilla, 15 drops; essence of ambergris,
10 drops.

5. (P. C.) White wax, 1 part; oil of almonds, 4 parts; rose water, 3
parts; as before.

6. (Van Mons.) White wax and butter of cacao, of each 1 part; oil of
almonds and rose water, of each 4 parts.

_Obs._ The above are used as agreeable and cooling emollients for
irritable surfaces, excoriations, sore nipples, &c. See COLD CREAM and
OINTMENTS.

=Cerate, Cro'ton.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM CROTO'NIS, L. _Prep._ (Caventou.) Lard,
5 parts; wax, 1 part; melt, and when nearly cold add croton oil, 2 parts.
Used as a counter-irritant; but is apt to affect the bowels.

=Cerate, Goulard's.= See CERATE, LEAD.

=Cerate, Hemlock.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM CO'NII, L. _Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.)
Spermaceti, 2 oz.; white wax, 3 oz.; melt, and add of hemlock ointment, 12
oz. Used for inveterate cancerous, scrofulous, and other sores.

=Cerate, Hon'ey.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM MEL'IS, L. _Prep._ 1. Simple cerate, 3
parts; honey, 1 part; oil of lemon-grass, 6 drops. Used as cold cream.

2. (Ph. Chirur.) Olive oil, 1/2 lb.; wax and lead plaster (or galbanum
plaster), of each 4 oz.; melt, and add honey, 1/2 lb. As a cooling
emollient dressing.

=Cerate of Honey with Turpentine.= (Paracelsus). Common turpentine, 1 lb.;
the yolk of 20 eggs; honey, 1 lb.; beat together the honey and yolk, and
add the turpentine, softened by heat.

=Cerate, Is'sue.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM AD FONTICULOS, L. As issue plaster, but
adding a little almond oil.

=Cerate, Kirk'land's.= _Syn._ KIRKLAND'S NEUTRAL CERATE; CERA'TUM
NEUTRA'LE, C. CRE'TAE ACETA'TIS, L. _Prep._ 1. Lead plaster, 8 oz.; olive
oil, 4 oz. melt, sift in chalk, 4 oz.; mix well, then add gradually
Goulard's extract, 1/2 oz.; distilled vinegar, 4 oz.; and stir until cold.

2. (Paris.) Lead plaster, 8 oz.; olive oil and chalk, of each 4 oz.; sugar
of lead, 3 dr., (dissolved in) distilled vinegar, 4 fl. oz. As a cooling
dressing to irritable ulcers and excoriated parts.

=Cerate, Lead (Compound).= _Syn._ GOU'LARD'S CERATE; CERA'TUM PLUM'BI
COMPOS'ITUM (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. L.) Olive oil, 16 fl. oz.; yellow
wax, 8 oz.; melt, remove the vessel from the fire, and when they begin to
thicken, add gradually solution of subacetate of lead (slightly warmed), 6
fl. oz.; and stir constantly until the whole is nearly cold; then add
camphor, 1 dr., dissolved in olive oil, 4 fl. oz. (by heat), and stir
until the cerate is quite cold. Used in similar cases to KIRKLAND'S CERATE
(which _see_). See also ACETATE OF LEAD CERATE.

=Cerate, Mar'shall's.= _Prep._ 1. Palm oil and calomel, of each 2 oz.;
acetate of lead, 1 oz.; ointment of nitrate of mercury, 4 oz.; triturated
together in a wedgwood mortar.

2. (Paris.) Palm oil, 5 oz.; calomel, 1 oz.; acetate of lead, 1/2 oz.;
citrine ointment, 2 oz.; as the last. Applied to the eyes, &c.

=Cerate, mercu''rial.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM MERCURIA'LE, C. HYDRAR''GYRI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Guibourt.) Strong mercurial ointment and simple cerate, equal
parts.

2. (Ph. L. 1746.) Strong mercurial ointment and yellow wax, of each 6 oz.;
lard, 3 oz. Both are used as dressings to venereal ulcers.

3. (Compound; CERA'TUM MERCURIA'LE COMPOS'ITUM, C. HYDRAR''GYRI, L.)
_Prep._ (Ph. L.) Mercurial ointment (strong) and soap cerate, of each 6
oz.; camphor (in powder), 1-1/2 oz.; triturate together. Alterative and
discutient; used to disperse indolent tumours and swellings, and as a
resolvent in enlarged joints, &c.

CERATE, METO''PIUM. _Syn._ CERA'TUM METO''PII, L. _Prep._ (Dr Barham.)
Hog-gum (from _Rhus Metopium_), and lard, of each 4 oz.; white wax and
root of Sweet Aristolochia (powdered), of each 2 oz.; yellow resin, 1 oz.;
in stiff joints and rheumatic pains.

=Cerate, Mez'ereon.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM MEZ'EREI, L. _Prep._ 1. Extract of
mezereon, 1 part; (dissolved in) alcohol, 5 parts; add beeswax, 5 parts;
olive oil, 11 parts; melt together, and continue the heat until all the
alcohol is evaporated.

2. Green oil of mezereon, 1 part; simple cerate, 20 parts; melt together.
Both are used to keep up the discharge from blistered surfaces, and as a
stimulant application to indolent sores.

=Cerate, Neu'tral.= See CERATE, KIRKLAND'S.

=Cerate, Ni'trate of Mer'cury.= _Syn._ CIT'RINE CERATE; CERA'TUM
HYDRAR''GYRI NITRA'TIS, L. _Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.) Citrine ointment and
simple cerate, equal parts. See OINTMENTS.

=Cerate, O'pium.= _Syn._ LAUD'ANUM CERATE, AN'ODYNE C.; CERA'TUM O''PII,
C. OPIA'TUM, C. ANODY'NUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Tincture of opium and olive oil,
of each 2 dr.; simple cerate, 1 oz.; digest with heat until all the spirit
and water is evaporated, constantly stirring the mixture all the time.

2. (Gilbert.) Wine of opium, 1 dr.; simple cerate, 1 oz.

3. (Lagneau.) Opium (in fine powder), 1/2 dr.; yolk of 1 egg; mix, then
triturate it with simple cerate, 1 oz.

_Uses._ The above are applied to painful swellings, piles, and ulcers, and
in chronic ophthalmia, &c.

=Cerate, Phosphora'ted.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM PHOSPHO'RI, C. PHOSPHORA'TUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. Phosphorus, 6 gr.; simple cerate, 3 oz.; heat together in a
phial placed in a water bath, with frequent agitation for 2 hours; and
after repose for 10 minutes, pour off the clear portion, and stir it well
until cold.

2. (Foy.) Phosphorated ether, 5 parts; simple cerate, 24 parts.--_Uses._
Both of the above have been recommended as frictions in obstinate
cutaneous affections, and in rheumatism of the joints.

=Cerate, Pitch.= _Syn._ CERATUM PI'CIS BERGUNDI'CAE, L. _Prep._ (Beral.)
White wax, 3 parts; suet, 4 parts; Bergundy pitch, 6 parts; melted
together. A mild stimulant and detergent dressing. See OINTMENTS.

=Cerate, Quin'ine.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM QUINIAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Sulphate of
quinine, 5 or 6 gr.; simple cerate, 1 dr. Applied to the denuded dermis
(endermically).

2. Sulphate of quinine and olive oil, of each 1 dr.; simple cerate, 6 dr.
As a friction. Both are used in intermittents.

=Cerate, Res'in.= _Syn._ BASIL'ICON, B. CERATE, B. OINTMENT, YELLOW B.,
CIT'RINE CERATE; CERA'TUM CITRI'NUM (Ph. L. 1788), C. RESI'NAE FLA'VAE (Ph.
L. 1745), C. RESI'NAE (Ph. L. 1809 and since), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Yellow resin and beeswax, of each 15 oz.; melt, add olive oil, 1 pint;
strain through a cloth, and stir the mixture until cold.

_Obs._ The above is the formula of the London College, but the basilicon
of the shops is seldom, if ever, made in this manner. The following forms
are those commonly used in trade, but the products are much inferior to
that made according to the directions in the Pharmacop[oe]ia.

2. (Commercial.)--_a._ Yellow resin, 10 lbs.; beeswax, 2 lbs.; linseed
oil, 7 lbs.; melt together, and stir until cold.

_b._ As the last, but using nut oil instead of linseed oil.

_c._ Nut oil, 1 gall.; beeswax, 5 lbs.; yellow resin, 14 lbs.

_d._ Lard (common) and linseed oil, of each 3 lbs.; yellow resin, 9 lbs.;
as before.

_Uses, &c._ This cerate is a mild stimulant, detergent, and digestive
application; and as such is employed to dress foul and indolent ulcers,
blistered surfaces, burns, &c. For the corresponding preparations of the
other colleges, see OINTMENTS.

3. (Compound; DESH'LER'S CERATE; CERA'TUM RESI'NAE COMPOS'ITUM, L.) _Prep._
(Ph. U. S.) Resin, suet, and beeswax, of each 1 lb.; turpentine, 1/2 lb.;
flax-seed oil (linseed oil), 1/2 pint; as above. Rather more stimulating
than resin cerate, but used for the same purposes.

=Cerate, Rose.= _Syn._ LIP SALVE; CERA'TUM ROSA'TUM, L. _Prep._ (P. C.)
Oil of almonds, 16 parts; white wax, 8 parts; alkanet root, 1 part;
digest, with a gentle heat, until sufficiently coloured, then strain, and
for every ounce of the cerate, add otto of roses, 2 drops. See LIP SALVE.

=Cerate, Sav'ine.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM SABI'NAE (Ph. E.; and Ph. L. 1836), L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ph. E.) Beeswax, 1 part; lard, 4 parts; fresh savin (leaves
bruised), 2 parts; boil together until the leaves become crisp, then
strain, with pressure, through a linen cloth.

2. (Ph. L. 1836.) Lard, 2 lbs.; savin leaves, 1 lb.; beeswax, 1/2 lb.; as
last.

3. (Ph. L. 1851.) In the B. P. this preparation is included among the
OINTMENTS (which _see_); in trade, however, the old name (Ph. L. 1836) is
still generally retained.

_Obs._ The preparation of this cerate requires caution, as the active
principle of the savin, being volatile, is injured by long boiling and a
high temperature. The leaves are usually boiled until they are crisp, but
as this takes some time, the essential oil, and consequently the odour, is
nearly all dissipated. A better plan is to express the juice from the
leaves, and to add it to the wax and oil melted together, and just
beginning to cool. As usually met with in the shops, this cerate has a
lively green colour, and the odour of the fresh plant; but neither of
these is derived from the leaves in the common process of making it. The
first is caused by the addition of powdered verdigris, and the last by
adding a little of the essential oil of savin to the compound when nearly
cold. The preparations of the British Colleges have only a very pale green
colour, and even that rapidly changes by exposure to the air. A uniform
green colour may therefore be regarded as a proof of adulteration; as the
unadulterated compound, however, skilfully prepared, is of a dingy green
colour, of little intensity; and after it has been made a short time, it
fades on the surface, and the under portion becomes streaky and mottled. A
greater quantity of colour is obtained from the leaves by long digestion
in the fat and wax in earthen vessels, at a moderate heat, than by hasty
boiling. In this way a lively green is sometimes produced, but it rapidly
changes in the manner just mentioned.

The following forms are those commonly adopted by the wholesale druggists
for the manufacture of this cerate:--

4. Lard and suet, of each 6 lbs.; yellow wax, 2 lbs.; melt them together
in an earthen vessel; add 2 oz. of distilled verdigris (previously rubbed
down smooth in a mortar with an equal weight of sweet oil); strain, whilst
hot, into a large earthen pot, and when the whole has cooled a little, add
of oil of savin, 1 oz., and stir until cold.

5. Savin leaves, 4 lbs.; yellow wax, 2 lbs.; lard, 8 lbs.; boil until the
leaves become crisp; then strain, and add, of green ointment (lively
coloured), 5 lbs.; when cooled a little, further add, of oil of savin, 3
dr., and stir briskly until cold. _Prod._, 13-1/2 lbs.

_Uses, &c._ Savin cerate and ointment are chiefly employed to keep up the
discharge from blisters (perpetual blisters), for which purpose it is
preferable to preparations of cantharides. The practice of colouring this
cerate with verdigris, which is general in trade, cannot be too severely
censured, as its therapeutic action is thereby altered. The copper may be
detected by burning down a little in a platinum or Hessian crucible,
washing out the ashes with a little dilute nitric acid, placing the liquor
in a glass tube, and applying the usual tests. See COPPER and OINTMENTS.

=Cerate, Sim'ple.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM SIM'PLEX, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. E.)
Spermaceti, 1 part; white wax, 3 parts; olive oil, 6 parts; melt by a
gentle heat, and stir until cold. This preparation is similar to SIMPLE
OINTMENT (_Unguentum Simplex_), B. P. (which _see_).

=Cerate of Snails.= White wax, 3 parts; spermaceti, 3 parts; oil of
almonds, 32 parts; mucilage of snails, 24 parts; otto of rose, sufficient
to scent it.

=Cerate, Soap.= _Syn._ COMPOUND SOAP CERATE; CERA'TUM SAPO'NIS (Ph. L.
1836), C. SAPONIS COMPOS'ITUM (Ph. L. 1851), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Boil
litharge, 15 oz., in distilled vinegar, 1 gall., until dissolved, stirring
continually; then add of Castile soap, 10 oz.; again boil until all the
moisture is evaporated; then add, gradually, beeswax, 12-1/2 oz., and
olive oil, 1 pint, previously melted together, and stir until nearly cold.
Similar to SOAP CERATE PLASTER (_Emplastrum Cerati Saponis_), B. P. (which
_see_).

2. (Wholesale.) Distilled vinegar, 6 galls.; litharge, 5 lbs.; soap, 3-3/4
lbs.; yellow wax, 4-1/2 lbs.; olive oil, 6 pints. Mix as above. Good nut
or poppy oil may be used instead of olive oil.

_Obs._ Unless the instructions contained in the above formulae are followed
in every particular, the process is apt to miscarry. When this is the
case, the cerate, on cooling, separates into two portions, and is commonly
full of hard, gritty particles. To prevent this, care should be taken to
use soap of the best quality. This mishap cannot be got over by long
boiling and stirring, as is generally supposed. The only remedy is the
addition of a little more soap, previously melted with some water, and
again evaporating to a proper consistence. A small quantity of solution of
potassa has a similar effect.

The colour and consistence of soap cerate chiefly depends on the length of
time it is kept heated after the addition of the oil and wax. As
evaporation proceeds, so the colour and consistence increase. Its usual
colour is that of a lively, pale chocolate-brown, but occasionally it is
much paler. This arises from its containing an undue quantity of moisture.
When it has been kept heated for a period beyond that usually adopted, it
attains greater hardness, and is then frequently called hard soap cerate
(CERA'TUM SAPONIS DURUM); but by over-boiling it is apt to become gritty.

_Uses, &c._ Soap cerate is resolvent, cooling, and desiccative, and is
chiefly employed as a cooling dressing for scrofulous swellings, &c. It
may be spread on linen and applied like a plaster. It is sometimes used as
a support for fractured limbs, and forms an excellent dressing for soft
corns.

=Cerate, Spermace'ti.= _Syn._ WHITE CERATE, WHITE LIP SALVE, SIMPLE C.;
CERATUM SIM'PLEX (Ph. E.), C. ALBUM (Ph. L. 1745), C. SPERMA'TIS CE'TI
(Ph. L. 1788), C. CETA'CEI (Ph. L. 1809, and since), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph.
L.) Spermaceti, 2 oz.; white wax, 8 oz.; melt by a gentle heat; add, olive
oil (warm), 1 pint, and stir with a spatula until they cool.

2. (Ph. E.) See CERATE, SIMPLE.

3. (Ph. D.) The corresponding preparation of the Ph. D. is classed under
Ointments, and contains lard.

4. (Commercial.) On the large scale lard or suet is substituted for oil,
by which means less wax is required. The following is a good form where a
cheap article is wanted, and is that commonly adopted in the wholesale
trade:--

Clarified mutton suet, 5-1/2 lbs.; white wax and spermaceti, of each 3/4
lb.; as above.

_Obs._ The materials should be melted by a very gentle heat (that of a
water bath is best) in a clean stoneware vessel, and as soon as perfect
liquefaction takes place, the heat should be withdrawn, and the fluid
cerate strained into a clean vessel, and stirred with a clean wooden
spatula until it solidifies. To facilitate the cooling, the vessel may be
placed in cold water or in a current of cold air. In this way the product
is rendered both whiter and finer than when the liquid mass is allowed to
cool by itself. By adding a little flowers of benzoin with the oil, or a
little nitric ether when the cerate is about half cold, this, as well as
other like preparations, will keep for years without becoming rancid or
suffering any material change of condition.

_Uses, &c._ Emollient and cooling. It is commonly employed as a soft,
cooling dressing, as a lip salve, as an application to chaps, chilblains,
&c.

=Cerate, Sul'phur.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM SULPHU'RIS, C. SULPHURA'TUM, L.
_Prep._ (P. C.) Washed sulphur, 2 parts; cerate of Galen, 7 parts; almond
oil, 1 part; mix. In itch, &c.

=Cerate, Sul'phide of Mer'cury.= _Prep._ (Swediaur.) Yellow resin, 1/2
oz.; yellow wax and lard, of each 1/2 lb.; vermilion, 20 gr. As a dressing
to unhealthy ulcers. See CERATE, CINNABAR.

=Cerate, Tobac'co.= _Prep._ Beeswax, 3 oz.; yellow resin, 1 oz.; olive
oil, 6 oz.; tobacco juice, 4 oz.; mix and evaporate to dryness, and when
nearly cold, add bergamot, 2 dr. Used to destroy pediculi, &c.

=Cerate, Touch.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM PRO TEC'TU, L.; CERAT POUR LE TOUCHER,
Fr. _Prep._ (Soubeiran.) Spermaceti and yellow wax, of each 1 part; olive
oil, 16 parts; melt, add caustic soda, 1 part, and stir until cold. Used
in hospitals for practising the touching in accouchements.

=Cerate, Turner's.= See CERATE, CALAMINE.

=Cerate, Ver'digris.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM AERU'GINIS, C. CU'PRI DIACETA'TIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Resin cerate, 19 parts; verdigris (in fine powder), 1 part.

2. (For. Ph.) Wax and resin, of each 6 parts; Venice turpentine, 5 parts;
linseed oil, 2 parts; verdigris, 1 part. Used as a mild escharotic and
stimulant to fungous ulcers, warts, corns, &c.

=Cerate, White.= See CERATE, SPERMACETI.

=Cerate, Zinc.= _Syn._ CERA'TUM ZINC'I, C. Z. OXY'DI, L. _Prep._ 1. Oxide
of zinc, 20 gr., spermaceti cerate, 1 oz. Used in sore nipples,
excoriations, &c.; and in chronic ophthalmia.

2. (Compound; CERA'TUM ZINCI COMPOSITUM, L.)--_a._ To the last add
calomel, 10 gr. Used as the last, and in scrofulous ophthalmia.

_b._ (Mid. Hosp.) Zinc ointment and compound lead ointment, equal parts.
Cooling, astringent; in excoriations, and as a dressing for ulcers.

_c._ (Hufeland.) Oxide of zinc and lycopodium, of each 15 gr.; simple
cerate, 1/2 oz. In sore nipples, ulcerations of the breast, tetters, &c.
It acts best when diluted with half its weight of spermaceti cerate.

_d._ (U. S. Ph.) Precipitated carbonate zinc, 2 oz.; simple cerate, 10 oz.
A substitute for calamine cerate.

=CEREB'RIC ACID.= A peculiar acid compound, first noticed by M. Fremy,
obtained along with oleo-phosphoric acid when the brain and nerves are
treated with hot alcohol. It is solid, white, crystalline; freely soluble
in boiling alcohol, and forms a solid gelatinous mass with hot water;
fusible with decomposition, exhaling a peculiar odour, and leaving much
charcoal behind. It has been found also in the yolk of eggs, in seminal
fluid, and in pus. With the alkalies it forms insoluble salts termed
cerebrates.

=CEREB'ROLEIN.= When oleo-phosphoric acid is boiled in water, it is
resolved into a fluid neutral oil and phosphoric acid, which dissolves.
The former is cerebrolein.

=CE'RIN=, HC_{27}H_{53}O_{2}. (Brodie.) _Syn._ CEROTIC ACID. When pure
beeswax (bleached) is digested in boiling alcohol for some time, a
solution of myricin and cerin is formed. The former is deposited as the
liquid cools, and the latter may be obtained by evaporating the decanted
portion. Cerin is a white, crystallisable substance, soluble in 16 parts
of boiling alcohol; it fuses at 144 deg. Fahr.; and is readily saponified with
caustic alkaline lyes. It greatly resembles white wax, of which, indeed,
it forms from 70%; to 80%.

=CERISIN.= A substance obtained from ozokerit or fossil wax, very similar
in appearance and properties to white wax, for which it has been proposed
as a substitute in pharmaceutical preparations. At present it is chiefly
used in the manufacture of candles. Cerisin appears to be one of the
paraffins. It differs, however, from ordinary paraffin in not being
unctuous to the touch, in being non-translucent and firmer in texture, and
in having a higher fusing point. It seems to be intermediate between
ordinary paraffin and wax.

=CE'RIUM.= Ce. A metal discovered in 1803 by Hisinger and Berzelius in the
mineral named cerite.

=Cerium Oxalate.= (Ph. B.) It may be obtained as a precipitate by adding a
solution of oxalate of ammonia to a soluble salt of cerium.--_Dose_, 1 to
2 gr. Given in the vomiting of pregnancy.

=CE'ROMEL.= _Prep._ (Van Mons.) Beeswax, 1 oz.; honey, 4 oz.; melt
together and stir until cold. An excellent application to irritable
ulcers, abraded surfaces, sore nipples, &c.

=CERO'TIC ACID.= See CERIN.

=CESSPOOLS.= It may be well to point out that the local authorities of any
district in which a cesspool is situated are required by the Public Health
Act--1. To see that it is so constructed and kept as to prevent its
becoming either a nuisance or detrimental to health. 2. That an
examination of any cesspool can be made by the sanitary inspector, or by
any officer appointed by the local authority, after notice of entry has
been served upon those who are the occupiers of the premises on which it
is situated. 3. The local authority may itself undertake the cleansing of
a cesspool, or it may enact bye-laws imposing this duty on the occupiers
of the premises. 4. If the local authority, after having undertaken the
cleansing of a cesspool, fail to do its duty, it becomes liable, after
notice from an occupier, for the payment to the said occupier of a penalty
not exceeding five shillings a day during default. 5. Any person in an
urban district who allows the contents of a cesspool to overflow, or to
soak therefrom, incurs a penalty of forty shillings for each offence, and
a further charge of five shillings a day for the continuance of the
offence after notice. 6. Information of any nuisance under the said Act in
the district of any local authority may be given to such local authority
by any person aggrieved thereby, or by any two inhabitant householders of
such district, or by any officer of such authority, or by the relieving
officer, or by any constable or officer of the police force of such
district.

It does not come within our province to enter into details as to the best
method of building a cesspool.

We may, however, state, that owing to the defective and leaky construction
of a cesspool, it very frequently becomes a serious source of dangerous
contamination to the wells in the neighbourhood, as well as a ready means
of contagion, when it contains the excreta of fever patients. The outbreak
of typhoid fever at the west end of London in 1874, the origin of which
was traced to the milk supply, was owing to the vessels in which the milk
was collected in the country having been washed out with water taken from
a well near a cesspool, into which ran the contents of a privy belonging
to a house, some of the inmates of which were labouring under typhoid
fever.

For a cesspool not to be injurious to health it should be water-tight and
ventilated by a shaft; it should never be allowed to overflow; and should
be sunk at as great a distance from houses or dwellings as possible.

=CE'TIN.= C_{32}H_{64}O_{2}. Chevreul applied this name to pure
spermaceti. _Prep._ Dissolve spermaceti in boiling alcohol, and collect
the crystals that are deposited as the solution cools. Bright pearly
crystals, melting at 120 deg., and subliming at 670 deg. Fahr. See SPERMACETI.

=CETRAR'IC ACID.= H_{2}C_{18}H_{14}O_{8}. _Syn._ CETRAR'IN. The bitter
principle of Iceland moss (_Cetraria Islandica_). It exists, in the free
state, in the cortical portion of the thallus.

_Prep._ 1. Iceland moss (bruised), 1 part; rectified spirit, 6 parts; boil
in a covered vessel for half an hour; express the liquor whilst hot,
filter, and distil off the spirit; redissolve the residuum in boiling
alcohol, decant the clear, and let the solution cool slowly; lastly,
collect the crystals and preserve them out of contact with air.

2. (Herberger.) Iceland moss (in coarse powder), 1 lb.; alcohol (.883), 4
lbs.; boil as before, cool until vapours cease to rise, express the
tincture, add hydrochloric acid, 3 dr., (dissolved in) water, 2 oz.; let
it rest for a night in a closed matrass; then decant, throw the deposit on
a filter, press it in bibulous paper, and whilst still moist wash it with
both alcohol and ether; lastly, purify it by digestion in boiling alcohol,
as before.

_Prop., &c._ Pure cetraric acid occurs under the form of minute, shining,
acicular crystals; it is intensely bitter, non-volatile, scarcely soluble
in water, ether, and cold alcohol; soluble in alkaline solutions forming
soluble salts, which give a red colour with the persalts of iron, and a
yellow one with acetate of lead. The compounds are called
cetrarates.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 gr. every three hours, as a febrifuge; 1 to 3
gr. thrice daily, as a tonic.

=CHA'BERT'S OIL.= _Syn._ CHABERT'S EMPYREUMAT'IC OIL; O'LEUM
EMPYREUMAT'ICUM CHABERTI, O. CONTRA TAENIAM CHABERTI, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Bor.
1847.) From empyreumatic oil of hartshorn, 1 part; oil of turpentine, 3
parts; mix and distil over three fourths only in a glass retort, and keep
it in well-stopped bottles. In tapeworm.--_Dose_, 2 teaspoonfuls in water,
night and morning, until 4 to 6 or even 7 oz. have been taken; a cathartic
being also administered from time to time.

=CHAFING.= See EXCORIATIONS.

=CHAIRS.= The black leather work of chairs, settees, &c., may be restored
by first well washing off the dirt with a little warm soap and water, and
afterwards with clean water. The brown and faded portions may now be
retained by means of a little black ink, or preferably, black reviver, and
when this has got thoroughly dry, they may be touched over with white of
egg, stained and mixed with a little sugar-candy. When the surface is
nearly dry, it should be polished off with a clean brush.

=CHALK.= _Syn._ SOFT CARBONATE OF LIME, or CARBONATE OF CALCIUM, EARTHY C.
OF L.; CRE'TA, L. Chalk is largely used in the arts and manufactures, and
in medicine. The natural varieties are remarkable for the fossils which
they contain. The COLOURED CHALKS which are used as pigments and for
crayons generally contain both clay and magnesia, as well as oxide of
iron, and are minerals quite distinct from WHITE CHALK, or CHALK properly
so called. The latter is an AMORPHOUS CARBONATE OF LIME. Exposed for some
time to a red heat, it is converted into QUICK-LIME; ground in mills and
elutriated, it forms WHITING; the same process performed more carefully
and on a smaller scale produces the PREPARED CHALK used in medicine. When
prepared artificially (by precipitation), it is the PRECIPITATED CHALK of
modern pharmacy. (See _below_.)

=Chalk, Black.= A variety of drawing slate.

=Chalk, Brown.= A familiar name for umber.

=Chalk, Cam'phorated.= _Syn._ CRETACEOUS TOOTH POWDER, CAM'PHORATED T. P.;
CRE'TA CAM'PHORATA, C. CUM CAMPHO'RA, L. _Prep._ 1. Camphor, 1 oz.; add a
few drops of spirit of wine, reduce it to a very fine powder, and mix it
(perfectly) with precipitated chalk, 7 oz.; lastly, pass it through a
clean, fine sieve, and keep it in a corked bottle. These proportions make
the strongest "CAMPHORATED TOOTH POWDER" of the shops.

2. Camphor, 1 oz.; precipitated chalk, 15 oz.; as before. These are the
best and safest proportions, and those now generally adopted by the
West-end perfumers.

3. As either of the above, but using prepared chalk in lieu of
precipitated chalk. Less white and velvety, but cleans the teeth better
than the softer article.

_Uses, &c._ Camphorated chalk is much esteemed as a dentifrice; especially
by smokers, and those troubled with foul teeth, or offensive breath. It
may be scented with a few drops (3 or 4 to each oz.) of otto of roses, oil
of cloves, or neroli, or of the essences of ambergris, musk, or vanilla;
but care must be taken not to overdo it. When the teeth are much furred or
discoloured, it may be mixed with about one seventh of its weight of
finely powdered pumice stone (sifted through lawn), which will render it
more effective. A little carmine, rouge, light red (burnt ochre), red
coral, or rose pink, is also sometimes added to give it a tinge
approaching that of the gums. The quantity of camphor (1 to 3 or 4)
commonly ordered in certain books is absurdly large, and would render the
compound not only unpleasant in use, but actually detrimental to the
teeth. See DENTIFRICES.

=Chalk, French.= Soap stone or steatite, a soft magnesian mineral,
possessing the property of writing on glass. It is used by tailors for
marking cloths. Its powder (obtained by scraping) is very soft, velvety,
and absorbent of grease. It forms the boot powder of the boot- and
shoe-makers.

=Chalk Mixture.= _Syn._ MISTURA CRETAE, L. Prepared chalk, 1 part; gum
arabic (in powder), 1 part; syrup, 2 parts; cinnamon water, 30 parts; mix
by trituration.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz., with astringent tinctures and opium.
Care should be taken to use the prepared chalk as directed; the
precipitated chalk has a crystalline character, and is said to occasion
irritation of the bowels. (Squire.)

=Chalk, Precip'itated.= _Syn._ PRECIPITATED CAR'BONATE OF LIME; CRE'TA
PRAECIPITA'TA, CAL'CIS CARB'ONAS PRAECIPITA'TUM, L. _Prep._ 1. By adding to
a solution of chloride of calcium, any quantity, another of carbonate of
soda (both cold), and well washing the precipitate with pure water, and
drying it out of the dust.

2. (Ph. D.) Solution of chloride of calcium (Ph. D.), 5 parts; carbonate
of soda, 3 parts; (dissolved in) water, 4 parts.

3. (B. P.) Dissolve chloride of calcium, 5 oz.; and carbonate of soda, 13
oz.; each in two pints of boiling distilled water; mix the two solutions,
and allow the precipitate to subside. Collect this on a calico filter,
wash it with boiling distilled water, until the washing cease to give a
precipitate with nitrate of silver, and try the product at the temperature
of 212 deg. F.

_Uses, &c._ It is chiefly employed for making aromatic confection,
cretaceous powder, and chalk mixture. That of the shops is seldom pure,
the refuse of the soda-water makers (sulphate of lime) being commonly sold
for it. When pure it is wholly soluble, with effervescence, in dilute
hydrochloric acid. (See _below_.)

=Chalk, Prepa''red.= _Syn._ CRE'TA (Ph. E. & Ph. L. 1836), CRE'TA
PREPARA'TA (Ph. L. 1851), CRE'TA AL'BA (Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. D.
1836.) Rub chalk, 1 lb., with sufficient water, add gradually, until
reduced to a smooth cream; then stir this into a large quantity of water,
and, after a short interval, to allow the coarser particles to subside,
pour off the supernatant water (still turbid) into another vessel, and
allow the suspended powder to settle; lastly, collect the chalk so
prepared and dry it. In the same way shells are prepared, after being
first freed from impurities and washed with boiling water.

2. (Commercial; WHI'TING.) On the large scale the chalk is ground in
mills, and the elutriation and deposit made in large reservoirs. It is now
seldom prepared by the druggist.

_Pur._ Almost entirely soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid, provided it
contains no sulphate of lime or silica, giving off small bubbles of
carbonic acid gas.

_Test._ The salt formed by dissolving the chalk in hydrochloric acid, if
rendered neutral by evaporation to dryness and redissolved in water, gives
only a very scanty precipitate on the addition of a saccharated solution
of lime, indicating absence of phosphate. (B. P.)

_Uses, &c._ In _medicine_, as an absorbent, antacid, and desiccant; in
acidity, heartburn, dyspepsia, and other like stomach affections, and in
diarrh[oe]a, depending on acidity or irritation; in the latter, generally
combined with aromatics, astringents, or opium. It forms a valuable
dusting powder in excoriations, ulcers, &c., especially in those of
children.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to a spoonful, in a little water or milk, or
made into a mixture with mucilage or syrup.

=Chalk, Red.= A natural clay containing about 18% of protoxide and
carbonate of iron.

=CHALYB'EATES.= _Syn._ CHALYBEA'TA, FERRUGIN'EA, L. The medicinal
qualities of the preparations of iron are noticed under the name of that
metal. Those most frequently employed in medicine are--IRON FILINGS;
QUEVENNE'S IRON; the BLACK OXIDE, MAGNETIC OXIDE, and SESQUIOXIDE OF IRON;
the AMMONIO-CHLORIDE and SESQUICHLORIDE; the CARBONATE and SACCHARINE
CARBONATE; the CITRATE and AMMONIO-CITRATE; the IODIDE, LACTATE, and
SULPHATE; the TARTRATE, AMMONIO-TARTRATE, and POTASSIO-TARTRATE OF IRON;
and the CHALYBEATE MINERAL WATERS. For the doses, &c., see the respective
articles.

=CHAM'OMILE.= _Syn._ ANTHE'MIS, L. The flowers of the _Anthemis nobilis_
(_Anthemidis Flores_, B. P.). They are bitter, stomachic, and tonic; in
dyspepsia, loss of appetite, intermittents, &c. They are an effectual
remedy for nightmare; and, according to Dr Schall, the only certain remedy
for that complaint.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr., or more, in powder or made
into a tea. Fomentations are also made with it. See EXTRACTS, OILS, PILLS,
&c.

=CHAMPAGNE'.= See WINES.

=CHAPS.= These are too well known to require description. Chapped hands
are common amongst persons with a languid circulation, who are continually
"dabbling" in water during cold weather. Chapped lips generally occur in
persons with pallid, bluish, moist lips, who are much exposed to the wind
in dry cold weather; especially in those who are continually moving from
heated apartments to the external air. The application of a little COLD
CREAM, POMATUM, SPERMACETI OINTMENT, LARD, or any similar article, will
generally prevent chaps on the lips, and chaps and chilblains on the
hands. Persons employed in oil and tallow works, or about oil, and who
have consequently their hands continually in contact with greasy matter,
never suffer from these things. A little oil or unguent of any kind, well
rubbed on the hands on going to rest (removing the superfluous portion
with a cloth), will not only preserve them from cold, but tend to render
them both soft and white. See CHILBLAIN.

=CHAR (Potted).= The flesh of the _Salmo Alpinus_ (Linn.), or trout of the
Alps, common in the lakes of Lapland, preserved by the common process of
potting.

=CHAR'BON-ROUX= [Fr.]. See CHARCOAL, WOOD (_below_).

=CHAR'COAL.= Charcoal is made by charring organic substances, such as
wood, bone, blood, &c., and is, in other words, the fixed residuum of
vegetable or animal matter exposed to a high temperature out of contact
with atmospheric air.

There are several different varieties of charcoal, the chief of which,
however, are wood and animal charcoal.

=Charcoal, Animal.= _Syn._ ANIMAL BLACK, BONE BLACK, IVORY BLACK, CARBO
ANIMALIS. The charcoal obtained by igniting bone in close vessels, but
often applied likewise to any charcoal obtained from animal matter.

_Commercial._ Bones (deprived of their grease by boiling) are broken to
pieces, and put into small cast-iron pots, varying from 3/8 to 1/2 an inch
in thickness. Two of these being filled, are dexterously placed with their
mouths together and then luted with loam. A number of these vessels are
then placed side by side and piled on each other, in an oven resembling a
potter's kiln, to the number of 100 or 150, or even more. The fire is next
kindled, and the heat kept up strongly for 10 or 12 hours, according to
circumstances, until the process is completed. The whole is then allowed
to cool before opening the pots.

A more economical method is by distillation, as under:--

Bones (previously boiled for their grease) are introduced into retorts
similar to those used in gas works, and heat being applied, the volatile
products are conveyed away by iron pipes to cisterns where the condensable
portion is collected. As soon as the process of distillation is finished,
the solid residuum in the retorts, while still red hot, is removed through
their lower ends into wrought-iron canisters, which are instantly closed
by air-tight covers and luted over. These are then raised to the ground by
a crane, and set aside to cool.

The bones, having been carbonised, are ground in a mill, and the resulting
coarse powder, sorted by sieves into two kinds, one, granular, somewhat
resembling gunpowder, for decolorising liquids, and the other, quite fine,
to be used as a pigment. The first is sold under the name of animal
charcoal; the second as bone or ivory black. The latter and other fine
varieties of animal charcoal are fully described under the head of BLACK
PIGMENTS.

_Uses, &c._ This crude animal charcoal possesses the valuable property of
taking lime and other saline matter from syrups and other aqueous
solutions, especially organic ones, at the same time that it decolours
them. Its power as a decoloriser may be tested by adding it to a solution
of brown sugar or of molasses, or to water containing 1/1000 part of
indigo dissolved in sulphuric acid. The test should be made in a small
glass tube. By well washing and carefully reburning it, this charcoal may
be used any number of times. As a decoloriser and deodoriser, animal
charcoal is vastly superior to vegetable charcoal.

Dr Stenhouse has invented a charcoal respirator to cover over the mouth
and nostrils of a person going into an infected atmosphere. Charcoal is
also used with excellent effect to prevent the escape of noxious vapours
and offensive effluvia from the ventilating openings of sewers. The
charcoal condenses and oxidises the escaping sewer gas in its pores. Dr
Garrod has proposed animal charcoal as a general antidote in cases of
poisoning.

PREPARED ANIMAL CHARCOAL. Hydrochloric acid, 1 lb.; water, 1 pint; mix,
add bone black, 7 lbs.; make a paste; in 2 or 3 days stir in boiling
water, 1 quart; and the next day wash it with fresh water until the
washings cease to affect litmus paper or a solution of carbonate of
sodium; then collect it in a cloth, and drain, press, and dry it; lastly,
heat it to redness, as before. Used to decolour syrups, &c.; and
occasionally by the distillers and rectifiers.

The most powerful charcoal is prepared by calcining blood, and well
washing the residue, and which is the method of the last 'London
Pharmacop[oe]ia.' The B. P. directs it to be made by burning bones in a
closed vessel.

_Concluding Remarks._ Animal charcoal, however prepared, if intended to be
used as a deodoriser or decoloriser, should be kept thoroughly excluded
from the air, as by exposure it loses all its valuable properties, and
becomes absolutely inert. Freshly burnt charcoal is therefore to be
employed whenever it can be obtained.

=Charcoal, Wood.= _Syn._ VEG'ETABLE CHARCOAL; CAR'BO LIG'NI, L. The
residue obtained after heating wood without access of air to about 572 deg.
Fahr. It is extremely porous, and retains the structure of the wood from
which it is derived. It consists essentially of carbon and of the fixed or
inorganic matter which exists in wood; but if carbonisation be imperfectly
effected, it may contain a sensible amount of hydrogen.

Charcoal burning is effected in the open air in piles or stacks provided
with a yielding cover, in pits, in closed chambers of brick or stone, and
in iron retorts heated externally like common gas retorts. The latter
method is only practised by the manufacturers of pyroligneous acid and
gunpowder.

CHARCOAL FOR FUEL, &c. The method of pile burning is that which is most
extensively practised. Pieces of wood of equal length are piled
concentrically round a sort of chimney formed by driving 3 stakes in the
ground; those nearest the centre are almost vertical, and the surrounding
pieces have a slight but gradually increasing inclination; a second row,
and in the case of very large piles even a third, may be stacked in a
similar manner one above the other. The pile is covered with turf and
soil, and kindled by filling the space within the 3 central stakes with
easily inflammable wood, which is ignited. The character of the smoke
which issues from vents made in the piles indicates exactly the degrees of
carbonisation in different parts. When the charcoal is drawn from the pile
it is extinguished by cold water, or if that is not at hand, by charcoal
dust or dry soil. In some parts of Sweden the wood is charred in large
rectangular stacks, and in China the method of charring in pits is
practised.

CHARCOAL FOR GUN'POWDER; CYL'INDER CHARCOAL. The charcoal employed in the
manufacture of gunpowder is burnt in close iron cylinders, and has hence
received the name of cylinder charcoal. For this and other nice purposes
it is essential that the last portion of the tar and vinegar should be
suffered to escape, and the reabsorption of the crude vapours prevented by
cutting off the communication between the cylinders and the condensing
apparatus; as without this precaution, on the fire being withdrawn, a
retrograde movement of the product takes place, and the charcoal is much
reduced in quality. Alder and willow are the woods chiefly used for making
charcoal at Waltham Abbey. The Dutch white willow, and after that the
Huntingdon willow, are said to yield the best charcoal for gunpowder. The
charcoal from the cylinders of the pyroligneous acid (wood vinegar) works
is also called cylinder charcoal, and is that chiefly used for chemical
purposes; but it is inferior to that prepared for gunpowder.

CHARCOAL FOR SCIENTIFIC PURPOSES. The box-wood charcoal, employed in
voltaic electricity, is prepared by putting prismatic pieces of box-wood,
about 1 inch long by 1/2 inch thick, into a crucible, which is then filled
with clean, dry sand, covered up, and exposed to a red heat for about an
hour.

_Uses, &c._ These are numerous and varied. Charcoal is extensively
employed as a fuel; and in metallurgy for tempering metals, making steel,
&c.; reduced to powder, it is used to surround vessels and bodies required
to retain their heat for some time; a coating of charcoal, formed on piles
and stakes of wood by charring them, promotes their preservation. Fresh
burnt charcoal, in coarse powder, restores tainted meat and putrid water,
discolours vegetable solutions, deodorises fetid substances, and withdraws
lime from syrups filtered through it. Exposed on trays it is used as a
disinfectant and deodoriser in the wards of hospitals and in dissecting
rooms, also as a material for water filters.

In _medicine_, charcoal is principally used as a deodoriser and
disinfectant, either in the form of powder or made into a poultice. It has
been given internally in dyspepsia, diarrh[oe]a, dysentery, heartburn,
agues, constipation, sickness of pregnancy, and various other diseases,
with advantage. As a prophylactic of cholera and fevers it is invaluable
and superior to all other substances. It forms the best tooth powder
known, as it both whitens the teeth and deodorises the breath.--_Dose_, 10
gr. to a teaspoonful, or more _ad libitum_. An ointment made with lard and
charcoal has been successfully employed in some skin diseases. In all
cases, to be useful, the charcoal must be both fresh-burnt and
fresh-powdered, and carefully preserved, out of contact with the air,
until about to be administered. Fresh carbonised bread forms an excellent
charcoal, both for a prophylactic and a tooth powder.

Charcoal varies in its qualities according to the substance from which it
is prepared: that of the soft woods (willow or alder) is best for crayons
and gunpowder; that of the hard woods for fuel, and for blowpipe supports.
That made by a low red heat, not exceeding cherry red, and which has a
dull surface, is the most valuable. If the heat be carried much beyond
this point, the charcoal acquires a brilliant surface, and deteriorates in
quality. Chestnut charcoal is preferred by smiths for forging, as it not
only burns slowly, but deadens as soon as the blast ceases. Areca-nut
charcoal is preferred as a dentifrice; but the willow charcoal or box-wood
charcoal is usually substituted for it by shopkeepers.

_Ant., &c._ Poisoning or suffocation, resulting from respiring the fumes
of burning charcoal, has been already alluded to, and the treatment
briefly pointed out. See CARBONIC ANHYDRIDE.

=CHAR'GES (for Cattle).= See VETERINARY MEDICINE.

=CHAR'RING (Surface).= The operation by which the surface of wood is
carbonised, to prevent its decay from exposure to air and moisture. Stakes
and piles are generally thus treated before they are driven into the
ground. Casks are charred on the inside by coopers when they are intended
to hold water. In both these cases the fire is commonly applied directly
to the wood. A new method has, however, been lately employed with apparent
success. This consists in washing the wood with the strongest oil of
vitriol. In this way not only the outer surface, but the surface of all
the cracks and holes, get carbonised, which is not the case when heat is
employed. It succeeds admirably with musty casks and vats.

=CHATHAM LIGHT.= A flash light used for military signals. It is produced
by blowing a mixture of pulverised rosin and magnesium dust through the
flame of a spirit lamp.

=CHEESE.= _Syn._ CA'SEUM, CA'SEUS, L. The curd of milk compressed into a
solid mass. That of commerce is usually salted and dried, and in some
varieties it is also coloured and flavoured.

The process of cheese-making is one which is eminently interesting and
scientific, and which, in every gradation, depends on principles which
chemistry has developed and illustrated. When a vegetable or mineral acid
is added to milk, and heat applied, a coagulum is formed, which, when
separated from the liquid portion, constitutes cheese. Neutral salts,
earthy and metallic salts, sugar, and gum Arabic, as well as some other
substances, also produce the same effect; but that which answers the
purpose best, and which is almost exclusively used by dairy farmers, is
rennet, or the mucous membrane of the last stomach of the calf. Alkalies
dissolve this curd at a boiling heat, and acids again precipitate it. The
solubility of casein in milk is occasioned by the presence of the
phosphates and other salts of the alkalies. In fresh milk these substances
may be readily detected by the property it possesses of restoring the
colour of reddened litmus paper. The addition of an acid neutralises the
alkali, and so precipitates the curd in an insoluble state. The philosophy
of cheese-making is thus expounded by Liebig:--

"The acid indispensable to the coagulation of milk is not added to the
milk in the preparation of cheese, but it is formed in the milk at the
expense of the milk-sugar present. A small quantity of water is left in
contact with a small quantity of a calf's stomach for a few hours, or for
a night; the water absorbs so minute a portion of the mucous membrane as
to be scarcely ponderable; this is mixed with milk; its state of
transformation is communicated (and this is a most important
circumstance), not to the cheese, but to the milk-sugar, the elements of
which transpose themselves into lactic acid, which neutralises the
alkalies, and thus causes the separation of the cheese. By means of litmus
paper the process may be followed and observed through all its stages; the
alkaline reaction of the milk ceases as soon as the coagulation begins. If
the cheese is not immediately separated from the whey, the formation of
lactic acid continues, the fluid turns acid, and the cheese itself passes
into a state of decomposition.

"When cheese-curd is kept in a cool place a series of transformations
takes place, in consequence of which it assumes entirely new properties;
it gradually becomes semi-transparent, and more or less soft, throughout
the whole mass; it exhibits a feebly acid reaction, and develops the
characteristic caseous odour. Fresh cheese is very sparingly soluble in
water, but after having been left to itself for two or three years it
becomes (especially if all the fat be previously removed) almost
completely soluble in cold water, forming with it a solution which, like
milk, is coagulated by the addition of the acetic or any mineral acid. The
cheese, which whilst fresh is insoluble, returns during the maturation, or
ripening, as it is called, to a state similar to that in which it
originally existed in the milk. In those English, Dutch, and Swiss cheeses
which are nearly inodorous, and in the superior kinds of French cheese,
the caseine of the milk is present in its unaltered state.

"The odour and flavour of the cheese is owing to the decomposition of the
butter; the non-volatile acids, the margaric and oleic acids, and the
volatile butyric acid, capric and caproic acids are liberated in
consequence of the decomposition of glycerin. Butyric acid imparts to
cheese its characteristic caseous odour, and the differences in its
pungency or aromatic flavour depend upon the proportion of free butyric,
capric, and caproic acids present." In the cheese of certain dairies and
districts, valerianic acid has been detected along with the other acids
just referred to. Messrs Jljenko and Laskowski found this acid in the
cheese of Limbourg, and M. Bolard in that of Roquefort.

"The transition of the insoluble into soluble casein depends upon the
decomposition of the phosphate of lime by the margaric acid of the butter;
margarate of lime is formed, whilst the phosphoric acid combines with the
casein, forming a compound soluble in water.

"The bad smell of inferior kinds of cheese, especially those called meagre
or poor cheeses, is caused by certain fetid products containing sulphur,
and which are formed by the decomposition or putrefaction of the casein.
The alteration which the butter undergoes (that is, in becoming rancid),
or which occurs in the milk-sugar still present, being transmitted to the
casein, changes both the composition of the latter substance and its
nutritive qualities.

"The principal conditions for the preparation of the superior kinds of
cheese (other obvious circumstances being of course duly regarded) are a
careful removal of the whey, which holds the milk-sugar in solution, and a
low temperature during the maturation or ripening of the cheese."

Cheese differs vastly in quality and flavour, according to the method
employed in its manufacture and the richness of the milk of which it is
made. Much depends upon the quantity of cream it contains, and
consequently, when a superior quality of cheese is desired, cream is
frequently added to the curd. This plan is adopted in the manufacture of
Stilton cheese and others of a like description. The addition of a pound
or two of butter to the curd for a middling size cheese also vastly
improves the quality of the product. To ensure the richness of the milk,
not only should the cows be properly fed, but certain breeds chosen. Those
of Alderney, Cheddar, Cheshire, Gloucestershire, Guernsey, and North
Wiltshire deserve a preference in this respect.

The materials employed in making cheese are milk and rennet. Rennet is
used either fresh or salted and dried; generally in the latter state. The
milk may be of any kind, according to the quality of the cheese required.
Cows' milk is that generally employed; but occasionally ewes' milk is
used; and sometimes, though more rarely, that from goats.

In preparing his cheese, the dairy farmer puts the greater portion of the
milk into a large tub, to which he adds the remainder, sufficiently heated
to raise the temperature to that of new milk. The whole is then whisked
together, the rennet or rennet liquor added, and the tub covered over. It
is now allowed to stand until completely "turned," when the curd is gently
struck down several times with the skimming-dish, after which it is
allowed to subside. The vat covered with cheese-cloth is next placed on a
"horse" or "ladder" over the tub, and filled with curd by means of the
skimmer, care being taken to allow as little as possible of the oily
particles or butter to run back with the whey. The curd is pressed down
with the hands, and more added as it sinks. This process is repeated until
the curd rises to about two inches above the edge. The newly formed
cheese, thus partially separated from the whey, is now placed in a clean
tub, and a proper quantity of salt added, as well as of annotta, when that
colouring is used, after which a board is placed over and under it, and
pressure applied for about 2 or 3 hours. The cheese is next turned out and
surrounded by a fresh cheese-cloth, and then again submitted to pressure
in the cheese press for 8 or 10 hours, after which it is commonly removed
from the press, salted all over, and again pressed for 15 to 20 hours. The
quality of the cheese especially depends on this part of the process, as
if any of the whey is left in the cheese it rapidly becomes bad-flavoured.
Before placing it in the press the last time the common practice is to
pare the edges smooth and sightly. It now only remains to wash the outside
of the cheese in warm whey or water, to wipe it dry, and to colour it with
annotta or reddle, as is usually done.

The storing of the newly-made cheese is the next point that engages the
attention of the maker and wholesale dealer. The same principles which
influence the maturation or ripening of fermented liquors also operate
here. In England, a cool cellar, neither damp nor dry, and which is
uninfluenced by change of weather or season, is commonly regarded as the
best for the purpose. If possible, the temperature should on no account be
permitted to exceed 50 deg. or 52 deg. Fahr. at any portion of the year. An
average of about 45 deg. is preferable when it can be procured. A place
exposed to sudden changes of temperature is as unfit for storing cheese
as it is for storing beer. "The quality of Rochefort cheese, which is
prepared from sheep's milk, and is very excellent, depends exclusively
upon the places where the cheeses are kept after pressing and during
maturation. Those are cellars, communicating with mountain grottoes and
caverns, which are kept constantly cool, at about 41 deg. to 42 deg. Fahr., by
currents of air from clefts in the mountains. The value of these cellars
as storehouses varies with their property of maintaining an equable and
low temperature. Giron mentions that a certain cellar, the construction of
which had cost only 480_l._ (12,000 francs), was sold for 8600_l._
(215,000 francs), being found to maintain a suitable temperature, a
convincing proof of the importance attached to temperature in the
preparation of these superior cheeses." (Liebig.)

It will thus be seen that very slight differences in the materials, in the
preparation, or in storing of the cheese, materially influence the quality
and flavour of this article. The richness of the milk--the addition to or
subtraction of cream from the milk--the separation of the curd from the
whey with or without compression--the salting of the curd--the collection
of the curd, either whole or broken, before pressing--the addition of
colouring matter, as annotta or saffron, or of flavouring--the place and
method of storing--and the length of time allowed for maturation, all tend
to alter the taste and odour of the cheese in some or other particular,
and that in a way readily perceptible to the palate of the connoisseur. No
other alimentary substance appears to be so seriously affected by slight
variations in the quality of the materials from which it is made, or by
such apparently trifling differences in the methods of preparing it.

_Var._ The varieties of cheese met with in commerce are very numerous, and
differ greatly from each other in richness, colour, and flavour. These are
commonly distinguished by names indicative of the places in which they
have been manufactured, or of the quality of the materials from which they
have been prepared. Thus, we have Dutch, Gloucester, Stilton,
skimmed-milk, raw-milk, cream, and other cheeses; names which explain
themselves. The following are the principal varieties met with in
Europe:--

CHEESE, BRICKBAT. From its form; made in Wiltshire of new milk and cream.

CHEESE, CHEDDAR. A fine, spongy kind of cheese, the eyes or vesicles of
which contain a rich oil; made up into round, thick cheeses, of
considerable size (150 to 200 lbs.).

CHEESE, CHESHIRE. From new milk, without skimming, the morning's milk
being mixed with that of the preceding evening, previously warmed, so that
the whole may be brought to the heat of new milk. To this the rennet is
added, in less quantity than is commonly used for other kinds of cheese.
On this point much of the flavour and mildness of the cheese is said to
depend. A piece of dried rennet, of the size of half-a-crown, put into a
pint of water over night, and allowed to stand until the next morning, is
sufficient for 18 or 20 gallons of milk. In large, round, thick cheeses
(100 to 200 lbs. each). They are generally solid, homogeneous, and dry,
and friable rather than viscid.

CHEESE, COTTENHAM. A rich kind of cheese, in flavour and consistence not
unlike Stilton, from which, however, it differs in shape, being flatter
and broader than the latter.

CHEESE, CREAM. From the "strippings" (the last of the milk drawn from the
cow at each milking), from a mixture of milk and cream, or from raw cream
only, according to the quality desired. It is usually made in small
oblong, square, or rounded cakes, a general pressure only (that of a 2 or
4 lb. weight) being applied to press out the whey. After twelve hours it
is placed upon a board or wooden trencher, and turned every day until dry.
It ripens in about three weeks. A little salt is generally added, and
frequently a little powdered lump sugar.

CHEESE, DERBYSHIRE. A small, white, rich variety, very similar to Dunlop
cheese.

CHEESE, DUNLOP. Rich, white, and buttery; in round forms, weighing from 30
lbs. to 60 lbs.

CHEESE, DUTCH. (Holland.) Of a globular form. 5 to 14 lbs. each. Those
from Edam are very highly salted; those from Gouda less so.

CHEESE, GLOUCESTER. Single Glo'ster; from milk deprived of part of its
cream; Double Glo'ster, from milk retaining the whole of the cream. Mild
tasted, semi-buttery consistence, without being friable; in large, round,
flattish forms.

CHEESE, GREEN or SAGE. From milk mixed with the juice or an infusion or
decoction of sage leaves, to which marygold flowers and parsley are
frequently added.

CHEESE, GRUYERE. A fine description of cheese made in Switzerland, and
largely consumed on the Continent. It is firm and dry, and exhibits
numerous cells of considerable magnitude. Its flavour is peculiar, and is
not generally liked by English people.

CHEESE, LINCOLN. From new milk and cream; in pieces about 2 inches thick;
soft, and will not keep over 2 or 3 months.

CHEESE, NEUFCHATEL. A much-esteemed variety of Swiss cheese; made of
cream, and weighs about 5 or 6 oz.

CHEESE, NORFOLK. Dyed yellow with annotta or saffron; good, but not
superior; in cheeses of 30 lbs. to 50 lbs.

CHEESE, PARMESAN. (Parma, &c.) From the curd of skimmed milk, hardened by
a gentle heat. The rennet is added at about 120 deg., and an hour afterwards
the curdling milk is set on a slow fire until heated to about 150 deg. Fahr.;
during which the curd separates in small lumps. A few pinches of saffron
are then thrown in. About a fortnight after making the outer crust is cut
off, and the new surface varnished with linseed oil, and one side coloured
red.

CHEESE, ROQUEFORT. From ewes' milk; the best prepared in France. It
greatly resembles Stilton, but is scarcely of equal richness or quality,
and possesses a peculiar pungency and flavour.

CHEESE, SLIPCOAT or SOFT. A very rich white cheese, somewhat resembling
butter; for present use only.

CHEESE, STILTON. The richest and finest cheese made in England. From raw
milk to which cream taken from other milk is added; in cheeses generally
twice as high as they are broad. Like wine, this cheese is vastly improved
by age, and is therefore seldom eaten before it is 2 years old. A spurious
appearance of age is sometimes given to it by placing it in a warm, damp
cellar, or by surrounding it with masses of fermenting straw or dung.

CHEESE, SUFFOLK. From skimmed milk; in round, flat forms, from 24 lbs. to
30 lbs. each. Very hard and horny.

CHEESE, SWISS. The principal cheeses made in Switzerland are the Gruyere,
the Neufchatel, and the Schabzieger or green cheese. The latter is
flavoured with melilot.

CHEESE, WESTPHALIAN. In small balls or rolls of about 1 lb. each. It
derives its peculiar flavour from the curd being allowed to become
partially putrid before being pressed. In small balls or rolls of about 1
lb. each.

CHEESE, WILTSHIRE. Resembles poor Cheshire or Glo'ster. The outside is
generally painted with a mixture of reddle or red-ochre or whey.

CHEESE, YORK. From cream: it will not keep.

_Qual., &c._ Cheese has been objected to as an article of diet, but
without sufficient reason, since it is, when of good quality, eminently
nutritious, wholesome, and digestible. Like all other food, cheese digests
more readily when well masticated, and the neglect of this precaution is
one reason why it frequently disagrees with delicate stomachs. It is
rendered more agreeable to many palates by toasting it, but becomes less
digestible by that operation. The basis of cheese is casein or coagulated
curd, a protein substance; it therefore cannot fail to prove nutritious,
provided it is properly digested. Cheese-curd, carefully freed from water
and milk by expression, and the addition of salt, is a mixture of casein
and butter. It contains all the phosphate of lime and part of the
phosphate of soda of the milk. (Liebig.) When taken as a condiment,
especially when rich and old, it powerfully promotes the secretion of the
saliva and gastric juice, and thereby aids the stomach in performing its
proper functions. Rotten cheese is very unwholesome.

We give below the composition of some of the principal varieties of
cheese:--

                               Cheddar.   Double     Skim.
                                        Gloucester.
  Water                          36.64     35.61     43.64
  Casein                         23.38     21.76     45.64
  Fatty matter                   35.44     38.16      5.76
  Mineral matter                  4.54      4.47      4.96

                                100.00    100.00    100.00

                                Stilton. Cotherstone.
  Water                          32.18     38.28
  Butter                         37.36     30.89
  Casein                         24.31     23.93
  Milk, sugar, and extractive }   2.22      3.70
  matters                     }
  Mineral matter                  3.93      3.20

                                100.00    100.00

                               Gruyere.  Ordinary
                                           Dutch.
  Water                         40.00      36.10
  Casein                        31.50      29.40
  Fatty matter                  24.00      27.50
  Salts                          3.00        .90
  Non-nitrogenous organic }      1.50       6.10
  matter and loss         }

                               100.00     100.00

_Concluding Remarks._--It is surprising that cheese is not more frequently
made an article of domestic manufacture, especially by housewives resident
in the country. The operations of cheese-making are all exceedingly
simple, and not laborious, and will, in most cases, amply repay the outlay
for the milk. Besides, cheese is not unfrequently coloured with stains and
pigments which are injurious, and even poisonous, the risk of taking which
is not encountered when it is made at home. Several persons have nearly
lost their lives from eating cheese coloured with annotta, for instance.
This substance, though harmless in itself, is frequently adulterated with
red lead, so that the cheesemonger may very innocently introduce a poison,
when he only intends to improve the colour of his goods.

When a whole cheese is cut, and the consumption small, it is generally
found to become unpleasantly dry, and to lose flavour before it is
consumed. This is best prevented by cutting a sufficient quantity for a
few days' consumption from the cheese, and keeping the remainder in a cool
place, rather damp than dry, spreading a thin film of butter over the
fresh surface, and covering it with a cloth or pan to keep off the dirt.
This removes the objection existing in small families against purchasing a
whole cheese at a time. The common practice of buying small quantities of
cheese should be avoided, as not only a higher price is paid for any given
quality, but there is little likelihood of obtaining exactly the same
flavour twice running. Should cheese become too dry to be agreeable, it
may be used for stewing, or for making grated cheese or Welsh rare-bits.

=Cheese, Ap'ple.= The pomace or ground apples from the cider press.

=Cheese, Dam'son.= _Prep._ From damsons boiled with a little water, the
pulp passed through a sieve, and then boiled with about one fourth the
weight of sugar, until the mixture solidifies on cooling; it is next
poured into small tin moulds previously dusted out with sugar. Cherry
cheese, gooseberry cheese, plum cheese, &c., are prepared in the same way,
using the respective kinds of fruit. They are all very agreeable candies
or confections.

=Cheese, Facti'tious Roque'fort.= _Prep._ (Roulle.) The gluten of wheat is
kneaded with a little salt, and a small portion of a solution of starch,
and made up into cheeses. It is said that this mixture soon acquires the
taste, smell, and unctuosity of cheese, and when kept a certain time is
not to be distinguished from the celebrated Roquefort cheese, of which it
possesses all the peculiar pungency. By slightly varying the process other
kinds of cheese may be imitated.

=Cheese, Legumin.= The Chinese prepare an actual cheese from peas, called
"tao-foo," which they sell in the streets of Canton. The paste from
steeped ground peas is boiled, which causes the starch to dissolve with
the casein; after straining the liquid, it is coagulated by a solution of
gypsum; this coagulum is worked up like sour milk, salted, and pressed
into moulds.

=Cheese, Toasted.= This much relished article is seldom well prepared. The
following has been recommended as an excellent receipt:--Cut the cheese
into slices of moderate thickness, and put them into a tinned copper
saucepan, with a little butter and cream; simmer very gently until they
are quite dissolved, then remove the saucepan from the fire, allow the
whole to cool a little, add some yolk of egg, well beaten, add spice, make
the compound into a "shape," and brown it before the fire. See FONDUE.

=CHELSEA PENSIONER.= _Prep._ From gum guaiacum, 1/4 oz.; rhubarb, 1/2 oz.;
cream of tartar, 2 oz.; flowers of sulphur, 4 oz.; nutmegs, 2 in number
(all in powder); honey, 1-1/2 lb., or q. s.; made into an electuary by
beating them together in a mortar.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 table-spoonfuls, night
and morning, in gout and chronic rheumatism. The name is said to have been
given to it from the circumstance of a Chelsea pensioner having cured Lord
Amherst with it.

=CHEL'TENHAM SALTS.= See SALTS.

=CHEM'IQUE= or =CHEM'IC BLUE=. See INDIGO.

=CHEROOT.= A species of cigar imported from Manilla, in the Philippine
Islands, distinguished by extreme simplicity of construction as well as
delicacy of flavour. The cigars now so commonly sold as cheroots in
England are, for the most part, made of inferior tobacco, and are often
much adulterated articles.

=CHER'RIES= are the fruit of different species of the genus _Cerasus_.
They are regarded as wholesome, cooling, nutritive, laxative, and
antiscorbutic. Brandy flavoured with this fruit or its juice is known as
cherry-brandy. Morello cherries preserved in brandy are called brandy
cherries. See BRANDY, FRUIT, &c.

=CHER'RY LAUR'EL.= _Syn._ LAU'REL. The _Cerasus Lauro-Cerasus_, a shrub
common in every garden in England, and often confounded with the true
laurel or Sweet Bay, which does not possess any of its deleterious
properties. Leaves, occasionally used instead of bay leaves in cookery.
The distilled oil and distilled water are both poisonous. See OIL, WATER.

=CHESTNUT.= Both the horse-chestnut and the edible variety have been
employed for the adulteration not only of coffee, but of chicory.

[Illustration: Microscopic view of the chestnut.]

=CHI'CA.= The red colouring matter deposited by a decoction of the leaves
of _Bignonia Chica_ in cooling. Used by the American Indians to stain
their skin. It is soluble in alcohol, ether, oil, fat, and alkaline lyes,
and slightly so in boiling water.

=Chi'ca.= See MAIZE BEER.

=CHIC'ORY.= _Syn._ WILD SUC'CORY; CICHOR'IUM INTY'BUS (Linn.), L. A plant
belonging to the natural order Compositae. It is indigenous to this and
many other countries of Europe, and is extensively cultivated for the sake
of its roots, which are sliced, roasted, and ground, to form the chicory
of the shops. Nearly 100 millions of pounds are annually consumed in
Europe. Much of the chicory used in Britain is of home growth; but still
more is imported in a raw state from Holland and other parts of the
Continent. A blue dye has been prepared from the leaves of this plant.

The FRESH ROOT OF CHICORY (_ra'dix chico'rii re'cens_) is reputed to be
alterative, attenuant, diuretic, febrifuge, hepatic, resolvent, and tonic;
and in large doses aperient. It is now seldom used in medicine, although
it appears to possess similar qualities and equal activity to those of
dandelion. "An infusion of the root, mixed with syrup, becomes thick;
forming the GOMME SACCHO-CHICORICE of Lacarterie." (Fee.)

        _Analysis of Chicory_ (the raw root):--

  Moisture                                  77.0
  Gummy matter (like pectin)                 7.5
  Glucose, or grape sugar                    1.1
  Bitter extractive                          4.0
  Fatty matter                               0.6
  Cellulose, inulin, and woody matter        9.0
  Ash                                        0.8

                                           100.0

The ROASTED ROOT is prepared by cutting the full-grown root into slices,
and exposing it to heat in iron cylinders, along with about 1-1/2% or 2%
of lard, in a similar way to that adopted for coffee. When ground to
powder in a mill, it constitutes the CHICORY of the grocers (CHICORY
COFFEE, SUCCORY C.; RADIX CHICO'RII TORREFAC'TA, R. C. T. CONTRI'TA); so
generally employed both as a substitute for coffee and as an adulterant of
that article. The addition of 1 part of good, fresh roasted chicory to 10
or 12 parts of coffee forms a mixture which yields a beverage of a fuller
flavour, and of a deeper colour than that furnished by an equal quantity
of pure or unmixed coffee. In this way a less quantity of coffee may be
used, but it should be remembered that the article substituted for it does
not possess in any degree the peculiar exciting, soothing, and
hunger-staying properties of that valuable product. The use, however, of a
larger proportion of chicory than that just named imparts to the beverage
an insipid flavour, intermediate between that of treacle and liquorice;
whilst the continual use of roasted chicory, or highly chicorised coffee,
seldom fails to weaken the powers of digestion and derange the bowels.
"There can be no doubt that roasted chicory must, when taken largely, have
a tendency to excite diarrh[oe]a." (Pereira.)

_Pur., &c._ The ground chicory of the shops, like ground coffee, is almost
universally adulterated. Pigments are added to it to colour it, and
various vegetable substances to lessen its value. The following articles
have been reported to have been detected in roasted chicory, or to have
been known to be used to adulterate it:--Venetian red, reddle, and red
clay; roasted acorns, beans, carrots, damaged dog-biscuits, damaged bread,
damaged wheat, horse-chestnuts, mangel wurzel, parsnips, peas, rye, and
sugar; coffee flights (coffee husks), coffina (roasted lupins), Hambro'
powder (roasted peas coloured with reddle), and the marc of coffee;
exhausted bark (from the tan yards), logwood dust, mahogany dust, &c. It
has also been asserted that the scorched livers of bullocks, horses, and
dogs have been applied to the same purpose; but of this there is not
sufficient evidence. The only way to avoid being thus cheated or poisoned
is to buy the chicory whole, and to grind it at home.

[Illustration: Microscopic appearance of chicory root.]

Roasted chicory is highly absorbent of moisture, and should, therefore, be
always kept in close vessels (bottles or canisters), the same as coffee.
If the lumps become tough or soft, or the powder cakes together, it is
unfit for use; but in some cases it may be recovered, by exposing it on a
plate in an oven until it again becomes perfectly dry or brittle.

_Tests._--1. Powdered chicory thrown on water turns it reddish-brown and
rapidly sinks, leaving light impurities either floating or diffused
through the liquid.--2. The cold decoction tested with tincture, or
solution of iodine, gives a brown colour; if it turns purple, blue, or
black, it indicates the presence of roasted peas, beans, rye, or some
other like substance, containing starch.--3. Persulphate or perchloride
of iron, added in the same way, should not materially affect the liquid;
if it turns it bluish or blackish, it indicates the presence of roasted
acorns, oak-bark tan, or some other substance containing tannin.--4. Water
acidulated with vinegar, digested on the powder, should not be blackened,
or even materially darkened, by tincture of galls or a solution of red
prussiate of potash; the contrary shows the presence of ferruginous
colouring matter.--5. The dry powder, when incinerated, should not leave
more than 4-1/2 to 5% of ash, which should be of a greyish or fawn colour;
the contrary indicates the presence of reddle, red clay, ochre, or the
like.--6. To the above may be added attention to the odour, colour, and
appearance, both to the naked eye and under the microscope; by the latter,
adulteration may be easily detected. See COFFEE.

=CHIL'BLAIN.= _Syn._ PER'NIO, L. An inflammatory swelling, of a purple or
lead colour, produced by the action of cold. Chilblains (PERNIO'NES)
exclusively attack the extremities of the body, and are generally confined
to the fingers, toes, and heels. The common symptoms are itching and
irritation, more or less intense, often accompanied with shooting pains,
and tenderness, and tumefaction of the parts. Children, especially those
of a scrofulous habit, and elderly persons, are generally the most liable
to chilblains. The common cause of chilblains is holding the hands or feet
to the fire after exposure to cold. The sudden change of temperature
partially destroys the vitality of the minute surfacial vessels, and thus
prevents the proper flow of blood through the part. The best preventives
of chilblains are woollen socks or stockings, good waterproof shoes,
woollen gloves, exercise, and friction. These act by promoting the
circulation of the blood in the extremities, and protecting them from
vicissitudes of temperature. When chilblains have once formed, the best
treatment is friction with stimulants, as spirits of wine and camphor, oil
of turpentine, opodeldoc, dilute spirits, camphorated oil, hartshorn and
oil, &c. Linnaeus recommends bathing the part with dilute muriatic acid,
just strong enough to faintly prick the skin. When the inflamed parts have
ulcerated, they are commonly called KIBES. In this state they should be
dressed with a little resin cerate or elemi ointment. If fungous
granulations appear, they must be removed by touching them with nitrate of
silver or blue vitriol. See CHAPS, &c.

REMEDIES FOR CHILBLAINS.--The following have been strongly recommended by
different parties, and may all prove useful in their turns, as
circumstances and convenience may suggest:--

1. Sulphate of copper, 1 oz.; rosemary water, 1 pint; dissolve.

2. Sal-ammoniac, 1 oz.; vinegar, 1/2 pint.

3. Sal-ammoniac, 1 oz.; rum, 1/2 pint; camphor, 1 dr. The affected part is
wetted with the above night and morning, and when dry is touched with a
little simple ointment, cold cream, or pomatum.

4. Soap liniment, 2 oz.; tincture of cantharides, 1 oz.; oil of cajeput, 2
dr.

5. Oil of turpentine, 2 oz.; camphor, 3 dr.; oil of cajeput, 1 dr. The
application of the last two is accompanied by gentle friction.

6. (Dr GRAVES' PREVENTIVE.) Sulphate of copper, 20 gr.; water, 1 oz. As
the first three.

7. (LEJEUNE'S BALSAM.) See CHILBLAIN BALSAM.

8. (LINNAEUS' REMEDY.) Hydrochloric acid, 1 oz.; water, 11 oz. As No. 3.

9. (MORTON'S LINIMENT.) Calomel and camphor, of each 1 dr.; spermaceti
ointment, 4 dr.; oil of turpentine and cocoa-nut oil, of each 2 dr. As No.
5.

10. (WAHLER'S OINTMENT.) Black oxide of iron, bole, and oil of turpentine,
of each 1 dr.; resin cerate, 1 oz. For broken chilblains. We have found a
mixture of equal parts of calamine cerate and resin cerate answer quite as
well. See CERATE, OINTMENT.

11. (RUSSIAN REMEDY.) The rind of perfectly ripe cucumbers dried, with the
soft parts attached. For use they are placed with the inner side,
previously soaked in warm water, over the soft parts. (Med. Zeitung.)

12. (RHEIN.) Dissolve 1 _oz._ of tannin in a pint of water, and 74 grains
of iodine in 1-3/4 _oz._ of spirit of wine; the solutions are then mixed,
and enough water added to make the whole up to 2-1/2 pints. In applying
it, which is best done at bedtime, the mixture is gently warmed over a
slow fire; the affected part is dipped into it while still cold, and
retained in it till the liquid, on being stirred, feels uncomfortably hot.
The vessel is then withdrawn from the fire, and the affected part dried
over it. The vessel must be of earthenware or porcelain, and care must be
taken not to use too much iodine, especially when abrasions are present.

13. (L'UNION MEDICALE.) Oxide of zinc, 2 parts; tannic acid, 1 part;
glycerin, 10 parts; balsam of Peru, 8 parts; camphor, 4 parts.

14. (SWEDIAUR'S PASTE.) Bitter almonds, 8 oz.; honey, 6 oz.; powdered
camphor and flour of mustard, of each 1/2 oz.; burnt alum and olibanum, of
each 1/2 oz.; yolks of 3 eggs; beat to a paste. To be applied night and
morning.

15. (VANCE'S CREAM.) Ointment of nitrate of mercury, 1 oz.; camphor, 1
dr.; oil of turpentine, 2 dr.; oil of olives, 4 dr.; mix well together. To
be applied by gentle friction 2 or 3 times daily.

_Obs._ All the preceding preparations are intended for chilblains before
they break. The liniments of ammonia, camphor, opium, soap, and
turpentine, as well as the compound camphor liniment of the British
Pharmacop[oe]ia, are also excellent preparations for the same purposes.

=CHIL'DREN (Care of).= See INFANCY.

=Children (Diseases of).= See the respective heads, and DISEASES.

=CHIL'LIES.= See CAPSICUM, PEPPERS.

=CHIM'NEYS= were not introduced into England until the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and for a considerable period the principles of their
construction were ill-understood. When the air inside and outside a
chimney is at the same temperature, an equilibrium exists; there is no
draught in the chimney, because the downward tendency of that within is
counteracted by the upward pressure of that without. Let a fire be kindled
in the grate; hot air is evolved, the chimney is heated, the air it
contains suffers expansion, and a portion is expelled. The chimney now
contains a smaller weight of air than it did before; the external and
internal columns no longer equibalance each other, the warmer and lighter
air is forced upwards from below, and its place is occupied by cold, and
consequently heavier air. If the fire continues to burn, and the chimney
retains its temperature, the second portion of air is disposed of like the
first, and the ascending current continues, so long as the sides of the
chimney are hotter than the surrounding air. Should the reverse happen to
be the case, as sometimes occurs from sudden atmospheric changes, the
column of air within the chimney rapidly contracts in volume, the
deficiency is filled up from without, the column of air becomes heavier
than one of a corresponding height on the outside of it, or in the
apartment, and, obeying the common laws of gravitation, it falls out of
the throat of the chimney or fire-place just as a heavy body sinks in
water, and has its place occupied by air from above. In this way a
descending current, of more or less intensity and duration, is
established, and, if there is a fire in the grate, the chimney "smokes,"
or, if the grate is empty, perhaps the smoke from neighbouring chimneys
finds its way into our apartments. By the judicious arrangement of the
fire-place, and the throat and flue of a chimney, an upward current may be
constantly ensured so long as there is a fire in the grate, or the air of
the apartment is warmer than the external atmosphere.

Count Rumford was the first who scientifically investigated the
construction of chimneys. He showed that more heat is obtained from the
fire by reflection when the coverings are placed in an oblique position.
He also directed that the fire itself should be kept as near to the hearth
as possible, and that the throat of the chimney should be constructed much
narrower than was then the practice, in order to prevent the escape of so
much heated air as happened with wide throats. By contracting the open
part of the fire-place immediately over the fire, as by lessening the
width of the hobs, or by bringing the throat of the chimney closer to the
fire, and by contracting the throat of the chimney itself, within certain
limits, any desired amount of draught may be obtained. When the space
above the fuel is too small, the throat too near the burning fuel, or the
throat itself too contracted, the draught of a common chimney is often too
strong, and much fuel and heat is wasted. When the reverse is the case,
the draught is commonly too languid, the fire draws badly, a portion of
the smoke escapes into the room, and all the usual annoyances of a smoky
chimney are suffered. By a proper attention to these conditions a common
fire-place may be adapted for the combustion of bituminous or easy burning
coal, or of anthracite, and varieties of coal that require a considerable
draught. It may even be converted into a wind furnace; whilst the
inconvenience of smoky chimneys may be always avoided, and, when existing,
easily cured. This is presuming, however, that a sufficient supply of air
exists in front of the fire-place (_i.e._ in the apartment), not only for
the combustion of the fuel, but also for the upward current of the
chimney. Many chimneys smoke simply from the apartment being so
ill-ventilated that the supply here alluded to is not provided. It may be
further stated, as a rule, that the greater the length of a chimney the
stronger will be the draught. Hence, the chimneys of the upper rooms of a
house often smoke, whilst the fires in the rooms beneath them burn
pleasantly and vigorously. Such cases are commonly relieved by a
chimney-pot or cowl, of which numerous varieties are now before the
public. The more crooked or tortuous the course of a chimney the less
likely is it to be affected by eddies and gusts of wind from neighbouring
buildings or hills. See FIRE, GRATE, SMOKE PREVENTION, STOVE.

=CHI'NA.= In the purchase of china, glass, and earthenware, care should be
taken to select those patterns which in case of breakage can be the most
readily matched. Peculiar or rare patterns should be avoided, for if any
such be broken, it will generally be found very difficult and expensive,
and frequently impossible, to replace them.

China, glass, and earthenware, when very dirty, are best cleaned with
finely powdered fuller's earth and warm water, followed by rinsing in
clean water. A little clean soft soap may be added to the water instead of
fuller's earth. See PACKING, PORCELAIN.

=CHIN'OIDINE.= See QUINOIDINE.

=CHINOLINE BLUE.= See CYANINE.

=CHINTZ (to Wash).= Boil 2 lbs. of rice in two gallons of water till soft;
and pour the mixture into a tub; let it stand until it attains a warmth
generally used for coloured linens; then put the chintz in it, and wash it
with the rice instead of soap, until all the dirt has disappeared. Next
boil another 2 lb. of rice, as above, in another two gallons of water, but
strain the rice from the water, and mix it in warm water. Wash the chintz
in this till quite clean, and afterwards rinse it in the water the rice
was boiled in. This will answer the same end as starch, as no wet will
affect it, as it will be stiff while it is worn. If a gown, it must be
taken to pieces; and when dried, it must be hung as smooth as possible,
after which it must be dry-rubbed with a smooth stone, but no iron must be
used.

=CHIRETTA.= CHIRATA. The entire plant (_Ophelia chirata_) is employed in
medicine. Northern India. The plant is pulled up by the root when the
flowers begin to decay, and the capsules are formed. The dried plant,
sometimes with, but more commonly without, the root, is the form in which
the chiretta is generally met with in commerce. The whole plant is
intensely bitter, but is without odour. In its physiological action it
bears a great resemblance to gentian. Instead of a constipating, it
appears to possess a slightly relaxing effect. It is an excellent
stomachic and carminative, and is said to diminish the tendency to
acidity, and to be of great service in the dyspepsia accompanying gout. No
vegetable alkaloid has been obtained from it. If given in powder, the dose
of chiretta is twenty grains. It is, however, more generally given in the
form of an infusion or tincture (which _see_).

=CHI'TIN.= This name has been given to the hard, insoluble matter forming
the shells and elytra of insects. It is obtained by boiling the elytra of
the cockchafer with water, alcohol, ether, acetic acid, and alkalies.

=CHIT'TICK'S REMEDY.= Dr Chittick's remedy for stone consisted of a fixed
alkali, administered in veal broth. (Paris.)

=CHLORAL.= C_{2}HCl_{3}O. A peculiar liquid first obtained by Liebig, by
the action of chlorine on alcohol. The name was intended to express its
origin from chlorine and alcohol.

_Prep._ (Liebig.) Anhydrous alcohol is placed in a tubulated retort, and
dry chlorine gas passed through it, at first in the cold, but afterwards
with the application of a gentle heat, until the chlorine passes unchanged
through the liquor on raising it to the boiling temperature; on cooling,
the whole forms a crystalline mass of what was at one time thought to be
chloral hydrate, but which subsequent researches have shown to be chloral
alcoholate; this is melted by a gentle heat, and agitated with three times
its volume of oil of vitriol; on increasing the heat a little, an oily
stratum of impure chloral rises to the surface. It is purified by boiling
it for some time (to drive off free hydrochloric acid and alcohol), next
distilling it with an equal volume of oil of vitriol; and lastly,
rectifying it from some powdered quick-lime, the process being stopped as
soon as the surface of the lime becomes dry.

_Prop., &c._ Chloral is an oily liquid, possessing an ethereal smell; it
is soluble in alcohol, ether, and water; with a small quantity of the
latter it rapidly changes into a semi-solid crystalline mass (chloral
hydrate), which is soluble in a larger quantity of water; boils at 201 deg.;
sp. gr. 1.502. It is decomposed by the caustic earths and alkalies. By age
it is converted into a white, solid, translucent substance (insoluble
chloral), which is reconverted by heat and by sulphuric acid into ordinary
chloral.

_Obs._ In operating as above the chlorine is most conveniently introduced
by a tube inserted into the tubulature of the retort, and a long tube,
bent upwards, should be connected with the beak to convey away the
hydrochloric acid gas extricated, and to allow the volatilised alcohol and
chloral to condense, and flow back into the retort.

=Chloral, Camphorated.= Hydrate of chloral and camphor, equal parts. Rub
them together in a warm mortar until they liquefy. It forms clear mixtures
with oil of turpentine and chloroform, but not with solution of ammonia.
It is a counter-irritant, and applied externally it has been found to give
relief in rheumatic pains and neuralgia. It should be painted on the
affected part with a camel's-hair brush.

=Chloral, Hydrate.= C_{2}HCl_{3}O. Aq. _Syn._ HYDRATE OF CHLORAL. _Prep._
"Pass dry chlorine gas, for several days, through absolute alcohol, sp.
gr. 0.795, until it becomes a thick viscid liquid of sp. gr. 1.57. At the
beginning of the operation the alcohol is well cooled to prevent
inflammation and explosion, but towards the end of the operation the
alcohol is heated nearly to the boiling point. The resulting liquid, which
after a day or two solidifies to a mass of crude chloral hydrate, is
agitated with four times its bulk of concentrated sulphuric acid, and the
anhydrous chloral which floats on the surface is separated and purified by
fractional distillation. The purified anhydrous chloral is placed in a
still, mixed with 11 per cent. of water, and distilled over chalk to
remove any hydrochloric acid that may be present; the resulting solid
distillate is then fused and poured out into shallow vessels to cast into
cakes." (Squire.) The purest chloral hydrate is said to be that which has
been crystallised two or three times out of pure bisulphide of
carbon.--_Prop._ White opaque solid, having a pungent odour resembling
that of a ripe melon. Soluble in water, glycerin, and alcohol. Gradually
volatilises in the air, and may be distilled without decomposition. From
100 gr. dissolved in 1/2 fl. oz. of water, well shaken with 1 fl. oz. of
solution of potash (B. P.), and allowed to stand for several hours, at
least 46 grain-measures of chloroform should separate.

Chloral hydrate may be obtained in crystals by mixing the cake with about
half its bulk of chloroform, and putting aside in a cool place. When the
crystallisation is complete (which is generally in about 8 or 10 days) the
crystals are freed from the mother liquor by a centrifugal machine, and
afterwards dried at a gentle heat. The mother liquor may be utilised for
future crystallisations.

_Uses._ An excellent sedative, antispasmodic, hypnotic, anodyne. It has
done good service in hypochondriacal and other nervous affections, as well
as in the insomnia of the insane, and of dipsomaniacs; also in asthma,
hooping-cough, and scarlet fever. It has also the reputation of being an
efficient preventive of sea-sickness, especially on short voyages, such as
crossing the channel, which can be accomplished during the sleep
occasioned by the agent.--_Dose_, from 10 to 60 gr.

It was introduced into medical practice by Dr Liebreich, of Berlin.
Immense quantities are imported into this country from Germany.

=CHLORALUM.= An impure aqueous solution of chloride of aluminum, sp. gr.
1.15, 1 fl. oz. of the liquid contains 75 grains of anhydrous chloride.
Introduced by Professor Gamgee as an antiseptic and disinfectant, for
which purposes it is recommended to dilute the article as sold with four
times its bulk of water.

=CHLO''RATE.= _Syn._ HYPEROXYMU''RIATE[dagger], CHLO''RAS, L. A compound
in which the hydrogen of chloric acid, HClO_{3}, is replaced by a metal or
other basic radical, _e.g._ KClO_{3}, chlorate of potassium. Chlorates may
be prepared by dissolving the hydrate or oxide in chloric acid, and
crystallising. The alkaline chlorates, however, are made by passing
chlorine into solutions of the hydrate or carbonate of potassium or
sodium, boiling the resulting liquid, and separating the chlorate from the
chloride, which is also formed by crystallisation. They are very similar
to the nitrates, both in their general properties and composition. They
are all decomposed at a red heat, metallic chlorides being formed and
oxygen gas given off. Like the nitrates, they deflagrate with inflammable
substances, but with greater facility and violence. A mixture of this kind
will detonate with a slight blow or friction. All the chlorates are
soluble in water.

_Char., Tests, &c._ The chlorates are known by their deflagrating when
placed on red-hot charcoal. By evolving a yellow gas when treated with
concentrated sulphuric acid, in the cold, which gas also communicates to
the liquid a red or yellow tinge. By evolving oxygen gas when heated alone
in a test-tube. This test is not characteristic, unless carried a stage
further, by dissolving the residual chloride out of the tube, and adding
to the filtered solution a few drops of nitrate of silver; then the
formation of a white precipitate, insoluble in nitric acid, will show that
the salt treated was a chlorate, and not a nitrate. Pure chlorates give no
precipitate with nitrate of silver.

=CHLORHY'DRIC ACID.= See HYDROCHLORIC ACID.

=CHLO''RIC ACID.= HClO_{3}. _Syn._ HYPEROXYMURIAT'IC ACID; ACIDUM
CHLO''RICUM, L. An acid discovered by Chenevix, but first obtained in a
separate form by Gay-Lussac.

=CHLO''RIDE= (-[)i]d). _Syn._ CHLO''RURET[dagger]; CHLORI'DUM, L. A
chemical compound of chlorine with a metal or other basic radical, _e.g._
NaCl, chloride of sodium; C_{2}H_{5}Cl, chloride of ethyl.

_Prep._ The majority of the metallic chlorides may be made by simply
dissolving the metal or its carbonate, oxide, or hydrate, in hydrochloric
acid (previously diluted with about twice its weight of water), and
evaporating and crystallising the solution in the usual manner. Zinc,
cadmium, iron, nickel, cobalt, and tin, dissolve readily in hydrochloric
acid; copper only in strong boiling acid; silver, mercury, and gold, not
at all. The insoluble chlorides, as those of silver and mercury, may be
readily prepared by precipitating any of their corresponding soluble salts
with hydrochloric acid, or a soluble chloride, such as common salt.
Anhydrous chlorides are generally prepared by the direct action of
chlorine on the bases.

_Char., Tests, &c._ Most of the metallic chlorides are soluble in water.
Many fuse when heated, and volatilise unchanged, but others are completely
or partially decomposed at a red heat. All, with the exception of those of
the alkali and earth metals, are decomposed at a red heat in a current of
hydrogen. They are recognised by the following reactions:--1. Heated with
a little peroxide of manganese and sulphuric acid, chlorine is evolved,
and easily detected by its colour, smell, and bleaching properties:--2.
The soluble chlorides may be readily detected by their solutions, slightly
acidulated with nitric acid, giving with a solution of nitrate of silver a
white, curdy precipitate (chloride of silver), insoluble in nitric acid,
freely soluble in liquor of ammonia, and blackened by the light:--3. The
insoluble chlorides may be tested by digesting them in a little liquor of
potassa, when a solution of chloride of potassium will be formed, which
may be treated as just directed (2); or the chloride may be dissolved in
nitric acid, and tested with nitrate of silver as before.

=CHLORIM'ETRY.= See CHLOROMETRY.

=CHLORINA'TED LIME.= See LIME.

=CHLORINA'TED SO'DA.= See SODIUM.

=CHLO''RINE.= _Syn._ CHLORIN'IUM, L.; CHLORE, Fr.; CHLOR, Ger. An
elementary substance discovered by Scheele in 1774, and at first supposed
to be a compound body. In 1809 MM. Gay-Lussac and Thenard suggested the
probability of it being a simple substance; but it was reserved for Sir H.
Davy, shortly afterwards, to demonstrate the truth of the suggestion of
these foreign chemists.

_Nat. Hist._ It exists in nature chiefly in the form of chloride of
sodium, which constitutes rock salt when deposited in inland beds, sea
salt when dissolved in masses of water. The sea also contains chlorides of
potassium, calcium, and magnesium. It is a constituent of several
well-known minerals. It has been met with in the air of volcanic
districts, combined with hydrogen, as hydrochloric acid.

_Prep._ Strong hydrochloric acid is poured on half of its weight of
finely-powdered peroxide of manganese, previously placed in a glass flask
or retort; chlorine gas is immediately evolved, even in the cold, but much
more rapidly on the application of a gentle heat, and is collected in
clean, dry bottles by displacement. The tube conducting the gas is so
arranged as to reach to the bottom of the bottle, and the chlorine, being
heavier than the air, displaces the latter without mixing with it. The
bottle is known to be full by the gas, easily perceived by its green
colour, overflowing the top of the vessel. The bottle is then closed up
with an accurately fitting stopper, previously greased, and an empty one
put in its place, which is subsequently treated in like manner. To free
the gas entirely from hydrochloric acid it is passed through a wash bottle
containing a small quantity of water; and to render it quite dry it is
passed over fused chloride of calcium. When the presence of moisture is no
object chlorine may be collected over warm water, or, what is better, a
saturated solution of common salt, in the pneumatic trough. The mercurial
trough cannot be employed, as the chlorine rapidly acts upon the metal,
and becomes absorbed.

_Commercial._--From oil of vitriol and water, of each 7 parts, cautiously
mixed, and allowed to cool; chloride of sodium (common salt), 4 parts,
mixed intimately with peroxide of manganese, 3 parts. The dilute acid is
placed in a retort or other generating vessel, and the powder added. The
gas comes off slowly at first, but the application of a gentle heat causes
it to rush forth in large quantities. Of late years, owing to the general
demand for bleaching agents, numerous new methods and suggestions for
obtaining chlorine have been patented, of which the following are the most
important.

1. Elliott. By this method the reconversion of the chloride of manganese
to peroxide was attempted as follows:--The manganese residues left in the
still are first heated to dryness. They are then roasted in a current of
steam, the result being the formation of hydrochloric acid (which is
condensed), and a residue consisting of a mixture of protoxide and
peroxide of manganese.

2. Gatty. In this process the manganese residues, after evaporation to a
suitable consistence, are mixed with nitrate of soda, and the nitrate of
manganese and chloride of sodium formed, when dried, are strongly heated
in an iron retort, the fumes of nitric acid which come off being employed
in the manufacture of sulphuric acid. The residue in the retort,
consisting of peroxide of manganese, being lixiviated, yields the peroxide
in a pure state:

  Mn(NO_{3})_{2} + 2(NaCl) + O_{2} = MnO_{2} + 2NaCl + 2(NO_{3}).

3. Hoffman. This process consisted in the regeneration of the manganese by
means of soda waste. In this process the chloride of manganese is, by the
addition of the yellow ley obtained from the lixiviation of soda waste,
converted into sulphide of manganese. The precipitate so obtained consists
of

  Sulphide of manganese   55.00
  Sulphur                 40.00
  Protoxide of manganese   5

                         100.00

This is dried and then calcined, the sulphurous acid evolved being
conducted into the sulphuric acid chamber.

The residue, which has the following composition--

  Sulphate of manganese   44.50
  Peroxide of manganese   18.90
  Protoxide of manganese  36.60

                         100.00

--is next mixed with nitrate of soda and heated to 300 deg. C., yielding
sulphate of soda and nitrate of manganese, the latter, however, being at
once decomposed into peroxide of manganese, and nitrogen peroxide, thus:--

_a._ MnSO_{4} + 2NaNO_{3} = Mn(NO_{3})_{2} + Na_{2}SO_{4}.

_b._ Mn(NO_{3})_{2} = MnO_{2} + 2NO_{2}.

After the mass has cooled, the sulphate of soda is washed out, the residue
yielding, according to the inventor, a material equal to native peroxide
of manganese.

4. Schloesing. Manganese is acted upon with a mixture of hydrochloric and
nitric acids, the degree of concentration of the acids being so regulated
by the addition of water that the mixture yields only chlorine, whilst
protonitrate of manganese is formed; this salt being calcined yields
peroxide of manganese and nitric acid. The nitric acid aids the oxygen of
the air in decomposing the hydrochloric acid.

The following equation will explain the successive stages of the
reaction:--

_a._ 2HCl + 2HNO_{3} + MnO_{2} = Cl_{2} + Mn(NO_{3}) + 2H_{2}O.

_b._ Mn(NO_{3})_{2} = MnO_{2} + 2NO_{2}.

_c._ 2NO_{2} + H_{2}O + O = 2HNO_{3}.

5. Vogel. By decomposing chloride of copper by heat. The chloride in the
crystalline state is mixed with half its weight of sand and heated in
earthenware retorts to 200 deg. to 300 deg. C., yielding chlorine gas, while the
remaining protochloride of copper is reconverted into perchloride by the
action of hydrochloric acid.

According to Laurens the reaction is as follows:--

  _a._ 2CuCl_{2} = Cl_{2} + 2Cu_{2}2Cl_{2}.
  _b._ Cu_{2}Cl_{2} + 2HCl + O = H_{2}O + 2CuCl_{2}.

6. MacDougal, Rawson, and Shanks. This is effected by decomposing chromate
of lime by means of hydrochloric acid, the result being the formation of
chloride of chromium, chloride of calcium, and the evolution of free
chlorine; thus

2CaCrO_{4} + 16 HCl = Cr_{2}Cl_{6} + 2CaCl_{2} + 8H_{2}O + Cl_{6}

158 parts of chromic acid yield 106 parts of chlorine. The chloride of
chromium is again precipitated with carbonate of lime, and by ignition
converted into chromate of lime. Only three eighths of the chlorine
contained in the hydrochloric acid is given up, whilst manganese yields
one half.

7. Hargreaves proposes to evaporate a solution of protochloride of iron to
dryness, and then to heat the dried substance in a current of air, at a
temperature of about the melting point of zinc, by which means perchloride
of iron and free chlorine would be obtained. Thielbierge's suggestion
consists in passing air over protochloride of iron, and so giving rise to
peroxide of iron and chlorine. This, like Hargreaves' proposition,
possesses the disadvantage of furnishing the chlorine very largely diluted
with air and nitrogen.

8. Jessie de Mothney. This chemist has proposed a continuous process which
is as follows:--Peroxide of manganese either alone or mixed with lime is
put into a retort, which, when heated to redness, has a current of
hydrochloric acid gas passed into it. A disengagement of chlorine and
steam takes place, and there remains in the retort a mixture of
undecomposed peroxide of manganese with chlorides of manganese and
calcium. The retort containing the undecomposed peroxide and chlorides
being still kept at a red-heat, air or oxygen is passed over them, the
result being that the manganic chloride is decomposed at once.

The chlorine liberated by this last operation is conveyed into vats
containing a mixture of lime and manganous oxide, which substances have
been previously formed by the decomposition of the manganous chloride by
lime, the soluble chloride of calcium having been run off. Sesquioxide of
manganese and hypochlorite of calcium are formed in the vats, and these
two, reacting on each other, give rise to peroxide of manganese and
chloride of calcium. With fresh hydrochloric acid this latter product
yields more chlorine for use in the chambers. Magnesia may be substituted
for lime.

9. Dunlop. This process, which may be regarded as the first practical
method for utilising the whole of the exhausted manganese residues, and
rendering them capable of reapplication in the production of chlorine, was
devised by Mr Dunlop in 1855, since which time it has been in use in the
alkali works of the Messrs Tennant, at St. Rollox, Glasgow. The operation
consists in precipitating the chloride of manganese in the still liquor by
carbonate of calcium; the resulting manganese carbonate being decomposed
by heat. The liquors are previously mixed with a little milk of lime,
which frees them from ferric oxide, alumina, and silica.

Being allowed to stand until these and all other insoluble matters are
precipitated, the clear solution containing the chloride of manganese is
mixed with finely divided chalk, when the following reaction ensues:--

MnCl_{2} + CaCO_{3} = MnCO_{3} + CaCl_{2}.

The resulting milky liquid is then run into large iron boilers, through
each of which passes horizontally an iron shaft furnished with a number of
projecting arms. This shaft having been put into revolution so as to keep
the contents of the boilers agitated, steam is admitted into them under a
pressure of from two to four atmospheres, and by the combined effects of
heat and pressure the decomposition of the manganese chloride by the
calcium carbonate is accomplished in about four hours. The manganese
carbonate is then allowed to subside, the calcium chloride solution is
drawn off, the precipitate carefully washed, and thrown up in heaps on an
inclined surface to drain. When partially dried the carbonate of manganese
is placed in small low wagons, made of sheet-iron, supported on rollers,
and slowly drawn through a furnace by means of a chain. The furnace holds
forty-eight of these little wagons. The furnace is 50 feet long, 12 feet
wide, and 10 feet high. "A fire-brick flue runs down the centre of the
bottom of the furnace, and is connected at the far end with two return
metal pipes, which lie on each side of the flue. A uniform heat at about
660 deg. F. is maintained in the furnace, in which four lines of rails are
laid for the small wagons to run along. The half-dried substance loses all
its moisture and part of its carbonic acid as the wagons pass along the
first line of rails, and as they return down the second line a further
escape of carbonic acid ensues, and eventually the expulsion of all the
acid, and the peroxidation of the manganese is completed during the
passage of the wagons on the third and fourth lines." The operation lasts
about forty-eight hours, the substance gradually changing in colour from
white to brown, and lastly to black.

The ends of the furnace are closed by loose hanging doors, so as to ensure
the entrance of a sufficient supply of air. The fire-place is situated
below the floor of the furnace, and requires very careful watching. The
resulting product is a mixture of oxides of manganese, and contains about
72 per cent. of peroxide of manganese.

9_a._ A. Dunlop. Another process designed by Mr Dunlop, and also in use at
Messrs Tennant's, is as follows:--Nitrate of sodium (Chilian nitre) and
chloride of sodium are decomposed by being heated in cast-iron cylinders
with sulphuric acid. The gaseous products are made to pass through leaden
Woulff's bottles containing sulphuric acid, which absorbs the nitric
peroxide formed, and allows the passage of the chlorine into the chambers.
The reaction may be represented by the following equation:--

NaCl + NaNO_{3} + H_{2}SO_{4} = Cl + NO_{2} + Na_{2}SO_{4} + H_{2}O.

The sulphuric acid charged with nitric peroxide is used in the manufacture
of chamber acid.

10. Weldon. _a._ The process by which the greater part of the chlorine
employed in the manufacture of bleaching compounds is now obtained and
which has hitherto proved the most practical is that of Mr Walter Weldon.
We have the authority of Mr Kingzett, in his work on 'The Alkali Trade,'
for the statement, that out of 90,000 tons of bleaching powder made in
Great Britain in 1874, 50,000 were procured by Weldon's method; and
turning to the Continent we find the process largely adopted in Germany,
France, and Belgium. The utilisation and regeneration of the residual
product left in the still after the evolution of the chlorine which it
will be presently seen is accomplished by the above process, is not the
only advantage accruing from it, since it has also been the means of
removing an extensive source of contamination of many of our streams and
rivers, into which the then useless chloride of manganese was thrown
previous to Mr Weldon's invention. It is true that the only waste product
formed in the course of the operations, viz., chloride of calcium, is got
rid of by being run into the nearest waters, but it is stated by the
Rivers Pollution Commission, beyond making these harder, no other
objectionable effect is caused by it.

Mr Weldon's process is based upon the fact, that if protoxide of manganese
be suspended in a solution of chloride of calcium, and an excess of lime
be added, the protoxide will become readily converted into peroxide if air
be forced into the liquor. It had long been known that it was possible to
convert into a peroxide the protoxide of manganese obtained by treating
the residual still liquors with an equivalent of lime, but all attempts to
reduce this knowledge to practical account had proved unsuccessful until
Mr Weldon attempted it.

Mr Weldon made the important discovery, that whilst protoxide of manganese
is by itself, when treated in the wet way with air, only capable of being
converted into peroxide, at the greatest, to the extent of one half; the
addition to the protoxide so treated of a certain quantity of lime
converted the whole of it into peroxide in less than a twentieth the time
required to peroxidise half the protoxide if lime were absent. It will be
seen that it is the employment of an _excess_ of lime which constitutes
the success of Mr Weldon's process, which is as follows:--

The residual liquors remaining in the still after the chlorine has been
evolved by the action of hydrochloric acid on peroxide of manganese, and
in which chloride of manganese is by far the predominating constituent,
are run into a receptacle termed the _neutralising well_, which is usually
six feet in depth by twenty in diameter. In this well the free
hydrochloric acid of the still-liquor is neutralised by the addition of
limestone or chalk, which at the same time serves to decompose the soluble
ferric and aluminic chlorides present in the liquid, and to precipitate
them as insoluble oxides. During this process the contents of the well are
kept in a state of brisk agitation by means of a suitable stirrer. After
this treatment the now neutral liquor consists of chlorides of manganese
and calcium in solution, of a small quantity of suspended ferric and
aluminic oxides and chalk. It additionally contains also in suspension a
by no means small quantity of sulphate of lime, derived from the sulphuric
acid always present in varying amount in the commercial hydrochloric acid
used.

From the neutralising well the liquor is pumped to a height of some forty
feet into tanks, called the _chloride of manganese settlers_, in which
after from two to four hours it deposits the solid matters suspended in
it, the supernatant clear liquor assuming a pale rose-coloured appearance.

The next operation is to draw off by means of syphons, which can be
lowered or raised in the settlers to any desired level, this clear liquid,
containing the chlorides of manganese and calcium, into a vessel called
the _oxidizer_; this latter being an iron cylinder, of from eight to
twelve feet in diameter, and from twenty-two to thirty-five feet deep. Two
pipes go down nearly to the bottom of the oxidizer; the larger one being
used for conveying a blast of air from a blowing engine, and the smaller
for the injection of steam. The introduction of steam is only had recourse
to in case the liquor when drawn into the oxidizer should not have the
requisite temperature, viz. 130 deg. or 140 deg. Fahr. Immediately above the
oxidizer a reservoir containing milk of lime is placed. A great deal
depends upon the careful preparation of the milk of lime, since on the
degree of fineness in which the lime is added to the manganese chloride in
solution depends the rapidity with which it acts in the oxidizer. The milk
of lime is kept constantly agitated, to ensure its being of uniform
consistency, and should contain from 15 lbs. to 20 lbs. of hydrate of
lime in every cubic foot of the mixture.

A charge of the clear liquor having been drawn into the oxidizer, and
raised if necessary to the requisite temperature, the blowing in of air is
begun, whilst at the same time the milk of lime is run into the oxidizer
as rapidly as possible, the flow of milk of lime being only discontinued
when a sample of the filtrate drawn off, by means of a tap placed near the
bottom of the oxidizer, ceases to give the manganese reaction when mixed
with a solution of bleaching powder. This reaction consists in the
production of a purple colour caused by the formation of permanganate of
calcium. More milk of lime is then added, when the contents of the
oxidizer are found to consist of a thin white mud, composed of a solution
of calcium chloride, holding in suspension a mixture of protoxide of
manganese and lime. The injection of air being continued the white mud
rapidly becomes darker in colour, and soon changes into a thin black mud
composed of solution of calcium chloride, holding in suspension certain
compounds of peroxide of manganese partly combined with protoxide of
manganese, but chiefly with lime, which compounds Mr Weldon terms
"_manganites_." Mr Weldon suggests that the manganites so formed may be
regarded as salts in which the basic radical is calcium or manganese, and
the acid radical MnO_{3}; and may be represented by the formulae CaMnO_{3},
and MnMnO_{3}; and possibly also CaMnO_{2} (MnO_{2})_{2}. "The quantity of
lime which has to be put into the oxidizer before the filtrate from a
sample of its contents ceases to yield the manganese reaction varies very
considerably. Recently precipitated protoxide of manganese dissolves very
appreciably in neutral solution of chloride of calcium, its solution
therein comporting itself with reagents exactly like solutions of
manganese salts. It dissolves also in solution of oxychloride of calcium,
that is to say, in solution of chloride of calcium containing dissolved
lime; its solution in oxychloride of calcium not giving the ordinary
manganese reactions."

"Hence even if all portions of the lime added to the chloride of manganese
in the oxidizer were capable of acting on chloride of manganese equally
readily, manganese could not cease to be so in solution as to be
detectible by ordinary reagents, until more than an equivalent of lime had
been added--that is to say, until enough had been added not only to
decompose all the chloride of manganese, but also to form a certain
quantity of oxychlorate of calcium. It is never the case, however, that
all portions of the lime used are capable of acting on the chloride of
manganese with equal readiness. The lime used always contains a larger or
smaller proportion of particles coarser than the rest, which coarser
portions cannot of course act so rapidly as the finer ones; and as the
decomposition of the chloride of manganese requires to be completed as
quickly as possible, those portions of the lime which will not act upon it
instantly are scarcely allowed time to act upon it at all.

"These coarser portions of the lime thus contribute very little to the
decomposition of the manganese, though they afterwards dissolve completely
in the hot solution of chloride of calcium, and then play their full part
in the reactions which take place during the subsequent blowing. The
proportion of lime which thus does not act on the chloride of manganese
varies with the source of the lime, and with the manner in which it is
prepared, so that the quantity of lime which has to be added to a charge
of chloride of manganese liquor in the oxidizer, before the filtrate from
a sample of the resulting mixture ceases to become coloured on the
addition of solution of bleaching powder, varies from about 1.1 to 1.45
equivalent.

"The further quantity of lime which is added after that point has been
reached is now usually so much as to raise the total quantity to about 1.5
to 1.6 equivalents, being from one half to six tenths in excess of the
quantity which actually takes part in the decomposition of the chloride of
manganese."[239]

[Footnote 239: 'Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and Analytical, as
applied to the Arts and Manufactures,'--Mackenzie & Co.]

As previously stated, Mr Weldon found that if only so much lime is
employed as is necessary to precipitate the manganese, not more than half
the protoxide of manganese will be converted into the peroxide, and that
even this result will be accomplished very tardily. And, as has been
already mentioned, a greater and more rapid yield of protoxide can only be
obtained by using a larger proportion of lime. Any excess, however, of
lime over that absolutely required for the peroxidation of the protoxide
of manganese must be sedulously avoided, since a superabundance of lime
leads to the formation of compounds that are not readily peroxidised.
Should such compounds be formed, it is necessary to destroy them, and this
may be done by the addition of a fresh quantity of chloride of manganese.
The objectionable compounds in question are lime and protoxide of
manganese, which are known in the process under the name of "bases;" and
the reason why it is desirable to prevent as much as possible their
formation will become evident when it is remembered that they cannot
furnish chlorine when treated with hydrochloric acid, but that they merely
dissolve in this latter.

The injection of air into the oxidizer, which constitutes the blowing
operation, varies from two to four hours.

The quantity required to be blown in is chiefly dependent upon the depth
of the oxidizer, and upon the amount of protoxide of manganese contained
in a given volume of the charge.

The greater the depth of this latter the more rapidly does the
peroxidation take place; and the greater the number of molecules of
protoxide in a given volume of the charge, the larger is the total surface
presented to the action of injected air, and consequently the greater is
the proportion of the oxygen absorbed.

"In one instance 175,000 cubic feet of air were blown in during five
hours, and of the oxygen contained in this, 14.8 per cent. (equal to
rather more than 4 cwt.) was absorbed in the production of 22 cwt. of
peroxide of manganese."[240]

[Footnote 240: Weldon.]

The expenditure of mechanical power in forcing the air into the oxidizer
averages between seven and eight horse-power for every 100 lbs. of
peroxide of manganese obtained. In theory, to produce the quantity of
chlorine contained in a ton of bleaching powder containing 37 per cent. of
chlorine, 1020 lbs. of peroxide of manganese would be required; but it is
found in practice that instead of this quantity of peroxide giving the
above result, 1100 lbs. are needed.

"The consumption of lime averages 14 cwt. per ton of bleach. By this
process 1 ton of bleach is made, using 2832 lbs. of hydrochloric acid,
generated by the decomposition of 47.5 cwt. of salt, viz. a quantity which
theoretically yields 3334 lbs. of hydrochloric acid. There is therefore a
loss of acid of 15 per cent. The loss of manganese varies from 4 to 10 per
cent. The whole of the lime is lost, and two thirds of the total chlorine
(in combination with calcium) contained in the acid used.[241]

[Footnote 241: Kingzett.]

When sufficient air has been blown into the oxidizer, the contents which
consist of a solution of chloride of calcium, holding in suspension
peroxide and protoxide of manganese and lime, are run into one of a range
of settling tanks placed below the level of the oxidizer. These tanks are
known as _mud settlers_. In these the manganese mud is left to deposit
until about half its volume has become clear. It generally requires 3 or 4
hours to deposit. The clear part, which consists of chloride of calcium,
being then decanted by means of a swivel-pipe, is usually thrown away. The
mud remaining in the settlers, which contains in a cubic foot from 4 lbs.
to 5 lbs. of peroxide of manganese, is now in a fit condition to be placed
in the still, where it is to be exposed to the action of the hydrochloric
acid. The stills, which are made of slabs of hard siliceous sandstone or
of Yorkshire flagstones, and are usually in the shape of an octagonal
prism, are about 8 feet square, and 10 feet in depth. Mr Kingzett says
"the new Weldon stills are polygonal in shape, about 12 feet across, and 7
feet to 8 feet deep." Contrary to the course formerly followed, when
native manganese was used in the Weldon process, the still is charged with
hydrochloric acid first, and the manganese mud is run in upon the acid in
a small, steady stream, the flow of which can be regulated by a stopcock.
Steam being carefully admitted into the still at the same time, the mud
dissolves very rapidly in the acid, and the chlorine is evolved in an even
current, the force and flow of which is dependent upon and can be very
accurately regulated by the admission of the mud.

The time occupied before the reaction between the acid and the manganese
is completed varies in different works from two to six hours. At the end
of this time the contents of the still are run off into the well placed
below it, and are afterwards submitted to the various operations already
described, which we have seen to accomplish the regeneration of the
residue and effect its reconversion into peroxide of manganese. The
process is a continuous one, and theoretically the original quantity of
manganese should be capable of being used over and over again for an
unlimited number of operations. In practice, however, there is always
found to be a loss of a small per-centage of manganese, arising from some
of the chloride of manganese being carried down by the sulphate of lime
and the ferric and aluminic oxides in the settlers, and not being
thoroughly recovered when the deposit is washed; for, though an exhaustive
washing of the precipitated matters could be easily managed, the bulk of
the wash waters would render the recovery of the chloride of manganese
from them a non-paying affair. This loss of chloride varies according to
the statements of different manufacturers from 2 to 10 per cent.

It is stated that not only is the chlorine yielded by Mr Weldon's process
of very pure quality, and the bleaching powder manufactured from it very
high of strength and excellence; but that over from 20 to 25 per cent.
more bleach is obtained from a given quantity of hydrochloric acid, when
artificial peroxide of manganese is used instead of the native. This
advantage is chiefly owing to the artificial manganese (of the manganese
mud) from its physical condition being much more accessible than the
native form of manganese to the action of the hydrochloric acid, and from
its dissolving in the acid so much more readily and thoroughly, and
neutralising as much as from 95 to 99 per cent. of it, a much larger
amount than the native ores are capable of neutralising.

Again, the bleaching powder produced by the above process stands not only
very high in point of strength, but varies very little in the amount of
chlorine it contains, as may be gathered from the following table, which
shows the average strength for thirteen consecutive weeks of the bleaching
powder made at six large and different manufactories:--


         |                FACTORY.
   WEEK. |-----------------------------------------
         |  I.  |  II. | III. |  IV. |  V.  | VI.
  -------|------|------|------|------|------|------
    1st  | 36.9 | 37.8 | 36.7 | 36.3 | 36.6 | 36.6
    2nd  | 36.1 | 36.8 | 36.7 | 36.2 | 35.1 | 37.4
    3rd  | 36.5 | 38.0 | 36.6 | 36.1 | 37.2 | 37.9
    4th  | 35.9 | 37.1 | 35.9 | 36.2 | 36.8 | 37.1
    5th  | 35.8 | 36.9 | 36.0 | 36.3 | 36.5 | 37.8
    6th  | 36.0 | 37.0 | 36.2 | 35.9 | 36.5 | 37.2
    7th  | 36.5 | 36.0 | 36.3 | 36.6 | 35.8 | 36.8
    8th  | 36.3 | 36.8 | 36.3 | 36.3 | 35.0 | 37.1
    9th  | 36.4 | 36.3 | 36.8 | 35.7 | 35.2 | 37.0
   10th  | 36.5 | 36.7 | 36.3 | 36.0 | 36.2 | 37.6
   11th  | 36.8 | 36.8 | 36.2 | 35.9 | 36.0 | 37.2
   12th  | 36.8 | 35.9 | 35.6 | 35.6 | 36.1 | 37.2
   13th  | 36.7 | 35.2 | 35.9 | 36.1 | 36.9 | 37.5


Spite of the expensive plant required to work Mr Weldon's process, it is
said to possess very decided advantages over the old methods as far as
regards cost of production.

In connection with Mr Weldon's process may be mentioned Mr Valentin's
modification of it, for which a provisional patent was taken out by this
latter gentleman. Instead of adding more lime, after the neutralised still
liquors have been precipitated by an equivalent of lime, as is done in the
above process, Mr Valentin adds a solution of potassium ferricyanide, and
air being blown in, the peroxidation of the manganese is effected much
more quickly than in Mr Weldon's process. It was also calculated that, by
Mr Valentin's method, bleaching powder could be produced at a cost of
about ten shillings per ton less than when made by Mr Weldon's.

For the successful working of Mr Valentin's process it is necessary that
the ferricyanide should be recovered, not only because of its cost, but
also because its presence gives rise to the production of cyanogen
compounds, which would enter the chamber with the chlorine. Hitherto no
economical plan for the recovery of the salt has been devised, and
consequently Mr Valentin's proposed modification of Mr Weldon's process
has failed to be adopted.

_b._ A second process for obtaining chlorine, called "_the magnesia
process_," has been devised by Mr Weldon. In the previous method, or
"_lime process_," two thirds of the chlorine contained in the hydrochloric
acid, as we have seen, is lost, passing away in the form of waste chloride
of calcium.

In the "magnesia process" all the chlorine is utilised, the acid employed
being made to yield the whole of its gas in the free state. The
regeneration of the manganese peroxide being likewise accomplished, and
the process being a continuous one, theoretically no loss of material
should take place.

Beyond the employment of liquor pumps, no machinery is requisite for
carrying out the operation, which, being very simple in its details,
requires the employment of little skilled and, consequently, expensive
labour. Further, the inventor claims for it the production of bleaching
powder at a less cost per ton than by any other process. The "magnesia
method" is worked as follows:--

The spent liquors of the still, consisting of chloride of manganese and
free hydrochloric acid, are neutralised with magnesite, or, as it is
sometimes called, Greek stone--a very pure native form of carbonate of
magnesia. Sometimes the magnesite is calcined, and the magnesia thus
obtained used instead.

The neutralisation may be effected either in the still itself, or in a
well made of cast iron. The liquid is next pumped into the settlers, in
which it deposits its ferric and aluminic oxides and sulphate of lime. The
clear liquor containing the chlorides of manganese and magnesia is then
run into an iron evaporating pan, where it is concentrated by boiling
until it reaches a temperature of between 300 deg. and 320 deg. F. At this point
the magnesium chloride begins to be decomposed by the water, and
hydrochloric acid is given off. When it has reached the above degree of
concentration, it is conveyed into a muffle furnace. This furnace is
divided into two compartments, separated by an iron door, which can be
opened or shut by means of a pulley placed outside. The desiccation of the
mass which is accompanied with the evolution of a little chlorine and a
large amount of hydrochloric acid, having been completed in one of the
divisions of the furnace, it is broken up by constant stirring into thin
cakes and raked into the second division, where it is gently heated with
access of air; when the operation is complete the residue which left the
first compartment as a mixture of manganese and magnesium chloride becomes
converted into manganate of magnesia (MgMnO_{3}), its chlorine having been
driven off partly in the free state and partly as hydrochloric acid. "As
long as water is present in the furnace hydrochloric acid is evolved, and
as the main evaporation takes place in the first division of the furnace,
it is chiefly hydrochloric acid that is there generated. In the second
division it is chiefly chlorine which is evolved, but it is, of course,
mixed with some hydrochloric acid. It is, indeed, doubtful whether much
manganese chloride is decomposed by the water so long as there remains
any chloride of magnesium, as this body is far more readily
decomposable."[242]

[Footnote 242: Kingzett.]

It is stated that all the manganese is not converted into peroxide in the
furnace, but that a certain portion of it is left as protoxide; which,
with the magnesia, constitutes the useless "bases." The completion of the
process is known when portions of the cake drawn from time to time from
the furnace cease to indicate any increase in the quantity of peroxide of
manganese.

The finely-divided black powder--manganate of magnesium--thus obtained,
after leaving the furnace and when sufficiently cold, is ready for the
stills--where, in contact with hydrochloric acid, it is again employed in
the generation of chlorine.

The chlorine leaves the furnace mixed with much hydrochloric acid,
nitrogen, and air. The gaseous mixture is drawn by a chimney draught
through the coke towers, as in the making of salt-cake. By this
contrivance the hydrochloric acid is recovered, yielding a solution strong
enough to react upon fresh manganese in the still. The diluted chlorine
may be made to ascend leaden towers, where it comes in contact with a
shower of milk of lime, which absorbs the gas and forms ordinary bleaching
liquid, whilst sometimes it is employed in the production of potassium
chlorate.

We have seen that the chlorine yielded by the "magnesia process" is partly
in the concentrated, and partly in the dilute condition. The ratio of
strong chlorine generated in the still to that of weak chlorine produced
in the furnace may be anything between one to one, and one to about four,
at pleasure.

"When working so as to obtain strong chlorine and weak chlorine in about
equal proportions, the quantity of the liquor to be boiled down per ton of
total bleaching powder made was about 105 cubic feet. As the proportion of
the weak chlorine increased, the quantity of liquor to be boiled down
diminished until, when the proportion of the weak chlorine to that of the
strong became as four to one, the quantity of liquor to be boiled down per
ton of total bleaching powder made was only about 40 cubic feet."[243]

[Footnote 243: 'Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and
Analytical,'--Mackenzie & Co.]

11. (Deacon.) As we have already seen, Vogel proposed to obtain chlorine
by the decomposition by heat of cupric chloride, and to reconvert the
resulting cuprous chloride into the cupric salt by treatment with
hydrochloric acid.

Chlorine may be produced by passing a mixture of gaseous hydrochloric acid
and air over heated bricks or other porous substances, a reaction which
Oxland unsuccessfully attempted to turn to account for the production of
chlorine for manufacturing purposes. The cause of failure appears to have
been the great heat necessary to effect the decomposition of the acid
atmospheric oxygen.

In the late Mr Deacon's process both Vogel's and Oxland's methods are
combined. He discovered that to be able to generate chlorine and water
from gaseous hydrochloric acid and air, a very much lower temperature than
that employed by Oxland was necessary, and he found that this diminished
temperature could be attained, if the gas and air to be decomposed were
passed over porous bricks saturated with a solution of sulphate of copper,
and heated to a temperature of 700 deg. to 750 deg. F.

Beyond this point he found the heat ought not to be carried; for at 800 deg.
the cupric chloride formed begins to volatilise, and to condense in the
cooler parts of the apparatus (presently to be described), thereby
interfering with the draught through it, and delaying the working, since
its removal becomes necessary. It was found that below 400 deg. the reaction
does not take place. Experience has demonstrated that the best temperature
to effect this decomposition is 625 deg. F.

The hydrochloric acid obtained either from a soda furnace or evolved from
an aqueous solution is immediately mixed with a quantity of air containing
an excess of oxygen over that required for liberating all the chlorine
from the evolved hydrochloric acid, and passed through heated U-shaped
tubes of cast-iron, from which the gaseous mixtures obtain the necessary
temperature. The original plant was so contrived that the heated gases
were conveyed from the U-shaped tubes into a series of nine towers made of
iron or other suitable material. Entering by a pipe at the bottom of the
first tower, and passing on to the second, the gases came into contact
with a series of ordinary agricultural drain pipes of small bore arranged
with vertical spaces, these pipes being saturated with a solution of
sulphate of copper and sulphate of soda, it being subsequently found that
this latter addition increased the efficacy of the copper sulphate, as
well as its power to resist decomposition. From the first two towers of
the series the mixed gases traversed the remaining ones, where they
encountered small pieces of common brick, fire brick, or burnt clay also
impregnated with the copper and soda sulphates, after reacting upon which
they passed out of the apparatus, called the '_decomposer_,'

In the more recently made decomposers we believe the nine towers were
abolished, and one chamber substituted for them, the drain-pipes being at
the same time abandoned for pieces of brick and clay marbles.

A decomposer upon this latter principle is said to have been in use for
several months at a factory in Berlin, and to have worked perfectly
satisfactorily. After leaving the decomposer, the gaseous mixture, which
now consists of chlorine, water, nitrogen, unconsumed oxygen, and
undecomposed hydrochloric acid, after being cooled, is passed through
water, by which means it is deprived of its hydrochloric acid.

It is next made to ascend a tower, where, meeting with a stream of
sulphuric acid running over coke, it is deprived of its water. The
chlorine (diluted with nitrogen and oxygen) is now ready for the lime
chamber.

One great objection urged against the adoption of the above process, viz.,
that in consequence of the large volume of the evolved gases enormously
large chambers for the preparation of the bleaching would be
necessitated, seems to have been met by passing the gas through a series
of chambers, in which the first contains nearly finished bleaching powder;
the second, lime in a less saturated condition; and so on, until the last
chamber contains merely slaked lime.

The following table, exhibiting the amount of chlorine contained in
different batches of bleaching powder made by Deacon's process, is
extracted from 'Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and Analytical,'
published by Mackenzie:--

  ----------+-----------+----------+-----------
            | Strength. |          | Strength.
  ----------+-----------+----------+-----------
  July  14  |  36.0     | July 22  |  34.3
  "     15  |  34.8     |  "   "   |  36.5
  "      "  |  36.1     |  "   24  |  36.8
  "     17  |  36.4     |  "   "   |  37.5
  "      "  |  36.0     |  "   25  |  36.1
  "     18  |  37.2     |  "   "   |  36.7
  "      "  |  37.9     |  "   "   |  36.8
  "     19  |  37.2     |  "   26  |  36.2
  "      "  |  37.0     |  "   "   |  36.9
  "     20  |  37.9     |  "   27  |  36.9
  "      "  |  36.7     |  "   "   |  35.5
  "     21  |  36.0     |  "   28  |  37.2
  "      "  |  35.3     |  "   "   |  37.0
  "      "  |  37.7     |  "   "   |  36.75
  ----------+-----------+----------+-----------

Writing on this process in his late work, 'The Alkali Trade,' Mr Kingzett
says:--"The process bearing Mr Deacon's name was first brought before the
public at the British Association Meeting in 1870.

"It excited at that time much attention, and indeed for some period it was
doubtful whether it would not rival or even displace the Weldon process.
Further experience, however, discovered difficulties in the practical
working of this beautiful method, which exercise a deteriorating influence
on its value, and lessen its applicability. Although several plants have
been erected in connection with this mode of manufacturing chlorine, most
of them have been since abandoned, and at the present time most of the
chlorine is manufactured according to the process of Mr Weldon."

Dr Jurisch, in a communication to 'Dingler's Polytechnic Journal,' 1876,
remarks that when Deacon's process was first taken up within a short time
by more than twelve English and two German establishments, the view was
generally entertained that the balls of clay steeped in solution of copper
would ensure an uninterrupted production of chlorine gas for a year or
two, if not longer. Before many months had elapsed complaints were heard
of the action of the balls. He, therefore, undertook to determine what can
be the cause of these balls declining so rapidly in their efficacy. His
conclusion is, that the true cause of this speedy decrease in the
decomposition is due to sulphuric acid, which passes through the
interstices of the clay-balls mixed with the other gases. This injurious
action, according to Hasenclever and Sartori, is probably to be explained
by the following reaction:--The vapour of sulphuric acid in contact with
sulphate of alumina at a dull red-heat, as is found in the balls, is
resolved into sulphurous acid, watery vapour, and oxygen; the sulphurous
acid thus formed is reoxidised at the expense of the free chlorine, is
again decomposed, and thus keeps up a destructive circulation in the
apparatus, which reduces or totally checks the chlorine.[244]

[Footnote 244: Extracted from the 'Chemical News.']

_Prices of Bleaching Powder_ (CLAPHAM).

  In 1805    L120  0  0 per ton.
   " 1810      84  0  0    "
   " 1815      80  0  0    "
   " 1820      47  0  0    "
   " 1825      27  0  0    "
   " 1830      23  0  0    "
   " 1832      21  0  0    "
   " 1835      23  0  0    "
   " 1840      21  0  0    "
   " 1846      18  0  0    "
   " 1850      13 15  0    "
   " 1855      10 15  0    "
   " 1857      13 10  0    "
   " 1860      11  0  0    "
   " 1868      10 12  0    "

_Prop., Uses, &c._ Chlorine is a gas possessing a yellowish-green colour,
and a pungent, suffocating odour. It is one of the heaviest substances
that are gaseous at ordinary temperatures, being nearly 2-1/2 heavier than
atmospheric air; sp. gr. 1.47. It is soluble to a considerable extent in
water, that liquid at 60 deg. Fahr. absorbing about twice its volume. It is
non-inflammable, but its union with some of the elements is attended with
the phenomena of combustion; thus, phosphorus, copper leaf, powdered
antimony and arsenic, and several other substances thrown into chlorine
immediately inflame. Under a pressure of 4 atmospheres it is condensed
into a yellow, limpid liquid. Moist chlorine gas cooled to 32 deg. Fahr.
condenses into yellow crystals, containing 35-1/2 parts of chlorine and 90
parts of water. The most remarkable property of chlorine is its power of
destroying almost all vegetable and animal colours, and the putrid odour
of decomposing organic matter; hence its value as a bleaching agent, and
as a disinfectant and fumigator. When first proposed as a bleaching agent
by Berthollet, it was used much the same way as sulphur is now in
bleaching woollen goods; afterwards a solution of the gas in water was
employed, but the final improvement was Tennant's patent of combining the
gas with lime to form "chloride of lime." With the bases chlorine forms an
important series of compounds called chlorides.

_Tests._ Free chlorine is readily distinguished from other gases by its
colour, suffocating odour, and bleaching properties. The aqueous solution
dissolves gold leaf, and with nitrate of silver gives a white, curdy
precipitate.

=CHLORINE STILLS.= The accompanying figure represents a section of one of
the earlier forms of still used in the preparation of chlorine.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

These stills were sometimes made of strong sheet lead, the lower part of
which was enclosed in a jacket of cast iron, into which steam was forced,
by which means the contents of the still were heated. The steam was
injected from an ordinary boiler through the pipe H, and the materials,
after the decomposition had been completed, were drawn off by the pipe G.
The four openings, C, D, E, F, were secured by water lutes, capable of
bearing a pressure greater than that required in the chamber where the
saturation took place. In some cases the lower half of the still was made
of cast iron, and fitted into a groove made in the upper part, the two
sections being united by means of a strong cement. In the latter case the
heating of the still was effected by a naked fire applied to the bottom.
Into the orifice C the said materials employed were introduced, whilst the
acid was poured through the opening F. The gas evolved passed off through
the pipe E to the purifier and chamber, where it was absorbed by the lime,
and converted into bleaching powder, and the shaft of the agitator passed
up through D.

The use of the leaden stills survived for a longer time in France than in
this country. In some parts of Germany large glass globes with long necks
were employed, in which the chlorine was generated from a mixture of
hydrochloric acid and manganese. But these were only applicable in cases
where comparatively small quantities of bleaching powder were to be
manufactured. When the chlorine is obtained from a mixture of manganese,
common salt, and sulphuric acid, the apparatus, being required to
withstand a greater heat, is made entirely of metal.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

In fig. 2. _a a_ represents a shallow iron pan, fitted with the tube _b_,
for the purpose of emptying the contents of the leaden cylinder _d d_.
This iron vessel serves as the lower part of the cylinder _d d_, the top
of which is provided with an opening for a funnel syphon tube, for the
introduction of the acid, and another opening, _f_, for the manganese. The
entire apparatus stands on a flue leading from the furnace.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The foregoing drawing represents a vessel for the manufacture of chlorine
on a large scale, and is extensively used in Germany.

It consists of a cylindrical vessel of sandstone, the lower half of which,
A, is carved out of a single block; the upper half, B, also of one piece,
fits into the lower by means of a grooved joint, the two parts being
united by means of a cement made of clay and boiled linseed oil. About six
inches from the bottom the cylinder widens by 2 inches, and the rim thus
formed carries a perforated bottom, C, upon which the manganese is
deposited in large lumps. The tube D, likewise of stone, passes beneath
the perforated bottom, and is at the other end joined to the steam-tube E.
The steam must therefore, when introduced, enter the cylinder through the
perforations of the false bottom. The top of the cylinder is closed by a
lead cover, K, which is fastened down by means of iron clamps; this lid
has an aperture, G, and the tubes E, F, H, pass through it; tube E serves,
as already stated, for the introduction of the steam; tube F is for the
delivery of chlorine; the bent tube, H, which ends in a funnel, for the
introduction of the hydrochloric acid; and the opening G for throwing the
lumps of manganese into the cylinder. The solution of manganese chloride,
resulting from the action of the hydrochloric acid upon the manganese, is
removed through I, which is kept closed by a wooden stopper whilst the
reaction proceeds.

See also, under CHLORINE, the description of WELDON'S stills, and of
DEACON'S apparatus.

=CHLORITE.= A salt in which the hydrogen of chlorous acid, HClO_{2}, is
replaced by a metal or other basic radical. See CHLOROUS ACID.

=CHLOROCHROMIC ACID.= CrOCl. _Syn._ CHLOROCHROMIC ANHYDRIDE. _Prep._
Bichromate of potassium, 3 parts; common salt, 3-1/2 parts; are intimately
mixed together, put into a glass retort, and oil of vitriol, 9 parts,
added; heat is next applied and maintained as long as dense, red vapours
are given off. The product in the receiver is a heavy, deep-red liquor,
greatly resembling bromine in appearance. Water resolves it into
hydrochloric and chromic anhydride.

=CHLORODYNE.= See PATENT MEDICINES.

=Chlorodyne= (Dr Browne's). Acid muriat. conc., 5 parts; ether,
chloroform, tinct. cannab. Ind., tinct. capsici, of each 10 parts;
morphia, prussic acid, of each 2 parts; oil of peppermint, 1 part; syrup,
50 parts; tinct. hyoscyami, tinct. aconiti, of each 3 parts.

=Chlorodyne, English.= A filtered mixture of 5 grammes tinct. aromat., 4
grammes tinct. opii simp., 1 gramme morph. mur., 10 grammes aq. amygd.
amar., 80 grammes syrup of liquorice, 1 gramme extract of liquorice, 40
grammes 90 per cent. spirit of wine, 5 drops oil of peppermint, 10 drops
ether, 30 drops chloroform.

=CHLOROFORM.= CHCl_{3}. _Syn._ TERCHLORIDE OF FORMYLE, FORMYL-CHLORIDE;
CHLOROFORMYL, TRICHLOROMETHANE, CHLOROFORMUM, L. A remarkable fluid
discovered by Liebig in 1830, and independently by Soubeiran in 1832, and
carefully examined in 1834 by Dumas. In 1842 its action upon animals was
investigated by Dr M. Glover, and in 1847 it was introduced to the medical
profession as an anaesthetic agent by Dr Simpson of Edinburgh.

It was first obtained by the action of caustic alkali upon chloral, but it
is more easily prepared by distilling alcohol or wood spirit with chloride
of lime. It may also be procured from wood spirit, acetone, oil of
turpentine, and several essential oils, as well as from amylic alcohol,
acetic acid, tartaric acid, and phenol; when these different bodies are
severally subjected to the action of chloride of lime. When chlorine is
made to act on marsh gas, or when chloral is treated with an alkali,
chloroform is also produced.

_Prep._ 1. Chloride of lime (in powder), 4 lbs.; water, 12 lbs.; mix in a
capacious retort or still, add of rectified spirit, 12 fl. oz., and
cautiously distil as long as a dense liquid, which sinks in the water it
passes over with, is produced; separate this from the water, agitate it
with a little sulphuric acid, and, lastly, rectify it from carbonate of
barium.

2. Chloride of lime, 4 lbs.; water, 10 pints; rectified spirit, 1/2 pint;
proceed as last, using a spacious retort that the mixture will only 1-3rd
fill, and the heat of a sand bath. When ebullition commences remove the
fire as quickly as possible, lest the retort be broken by the suddenly
increased heat, and let the solution distil into a receiver as long as
there is nothing which subsides, the heat being restored if it be at all
needed. Add to the distilled liquid four times as much water, and shake
the whole well together; next cautiously separate the heavier part as soon
as it has subsided, and to this add chloride of calcium, broken into
fragments, 1 dr.; and shake occasionally during an hour; finally, let the
fluid again distil from a glass retort into a glass receiver.

3. Hydrate of lime, 1 part, is suspended in cold water, 24 parts, and
chlorine passed through the mixture until nearly the whole of the lime is
dissolved; hydrate of lime, q. s. just to restore the alkaline reaction of
the liquid, is then added; and, afterwards, rectified spirit of wine or
wood spirit, 1 part, is mixed in; the whole, after repose for 24 hours in
a covered vessel, is cautiously distilled as before.

4. (B. P.) Take of chlorinated lime 10 _lbs._; rectified spirit, 30 fluid
ounces; slaked lime, a sufficient quantity; water, 3 gallons; sulphuric
acid, a sufficient quantity; chloride of calcium in small fragments 2
_oz._; distilled water, 10 fluid ounces. Place the water and the spirit in
a capacious still, and raise the mixture to a temperature of 100 deg. F. Add
the chlorinated lime, and 5 _lbs._ of the slaked lime, mixing thoroughly.
Connect the still with a condensing worm, encompassed by cold water, and
terminating in a narrow-necked receiver; and apply heat so as to cause
distillation, taking care to withdraw the fire the moment that the process
is well established. When the distilled product measures 50 fluid ounces
the receiver is to be withdrawn. Pour its contents into a gallon bottle,
half filled with water; mix well by shaking, and set it at rest for a few
minutes, when the mixture will separate into two strata of different
densities. Let the lower stratum, which contains crude chloroform, be
washed by agitating it in a bottle with 3 fluid ounces of the distilled
water. Allow the chloroform to subside, withdraw the water, and repeat the
washing with the rest of the distilled water, in successive quantities of
3 oz. at a time. Agitate the washed chloroform for five minutes in a
bottle with equal volume of sulphuric acid, allow the mixture to settle,
and transfer the upper stratum of liquid to a flask, containing the
chloride of calcium, mixed with 1/2 oz. of slaked lime, which should be
perfectly dry. Mix well by agitation. After the lapse of an hour connect
the flask with a Liebig condenser, and distil over the pure chloroform by
means of a water bath. Preserve the product in a cool place in a bottle
furnished with an accurately ground stopper. The lighter liquid which
floats on the crude chloroform after its agitation with water, and the
washings with distilled water, should be preserved and employed in a
subsequent operation. Sp. gr. 1.456.

_Prop., &c._ Liquid; transparent; colourless; odour fragrant, ethereal,
and apple-like; taste ethereal, sweetish, but slightly acrid; soluble in
2000 parts of water; mixes in all proportions with alcohol and ether;
dissolves (readily) bromine, camphor, caoutchouc, gutta percha, iodine,
oils, resins, wax, and several other like substances; boils at 141.8 deg.
Fahr.; kindles with difficulty; burns, when strongly heated, with a
greenish flame; and communicates a dull, smoky-yellow colour to the flame
of alcohol. Sp. gr. 1.48 (1.497, Miller); density of vapour 4.2. The
vapour has the remarkable property of rendering a person breathing it
temporarily insensible to pain.

Chloroform is frequently adulterated with alcohol and ether; and owing to
careless manipulation, is also sometimes contaminated with other
substances, as chloral, hydrochloric acid, free chlorine, aldehyde and
certain chlorinated oils. These latter compounds are not only the most
objectionable and prejudicial of the impurities found in chloroform, but
if present in it to any appreciable extent, they render its anaesthetic
administration not only inefficient, but frequently absolutely dangerous.
These deleterious chlorinated oily compounds may be removed by agitation
with strong sulphuric acid, or by distillation from it. Chloroform made
from wood spirit is said to be more impure than that from alcohol. When
pure it is free from colour, and of a pleasant odour. It is not perfectly
soluble in water; and does not turn the colour of litmus red. Rubbed on
the skin it quickly evaporates, scarcely leaving any odour. Dropped into
water, it falls to the bottom and remains bright and limpid; but if it
contain alcohol the surface of the drop becomes opaline. If the same
experiment be made with diluted sulphuric acid, sp. gr. 1.44, the drop of
pure chloroform will fall to the bottom; but that which contains spirit,
if not shaken, will float or remain suspended in the acid solution. When
contaminated with heavy hydrocarbon oils, a drop evaporated from the palm
of the hand leaves behind a strong smell. Hydrochloric acid and free
chlorine are detected by the ordinary tests.

Mr Shuttleworth, writing to the 'Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal,'
says:--"In regard to the restoration of chloroform which has become
spoiled, I would recommend that the chloroform be well agitated with a
dilute solution of hyposulphite of soda.

"It should then be separated by means of a glass funnel from the
supernatant liquid, and again washed; this time with simple water. After
being separated the chloroform should be passed through filtering paper to
free it from traces of moisture, when it will be found much improved and
comparatively sweet, good enough in any case for external use.

"There are, of course, certain other impurities of chloroform which the
hyposulphite will not remove. These are of a more stable character, and as
they possess a higher boiling point than chloroform, may be separated by
distillation, or by treatment with sulphuric acid in the usual manner."

_Uses, Action, &c._ Chloroform is anodyne, antispasmodic, sedative,
stimulant, and anaesthetic. In small doses (5 to 12 or 15 drops, in water,
mixed with a little syrup or mucilage) it is employed in spasmodic
disorders, and as a stimulant and diaphoretic. It is now chiefly used as
an anaesthetic to produce insensibility to pain during surgical operations.
The dose for inhalation is 1 fl. dr., which is repeated, in a few minutes,
if no effect is produced, until 3 fl. dr. have been thus exhibited; the
effects being carefully watched, and the source of the chloroform vapour
removed as soon as a sufficient degree of anaesthesia is produced, or any
unpleasant symptoms develop themselves.

Chloroform in large doses depresses the heart's action, and causes
profound coma, and death. It is therefore dangerous in all cases
complicated with diseases of the heart or brain, or any visceral
affections of a congestive character.

The treatment of asphyxia from chloroform is--the horizontal position,
cold affusion to the head and spine, artificial respiration, and, if
possible, either the application of electricity, or the inhalation of
protoxide of nitrogen or oxygen gas, largely diluted with atmospheric
air.

_Concluding Remarks._ The preparation of chloroform is not unattended with
danger, and frequently miscarries in careless or inexperienced hands. This
arises chiefly from the violent reaction which immediately follows the
application of the heat. The common plan is attended with danger of
explosion, or of the liquid in the still being forced over into the
receiver, owing to the extraordinary rapidity with which the vapours are
eliminated, and the ingredients, in consequence, swell up. A method which
is successfully adopted on the large scale is to employ a very broad and
shallow capsule-shaped still, having a flat rim round it, with a head or
capital furnished with a corresponding rim at its lower part. In use, a
flat, endless band of vulcanised india rubber is placed between the two
rims, which are then held air-tight together by means of small, iron
clamps. The application of heat is also delayed for some time after the
admixture of the spirit with the other ingredients, and the process is
interrupted as soon as the first violence of the reaction has subsided, by
which time the whole product of chloroform will have passed over into the
receiver. If the distillation is continued beyond this point, the
remaining product is water. On the small scale, a very capacious,
flat-bottomed retort or cucurbit should be employed. A similar condenser
may be used to that noticed under ether.

=CHLOROFORMIC ANODYNE= (George Harley) is said to be an alcoholic tincture
of opium with prussic acid and chloroform.

=CHLOROHYPONITRIC GAS= (NOCl) and =CHLORONITROUS GAS= (N_{2}O_{2}Cl_{4}
are two peculiar compounds, formed when nitric acid and hydrochloric acid
are mixed.

=CHLOROMETER.= _Syn._ CHLORIM'ETER. An instrument or apparatus employed in
chlorometry. The chlorometers in common use are graduated measures and
tubes precisely similar to those used in ACIDIMETRY, ALKALIMETRY, &c.

=CHLOROMETRY.= _Syn._ CHLORIM'ETRY. The estimation of the available
chlorine in the bleaching powder of commerce, which is valued and sold in
this country by its per-centage of that element. The plans generally
adopted are applicable to the so-called chlorides of soda and potassa, as
well as to the ordinary bleaching powder, chloride of lime. Most of them
depend on the oxidising effect of water when undergoing decomposition
through the action of chlorine.

_Dalton's Process._ The test solution is prepared as follows:--Pure
protosulphate of iron (previously dried by strong pressure between the
folds of cloth or bibulous paper), 78 gr., are dissolved in distilled
water, 2 oz., and a few drops of hydrochloric or sulphuric acid added.
This quantity of protosulphate requires for complete peroxidation just the
quantity of oxygen liberated by 10 gr. of chlorine; in other words, the
solution exhibits the indirect effect produced by exactly 10 grains of the
bleaching element.

Exactly 50 gr. of the sample of chloride of lime to be examined are next
weighed, and well mixed in a glass or wedgwood mortar with tepid water, 2
oz.; and the mixture poured into a graduated tube or chlorometer. The tube
is next filled up to 0, or zero, with the washings of the mortar, and the
whole well mixed, by placing the thumb over the orifice and shaking it.
The solution of chloride of lime, thus formed, is next gradually and
cautiously added to the solution of sulphate of iron, previously noticed,
until the latter is completely peroxidised, which may be known when it
ceases to be affected by a solution of red prussiate of potash. When a
drop of the latter test, placed upon a white plate, ceases to give a blue
colour on being touched with the point of a glass stirrer or rod dipped in
the liquor under examination, enough of the solution of the chloride has
been added. The number of measures thus consumed must now be carefully
read off from the graduated scale of the chlorometer, from which the
richness of the sample may be estimated as follows:--As 100 of the
chlorometer divisions contain exactly 50 gr. of the chloride under
examination, each measure will contain only 1/2 gr., and, consequently,
the number of measures consumed will represent half that number of grains
of the chloride examined; and the weight of the chloride thus used will
have contained 10 gr. of chlorine--the constant quantity of that substance
required to peroxide the test solution of sulphate of iron. Thus:--If 80
measures of the liquor in the chlorometer have been consumed, this
quantity will represent 40 gr. of chloride of lime, and 10 gr. of
chlorine. By dividing 1000 by this number, the per-centage of chlorine
will be obtained. In the present instance this would be--

  1000
  ---- = 25%
   40

_Crum's Process._ Equal weights of water and hydrochloric acid are mixed
together, and cast-iron borings digested in the diluted acid until
saturation is complete; a large excess of iron being purposely employed,
and the liquid kept at the heat of boiling water for some time. One
measure of the solution, marking 40 deg. on Twaddell's scale (sp. gr. 1.200),
is then mixed with an equal quantity of acetic acid (sp. gr. 1.048). This
forms the test-liquid. When mixed with 6 or 8 parts of water it is quite
colourless, but chloride of lime occasions the production of peracetate of
iron, which gives it a red colour.

The above proof-solution is next poured into 12 two-oz. vials, of exactly
equal diameters, to the amount of 1/9th of their capacity; these are
filled up with bleaching liquid of various strengths; the first at 1/12th
of a degree of Twaddell, the second 2/12ths, and so on up to 12/12ths of
1 deg.. They are then well corked up, and, after agitation, arranged side by
side on a tray, furnished with holes to receive them. (See _engr._) To
ascertain the strength of an unknown sample of bleaching liquor, the
proof-solution of iron is put into a phial, exactly similar to the 12
previously used, and in precisely the same proportion (1/9th). The phial
is then filled up with the bleaching liquor, well shaken, and placed
beside that one of the 12 already prepared which it most resembles in
colour. The number on that phial expresses the strength of the sample
under examination, in twelfths of a degree of Twaddell's hydrometer.

[Illustration]

_Obs._ The preceding method is admirably suited for weak solutions, such
as are employed for bleaching textile fabrics, and is well adapted (from
its simplicity) to the purposes of practical men. Indeed, it is quite
astonishing to see with what ease and accuracy it is applied by unlettered
operatives. This gives it great practical value. It has been for some time
in extensive use in the bleaching houses of Scotland.

TABLE _exhibiting the quantity of Bleaching Liquid, at 6 deg. on_ TWADDELL'S
_scale_ (_sp. gr._ 1.030), _required to be added to a weaker liquor, to
raise it to the given strengths. Adapted from_ MR CRUM'S _table by_ MR
COOLEY.


             |           | Proportions required.
   Strength  | Required  |-----------------------
   of Sample | Strength. |   Given   |   Liquor
   in 1/12 deg.. |           |  Sample.  |   at 6 deg..
  -----------+-----------+-----------+-----------
             |           |   Parts.  |   Part.
   Water.    |   8/12 deg.   |    8      |     1
     1       |     "     |    9-1/4  |     1
     2       |     "     |   11      |     1
     3       |     "     |   13-1/2  |     1
     4       |     "     |   17      |     1
     5       |     "     |   23      |     1
     6       |     "     |   35      |     1
     7       |     "     |   71      |     1
   Water.    |   6/12 deg.   |   11      |     1
     1       |     "     |   13-1/2  |     1
     2       |     "     |   17      |     1
     3       |     "     |   23      |     1
     4       |     "     |   35      |     1
     5       |     "     |   71      |     1
   Water.    |   4/12 deg.   |   17      |     1
     1       |     "     |   23      |     1
     2       |     "     |   35      |     1
     3       |     "     |   71      |     1
   Water.    |   3/12 deg.   |   23      |     1
     1       |     "     |   35      |     1
     2       |     "     |   71      |     1


According to Mr Crum, the range of strength within which cotton is "safe"
is very limited. A solution at 1 deg. of Twaddell's scale (sp. gr. 1.005) is
not more than safe, while one at 1/2 deg. is scarcely sufficiently strong for
the first operation on stout cloth, unless it is packed more loosely than
usual.

_Gay-Lussac's Indigo Process._ One part of the best indigo is dissolved in
9 parts of strong sulphuric acid by the aid of a gentle heat; this
solution is then mixed with distilled water, in such proportion that 1
volume of chlorine gas shall exactly decolour 10 volumes of this solution.
Each measure so decoloured is called a degree, and each degree is divided
into fifths. 5 gr. of the best chloride of lime, dissolved in 500 gr.
measures of water, possess the above power, and indicate 10 deg. or proof; or
in other words, will decolour 10 times its volume of the indigo solution.

_Obs._ This method of chlorometry is objectionable, and liable to error,
from the indigo solution altering by keeping. When, however, the proper
precautions are used, it may be safely trusted for weak bleaching liquors.

_Arsenious Acid Process._ This depends on the conversion, by oxidation, of
arsenious acid into arsenic acid, in the presence of chlorine and water.

To prepare the test-liquor, pure arsenious acid, 100 gr., are dissolved in
about 4 fl. oz. of pure hydrochloric acid (free from sulphurous acid), and
the solution diluted with water until, on being poured into a graduated
10,000 grains-measure-glass, it occupies the volume of 7000 grains measure
marked on the scale. Each 1000 grains measure of this liquid now contains
14.29 gr. of arsenious acid; corresponding to 10 gr. of chlorine, or
1/10th gr. of chlorine for every division or degree of the scale of the
chlorometer.

100 gr. of the chloride of lime to be examined are next dissolved in water
as before, and poured into a tube graduated up to 2000 grains measure. The
whole is now well shaken, in order to obtain a uniformly turbid solution,
and half of it (1000-grains-measure) transferred to a graduated
chlorometer, which is, therefore, thus filled up to 0 deg., or the zero of the
scale, and contains exactly 50 gr. of the chloride of lime under
examination; whilst each degree or division of the scale contains only 1/2
gr.

1000 grains measure of the arsenious acid test-liquor are now poured into
a glass beaker, and a few drops of solution of sulphate of indigo added in
order to impart a faint but distinct blue colour to it; the glass is then
shaken so as to give a circular movement to the liquid, and whilst it is
whirling round, the chloride-of-lime solution from the chlorometer is
gradually and cautiously added, until the blue tinge given to the
arsenious acid test-liquor is destroyed; care being taken to stir the
mixture well during the whole process, and to stop as soon as the
decolorisation is completed.

Let us suppose now that, in order to destroy the blue colour of the 1000
grains measure of the arsenious acid test-liquor, 90 divisions or degrees
of the chloride-of-lime solution have been employed. These 90 divisions,
therefore, contained the 10 gr. of chlorine required to destroy the colour
of the test-solution; and since each division represents 1/2 gr. of
chloride of lime, 45 gr. of chloride of lime (10 gr. of chlorine) were
present in the 90 divisions so employed, from which the per-centage
strength may be ascertained. For--

45 : 10 : : 100 : 22.22

The chloride of lime examined, therefore, contained 22-1/4 per cent,
(nearly) of chlorine.

_Obs._ This method is extremely simple and trustworthy when properly
employed; but to ensure accuracy, certain precautions must be adopted.
Instead of pouring the test-liquor into the solution of the sample (as in
alkalimetry), the solution of the sample must be poured into the
test-liquor.

Vogel found that in a normal solution of arsenious acid that had been
prepared for using in the above process, half the quantity of the
arsenious acid became oxidised to arsenic acid in the course of about a
year. He therefore recommends that the standard solution, if kept for some
time, should be tested by a magnesium salt. The formation of a precipitate
would show the solution had undergone such a change, as to render it unfit
for volumetric estimations.

_Penot's Process._ This is a modification of the previous process. For the
arsenious acid solution arsenite of soda is substituted, and for the
indigo solution a colourless iodised paper, which is turned blue by the
smallest quantity of free acid. The paper is prepared in the following
manner:--1 gram of iodine, 7 grams of carbonate of soda, 3 grams of
starch, and a quarter of a litre of water are mixed. When the solution
becomes colourless it is diluted to half a litre; in this fluid, white
paper is soaked. The arsenical fluid is prepared by dissolving 4.44 grams
of arsenious acid, and 13 grams of crystallised carbonate of soda in 1
litre of water. This solution is added by means of a burette to the
solution of chloride of lime intended to be tested (10 grams of the sample
to 1 litre) the completion of the reaction being known by the paper
remaining uncoloured.

Lunge says that the same piece of moist iodine test paper may be made use
of repeatedly, since the spots produced by testing usually disappear after
about twenty-four hours if exposed to the air. The paper must, however, be
kept away from dust.

_Wagner's Process._ This method is based upon the fact that a solution of
chloride of lime separates the iodine from a weak (1 to 10) and slightly
acidified iodide-of-potassium solution, the iodine being quantitatively
estimated by means of hyposulphite of soda:--

  Iodine 21,       }         {Iodine of sodium, 2NaI,
  Hyposulphite of  }  yield  {Tetrathionate of sodium, Na_{2}S_{4}O_{6},
  soda, 2Na_{1}SO_{3}  }         {Water, 5H_{2}O.
  +5H_{2}O,

The test is performed as follows:--100 c. c. =1 gram of bleaching-powder
solution, obtained by dissolving 10 grams of chloride of lime in 1 litre
of water, are mixed with 25 c. c. of solution of iodide of potassium
acidified with dilute hydrochloric acid. The resulting clear, deep
brown-coloured solution is treated with hyposulphite of soda solution
until quite colourless. The hyposulphite of soda solution is composed of
24.8 grams of that salt to 1 litre of water; 1 c. c. of this solution
neutralises 0.0127 grams of iodine, and 0.00355 grams of chlorine.

_Otto's Process._ This method is based upon the following data. Two
molecular weights of protosulphate of iron when brought into contact with
chlorine, in presence of water, and free sulphuric acid, give one molecule
of persulphate of iron, and two molecules of hydrochloric acid, the
process consuming one molecule of chlorine. Two molecules of crystallised
sulphate of iron = 556, correspond to 71.0 of chlorine, or in other terms
0.7839 grams of the crystallised sulphate correspond to 0.1 gram of
chlorine.

_Bunsen's Process._ This consists in adding iodide of potassium to the
bleaching-powder liquor, acidulating the mixture with hydrochloric acid,
and running the solution of arsenite of soda into it till only a yellow
tint shows itself. A little starch paste is now added, and the arsenite
solution cautiously introduced drop by drop, till the blue colour just
disappears. The solutions must all be standardised. To preserve the starch
paste Mohr advises the addition to it of a little chloride of zinc.

_Mr Davies_ uses glycerin as a solvent for the arsenious acid. He prepares
a standard solution as follows:--13.95 grains of arsenious acid in 40 c.
c. of glycerin and fitted up to 1 litre. Every c. c. corresponds to 0.1
grain of chlorine. Indigo sulphate solution is used as an indicator, and
the bleaching liquor is run into the glycerin solution until the blue
colour of the latter is changed to a brownish yellow.

_Dr Ure's_ as follows:--Liquor of ammonia, of a known strength, tinged
with litmus, is added to a solution of a given weight of the chloride
under examination, until the whole of the chlorine is neutralised, which
is known by the colour being destroyed. From the quantity of ammonia
consumed the strength of the sample is estimated.

The value of bleaching powder is estimated in England, America, and
Germany by degrees corresponding to the per-centage of available chlorine
contained in a sample of chloride of lime by weight; but in France the
degrees denote the number of litres of chlorine gas at 0 deg. c. and 760 deg. Mm.
Bar., which 1 kilo of bleaching powder can evolve. In the following table
the chlorometrical degrees of France and England are contrasted:--

  French.   English.
  63         20.02
  65         20.65
  70         22.24
  75         23.83
  80         25.42
  85         27.01
  90         28.60
  100        31.80
  105        33.36
  110        34.95
  115        36.54
  120        38.13
  125        39.72
  126        40.04

The per-centage may be calculated by multiplying the French degrees by the
coefficient 0.318.

=CHLOROCARBONIC ACID.= (COCl_{2}). _Syn._ PHOSGENE GAS, CARBONIC
OXYDICHLORIDE. This compound may be produced by the direct combination of
equal volumes of carbonic oxide and chlorine gases under the influence of
sunlight (whence its name of "phosgene gas"), when the mixture gradually
becomes colourless, and contracts to half its original volume.
Chlorocarbonic acid has a peculiar pungent smell, and fumes strongly when
exposed to moist air, the moisture of which it decomposes, producing at
the same time hydrochloric and carbonic acids.

It is sometimes employed in chemical research for the removal of hydrogen
from organic compounds, and the substitution of carbonic oxide, or its
elements for the hydrogen.

=CHLOROPHYLL.= The green colouring matter contained in the leaves, stalks,
unripe fruit, and juices of most plants.

=CHLORO'SIS.= _Syn._ GREEN SICKNESS. A disease which principally affects
young unmarried females.

_Symp._ Languor, listlessness, fatigue after the least exercise,
palpitation of the heart, flatulency, indigestion, acidity of stomach and
bowels, constipation (generally), appetite for unnatural food, general
debility, &c. As the disease advances, the skin at first pale, assumes a
peculiar greenish tint, the respiration becomes affected, the feet and
legs swell, and various organic affections of the viscera ensue. During
the early stages of this disease the catamenia are usually pale and
scanty, and return at irregular intervals, and as it progresses they
disappear altogether.

_Treat._ This should be tonic and restorative. That recommended under
ANAEMIA may be adopted with advantage. See also APPETITE, ATROPHY.

=Chlorosis, Electuary for--Female Electuary.= A greenish-black thick
syrup, consisting of sugar, bayberries, carbonate of iron, iron filings,
and water. (Buchner.)

=Chlorosis Powder--Female Powder=--consists of a mixture of anise, sugar,
and 14 per cent. of iron filings. (Wittstein.)

=Chlorosis Powder--Female Powder=, according to Schott and Strauss, is a
mixture of violet root, gum Arabic, and a tasteless green powder with 33
per cent. of steel filings. According to Hager, it is composed of 2 parts
ferri pulvis, with 3 parts powdered sweet-flag root.

=Chlorosis Powder--Female Powders.= Steel filings, starch powder, and knot
grass, of each 1 part, Florentine orris root, 4 parts.

=Chlorosis Powder--Female Powders.= A mixture of 1 part steel filings and
2 parts of a vegetable powder composed of gum Arabic, Florentine orris,
knot grass, &c. (Egb. Hoyer.)

=Chlorosis Water= (Dr Ewich) contains in 10,000 parts 11 of sodium
carbonate, 9 of sodium chloride, 1-1/2 sodium sulphate, 7 calcium
carbonate, and 1.2 iron carbonate with an excess of carbonic acid.
(Hager.)

=CHLOROUS ACID.= HClO_{2}. _Syn._ ACIDUM CHLORO'SUM, L. _Prep._ From
chlorate of potassium, 4 parts; arsenious anhydride, 3 parts; nitric acid,
12 parts; (diluted with) water, 4 parts; heated together in a glass flask,
furnished with a bent tube, and placed in a water bath. It must be
collected in the same way as chlorine, or passed into water, when it forms
a solution of chlorous acid.

_Prop., &c._ Chlorous acid is a greenish-yellow gas, non-condensable by a
freezing mixture of salt and ice, but liquefiable by extreme cold. The
aqueous solution undergoes gradual decomposition, yielding chloric acid
and chlorine. Chlorous acid possesses powerful oxidising and bleaching
properties; with the bases it forms salts called CHLORITES. These are all
soluble in water, and bleach like the acid. They may be recognised by the
evolution of chlorous acid gas when acted on by an acid. The use of the
arsenious acid is to deoxidise the nitric acid employed in the process.
Tartaric acid, or other deodorising agent, may be substituted for it.

=CHOC'OLATE.= _Syn._ CHOCOLA'TA, L.; CHOCOLLATI, Mexican; CHOCOLAT, Fr. A
beverage or paste made from the roasted seeds of the _Theobroma Cacao_, or
COCOA. Strictly speaking, the term "chocolate" is applicable to all
genuine preparations of cocoa, but it is now generally used to distinguish
those which contain sugar, and, commonly, flavouring substances. Of late
years great attention has been paid to the manufacture of chocolate in
England; our principal makers now import the finest descriptions of cocoa,
and produce varieties of the manufactured article which are scarcely
inferior to those of their French rivals. The different kinds of cocoa,
and the processes of roasting, sweating, &c., are described under COCOA,
to which article we refer the reader also for particulars respecting the
chemistry of chocolate.

_Prep._ The cocoa nibs[245] are ground in a mill consisting of stone or
metal rollers, which are usually heated either by charcoal fires or by
steam, so as to soften or melt the natural fat.[246] The warm, smooth
paste which passes from the mill is then placed in a mixing mill, and
incorporated with refined sugar, and usually vanilla or other flavouring
substance. The trituration is continued until the whole paste is converted
into an entirely homogeneous mass, which is finally shaped, by means of
suitable moulds, into various forms, as blocks, loaves, tablets, lozenges,
&c.

[Footnote 245: The bruised, roasted seeds, freed from husk and membrane.]

[Footnote 246: Cacao- or cocoa-butter.]

_Obs._ Chocolate, prepared as above, without the addition of aromatics, is
known in the trade as PLAIN CHOCOLATE. The Spaniards flavour it with
vanilla, cloves, and cinnamon, and frequently scent it with musk and
ambergris. With these additions it is termed SPANISH CHOCOLATE. In
general, they add too large a quantity of the last four articles. The
Parisians, on the contrary, use little flavouring, and that principally
vanilla. They employ the best kinds of cocoa, and add a considerable
quantity of refined sugar. So prepared, it is called FRENCH CHOCOLATE.

_Proportions._ 1. FRENCH CHOCOLATE:--The proportions used for the best
description are said to be--2 beans of vanilla, and 1 lb. of the best
refined sugar, to every 3 lbs. of the choicest cacao nuts.

2. SPANISH CHOCOLATE:--The following forms are said to be commonly
adopted:--

_a._ Caracas cocoa, 11 lbs.; sugar (white), 3 lbs.; vanilla, 1 oz.;
cinnamon (cassia), 1/4 oz.; cloves, 1/2 dr.

_b._ Caracas cocoa, 10 lbs.; sweet almonds, 1 lb.; sugar, 3 lbs.; vanilla,
1-1/4 oz.

_c._ Caracas cocoa, 8 lbs.; island cocoa, 2 lbs.; white sugar, 10 lbs.;
aromatics, as above.

_d._ Island cocoa, 7 lbs.; farina, q. s. to absorb the oil. Inferior.

3. VANILLA CHOCOLATE. _Syn._ CHOCOLAT A LA VANILLE, Fr. A variety of
French or Spanish chocolate highly flavoured with vanilla. The following
proportions have been recommended:--

_a._ Caracas cocoa, 7 lbs.; Mexican vanilla, 1 oz.; cinnamon, 1/2 oz.;
cloves, 3 in no.

_b._ Best chocolate paste, 21 lbs.; vanilla, 4 oz.; cinnamon, 2 oz.;
cloves, 1/2 dr.; musk, 10 gr.

_Obs._ The vanilla used in making chocolate is reduced to powder by
rubbing it with a little sugar before adding it to the paste.

_Pur., &c._ The chocolate commonly sold in England is prepared from the
cake left after the expression of the oil, and this is frequently mixed
with the roasted seeds of ground peas, and maize or potato flour, to which
a sufficient quantity of inferior brown sugar, or treacle and mutton suet,
is added to make it adhere together. Inferior sweet almonds are also
employed in the same way.

Since the above paragraph was written there has been a vast improvement in
English chocolates, though the cheaper sorts of certain makers are still
much adulterated. Genuine chocolate should dissolve in the mouth without
grittiness, and should leave a peculiar sensation of freshness; after
boiling it with water the emulsion should not form a jelly when cold, for
if it does starch or flour is present. The presence of animal fat may
generally be detected by a cheesy or rancid flavour. See COCOA.

_Qual., &c._ Chocolate is nutritive and wholesome if taken in moderation,
but is sometimes apt to disagree with weak stomachs, especially those that
are easily affected by oily substances or vegetable food. When this is the
case, by adopting the simple plan recommended under BUTTER, chocolate may
generally be taken with impunity, even by the dyspeptic. The quantity of
aromatics mixed with the richer varieties of chocolate improve the
flavour, but render them more stimulant and prone to produce nervous
symptoms and head complaints.

Chocolate is taken in the solid form, or made into a beverage; or,
combined with sugar, is made into various articles of confectionery.

CHOCOLATE FOR THE TABLE is prepared by slicing or scraping very finely the
required quantity into a jug, and adding to it a small quantity of boiling
water. This is worked into a thin, smooth paste, and the jug immediately
filled up with boiling milk-and-water. A froth is produced by the same
means that eggs are beaten up. The operation of "milling," performed by
rapidly twirling a notched cylinder of wood in the emulsion, raises the
froth very quickly. Sugar may be put in with the scraped chocolate, or
added afterwards at pleasure.

Chocolate should never be made for the table before it is wanted, because
beating it again injures the flavour, destroys the froth, and separates
the body of the chocolate, the oil of the nut being observed, after a few
minutes' boiling, or even standing long by the fire, to rise to the top.
This is one of the principal reasons why chocolate offends the stomach.

Preparations of chocolate, intended either as nutritious articles of food
for convalescents, or as vehicles for medicine, are common among the
pharmacop[oe]ial and magistral formulae of the Continent. The following are
a few examples:--

=Chocolate, Aromat'ic.= _Prep._ (Weiglebt.) Cocoa beans and sugar, of each
16 oz.; cinnamon, 1/2 oz.; cloves, 2 dr.; cardamoms and vanilla, of each 1
dr.

=Chocolate, Car'rageen.= See CHOCOLATE, WHITE (Nos. 1 and 2).

=Chocolate, Chalyb'eate.= _Syn._ FERRUGIN'EOUS CHOCOLATE; CHOCOLA'TA
CHALYBEA'TA, C. MAR'TIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Trousseau.) Spanish chocolate, 16
oz.; carbonate of iron, 1/2 oz.; mix, and divide into 1-oz. cakes. One at
a time; in anaemia, amenorrh[oe]a, chlorosis, &c.

2. (Pierquin.) Iodide of iron, 2 dr.; chocolate, 16 oz. For 1/2-oz. cakes;
as above, and in scrofulous and glandular affections.

=Chocolate, Guarana'.= _Syn._ PAULLIN'IA CHOCOLATE; CHOCOLA'TA PAULIN'IAE,
C. GUARAN'AE, L. _Prep._ From guarana and white sugar, of each 1 oz.,
triturated together, and afterwards thoroughly mixed with good plain
chocolate, 18 oz. Recommended as a restorative in debility, chlorosis, and
other diseases of debility, especially those of a nervous character.

=Chocolate, Ice'land Moss.= _Syn._ CHOCOLA'TA CETRAR'IAE ISLAND'ICAE, C.
LICHEN'IS, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. C.) Simple chocolate (P. C.), 32 parts;
sugar, 29 parts; dried jelly of Iceland moss, 11 parts; mix.

2. (Cadet.) Chocolate, 4 lbs.; sugar, 2 lbs.; Iceland moss (freed from its
bitter, and powdered), 1-1/2 lb.; tragacanth and cinnamon, of each 4 oz.;
water, q. s.; to be beaten in a warm mortar, or ground with a muller on a
warm slab to a paste. Recommended in pulmonary affections, general
debility, weakness of stomach, &c. See COCOA (Iceland Moss).

=Chocolate, Pur'gative.= _Syn._ CHOCOLA'TA PUR'GANS, C. CATHAR'TICA, L.
_Prep._ 1. Jalap, 1 oz.; chocolate, 9 oz.; mix, and divide into 1-dr.
cakes.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 cakes, as a purge.

2. Jalap, 2 oz.; calomel and sugar, of each 1 oz.; triturate together,
then add chocolate, 20 oz.; for 1-dr. cakes.

3. Scammony, 2 dr.; chocolate, 3 oz.; for 1 dozen cakes. The last two are
given in worms.--_Dose_ (for an adult), 1 cake, taken fasting.

=Chocolate, Sal'ep.= _Syn._ SAL'OOP CHOCOLATE; CHOCOLA'TA CUM SAL'EP, L.
_Prep._ 1. (P. C.) Chocolate, 16 oz.; powdered salep, 1/2 oz.

2. (Cadet.) Cacao paste and sugar, of each 1 lb.; powdered salep, 1 oz.
Arrowroot chocolate and tapioca chocolate are made in the same manner.
(See _below_.)

=Chocolate, Sim'ple.= _Syn._ HYGIEN'IC C., HOM[OE]OPATH'IC C.; CHOCOLA'TA,
C. SIM'PLEX, C. SALU'TIS, L.; CHOCOLAT DE SANTE, Fr. _Prep._ (P. C.)
Caracas and Maragnan cocoa, of each 96 lbs.; sugar, 160 lbs.; cinnamon, 1
oz. (to 2 oz.); triturated together in the usual manner, and formed into
cakes or powder.

=Chocolate, Vanil'la.= _Syn._ CHOCOLA'TA CUM VANIL'LA, L. _Prep._ 1. (P.
C.) Chocolate (plain,--P. C.), 16 oz.; vanilla, 1/2 dr.

2. (Cotterau.) Cocoa paste, 6 lbs.; sugar, 10 lbs.; vanilla, 11 dr.

See forms previously given.

=Chocolate, Ver'mifuge.= _Syn._ CHOCOLA'TA VERMIFU'GA, L. See CHOCOLATE,
PURGATIVE (Nos. 2 and 3, _above_).

=Chocolate, White.= _Syn._ WHITE COCOA, CAR'RAGEEN C.; CHOCOLA'TA CUM
CHON'DRO, PAS'TA CACA'O CUM CHON'DRO, P. C. C. LICHEN'E CARRAGHEN'O, L.
_Prep._ 1. As Iceland moss chocolate, but employing carrageen moss.

2. (Ph. Dan.) Roasted and decorticated cocoa seeds (reduced to a subtile
mass in a warm iron mortar) and powdered white sugar, of each 2 lbs.;
powdered carrageen (debitterised), 3 oz.

3. (Cottereau.) Sugar, 6 lbs.; rice flour, 1-3/4 lb.; potato starch and
butter of cocoa, of each 1/2 lb.; gum Arabic 1/4 lb. (dissolved); tincture
of vanilla, 1/2 fl. oz.; boiling water, q. s.; triturate to a stiff paste.
The above are highly nutritious, and are recommended as articles of diet
for convalescents and debilitated persons.

=CHOKE-DAMP.= _Syn._ AFT'ER-DAMP. The term applied by miners to carbonic
anhydride (carbonic acid) and other irrespirable gases and vapours evolved
in mines. See CARBONIC ACID, FIRE DAMP, VENTILATION, &c.

=CHOKING.= Threatened choking may occur either in the gullet or
swallow--or in the windpipe. If in the gullet press down the tongue with
the handle of a spoon, and pass the fingers down without any hesitation,
when the substance may generally be dislodged or pulled up. When it is
small, and has got out of reach, it may mostly be removed by filling the
mouth with liquid and swallowing it at a gulp, or by swallowing a large
piece of bread. Foreign bodies thus swallowed generally pass harmlessly
through the bowels.

If the choking occur in the windpipe or trachea, it is usually dislodged
by the paroxysm of coughing which accompanies the act. Should it fail to
be so, and a sense of suffocation ensues, accompanied with blueness of
countenance and difficulty of breathing, place the patient, and follow the
directions given in the article "SUSPENDED ANIMATION," while a medical man
is immediately sent for.

_Treatment for Horses or Cattle._--Remove any foreign body by hand, as
directed above, or have recourse to the probang. It may perhaps be
necessary to call in a veterinary surgeon, in case the above methods fail,
to extract the obstruction by cutting into the gullet.

=CHOLAGOGUES.= Medicines which promote a flow of bile.

=CHOLALIC ACID.= C_{24}H_{40}O_{5}. _Syn._ CHOL'IC ACID. A non-nitrogenous
acid existing in bile. It is best prepared by boiling the resinous mass
precipitated by ether from an alcoholic solution of ox bile with a dilute
solution of potassa, for 24 to 36 hours, till the amorphous potassa salt
that has separated begins to crystallise. The dark-coloured soft mass is
then removed from the alkaline liquid, dissolved in water, and
hydrochloric acid added. A little ether will cause the deposition of the
CHOLALIC ACID from this solution in crystals. With sulphuric acid and
solution of sugar it strikes a purple-violet colour; this constitutes
Pettenkofer's test for bile.

=CHOLE'IC ACID.= _Syn._ TAURO-CHOLALIC ACID. A peculiar conjugated
compound of cholalic acid with a substance called taurine, which contains
both nitrogen and sulphur. In combination with soda, choleic acid
constitutes a principal ingredient in bile.

=CHOL'ERA.= This word, which, from its derivation, can be only applied
correctly to a bilious affection of the stomach and bowels, has been of
late years very loosely extended to a malignant disease, the most marked
characteristic of which is a total suspension of the functions of the
biliary organs.

=Cholera, En''glish.= _Syn._ COM'MON CHOLERA, BIL'IOUS C.; CHOL'ERA
MOR'BUS, L. A disease characterised by bilious vomiting and purging,
accompanied by more or less pain and debility. Diarrh[oe]a is the most
common precursor of the disease, and ought to be attended to without
delay, particularly if the weather be warm. Cholera most frequently occurs
towards the end of the summer and early in the autumn, when the increased
heat of the sun stimulates the liver to an inordinate secretion of bile,
by which the whole system becomes overloaded with it. Among secondary and
accidental causes are sudden changes of temperature, checked perspiration,
and the use of indigestible food, and food and beverages in a state of
incipient decomposition. It is usually accompanied by fever, thirst, and
severe colic, and sometimes by cold sweats, extreme debility, feeble
pulse, &c., under which the patient sinks in 24 hours.

_Treat._ In most cases this complaint is not dangerous, and yields to
proper treatment in a few days. As soon after the commencement of the
attack as possible, some mild aperient should be administered. Opiates may
be employed, both topically and by the mouth. Jeremie's solution is stated
to be very efficacious in the diarrh[oe]a which so generally precedes
cholera. A teaspoonful or two of laudanum, rubbed over the region of the
stomach and bowels, is a simple application which will generally allay the
pain. 10 to 20 drops of laudanum, mixed with a table-spoonful of good
brandy, or a few grains of cayenne pepper, may also be taken every hour if
the pain is severe. Should the stomach reject the medicine, or the
vomiting be apparently increased by drinking warm diluents, a few
spoonfuls of ice-cold water, or of a mixture of lemon-juice and water, may
be taken instead, until the sickness abates. Dr Copeland recommends spirit
of turpentine in violent attacks, both internally and as an external
application in the form of warm epithems. When the violence of the
symptoms has abated, tonics and bitters (as calumba, gentian, orange-peel,
&c.) may be advantageously had recourse to. Calumba, in the form of a weak
infusion, conjoined, if necessary, with aromatics, is, perhaps, the most
valuable agent we possess for the after-treatment of the disease. See
DIARRH[OE]A.

=Cholera, Malig'nant.= _Syn._ ASIAT'IC CHOLERA, EPIDEM'IC C, BLUE C,
PESTILEN'TIAL C, SPASMOD'IC C.; CHOL'ERA ASIAT'ICA, C. ASPHYX'IA, C.
MALIG'NA, L. This fearful disease first became known in this country in
the autumn of 1831. The attack usually begins with sickness and purging;
this discharge, however, is not bilious, as in ordinary cholera, but a
thin, colourless fluid, like rice-water; at the same time there is great
prostration of strength, and cold, clammy sweats. In a short time dreadful
cramps assail the extremities and afterwards the abdomen; the body becomes
bent, the limbs twisted, the countenance cadaverous, the pulse almost
imperceptible, and the eyes sunken; the patient sinks into a state of
apathy, and unless a favorable change speedily takes place, soon expires
from exhaustion. When there is a reaction the pulse gradually returns, the
natural warmth of the body is restored, and the spasms and difficulty of
breathing give way. Frequently, however, the reaction is accompanied by
fever closely resembling typhus, and which often terminates fatally in
from four to eight days. The symptoms of epidemic cholera are not always
of this terrible character.

_Treat._ In giving a few of the many remedies that have been recommended
for this terrible disease, we may preface the list, by urgently
counselling the sufferer to lose no time in sending for a medical man, in
case of being attacked by this appalling malady.

1. (American Remedy.) Equal parts of maple sugar and powdered fresh-burnt
charcoal, made into a stiff paste with lard, and divided into pieces the
size of a filbert.--_Dose._ One, occasionally, swallowed whole.

2. (Austrian Specific.) The proportions of the ingredients in the
following formulae are founded on Mr Herapath's analysis of this celebrated
preparation, and are given in the nearest available whole numbers:--

_a._ Sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1.845), 20 gr.; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.500),
12 gr,; sugar and gum, of each 15 gr.; distilled or pure soft water, q. s.
to make the whole weigh exactly 1 oz.

_b._ Sulphuric acid, 3 dr.; nitric acid, 2 dr.; simple syrup, 6 dr.;
water, q. s. to make the whole weigh exactly 10 oz. A single drop of
essential oil of lemon may be added.

_Doses, &c._ One table-spoonful is ordered to be taken in water, on the
first appearance of premonitory symptoms, followed by the free use of very
cold water. In half an hour a second dose is to be taken. This (as
asserted) is generally sufficient to arrest the progress of the disease. A
table-spoonful is then to be added to a pint of cold water, and drunk _ad
libitum_. In more obstinate cases it is said that 4 or 5 doses are
generally required to effect a cure. When collapse sets in, double doses
are ordered to be given, and to be repeated after every attack of vomiting
until the sickness and cramp abate. After the vomiting abates the doses
are still to be repeated until 5 or 6 doses are retained by the stomach.
Should quiet sleep or drowsiness come on, it is not to be interfered with.
The free use of cold water or soured water is to be allowed until
perspiration sets in and the warmth of the body returns. According to the
report, the use of warm liquors, wines, spirits, &c., must be carefully
avoided as so much poison.

_Obs._ A bottle of the above remedy was handed to the late Mr Wm. Herapath
by the superintendent of the Birmingham police, who had received it from
the head of the Austrian police, as being in general use in Austria, under
the sanction of the medical department of the government, and being found
to act almost as a specific in cholera. In 1831-2 it was first tried on
some criminals with perfect success, and soon afterwards with similar
results on thousands of the general public. In 1849 the Austrian
government ordered its use in the public establishments of the empire,
since which not a single case of failure had occurred in which it had been
fairly tried.

3. (Mr Buxton's Remedy.) From dilute sulphuric acid (spirit of vitriol),
25 drops; water, 1 fl. oz. For a draught; as the last.

4. (College of Physicians and Board of Health; for Premonitory
Diarrh[oe]a.) Chalk mixture, 1 oz.; aromatic confection, 10 to 15 gr.;
tincture of opium, 5 to 15 drops; to be repeated every 3 or 4 hours, or
oftener, if required, until the looseness is arrested.

5. (Dr Graves's Astringent Pills.) Acetate of lead, 20 gr.; opium, 1 gr.;
conserve of roses, q. s.; for 12 pills.--_Dose._ One every 1/2 hour or
hour, at first; then one every two hours.

6. (Hom[oe]opathic Preventive.) Camphor, 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 6 dr.;
dissolve, and preserve it in a well-corked bottle.--_Dose._ 2 drops on a
lump of sugar, sucked as a lozenge two or three times a day.

7. (Hom[oe]opathic Remedy.) As the last, repeating the dose every 10 or 15
minutes, followed by draughts of ice-cold water, until the symptoms abate.

8. (Mr Hope's Remedy.) (_a._) Red nitrous acid, 2 dr.; peppermint water or
camphor julep, 1 oz.; tincture of opium, 40 drops; mix.--_Dose._ One to
two teaspoonfuls in a cupful of thin gruel every 3 or 4 hours.

_b._ Spirit of wine, 1 oz.; spirit lavender, 1/4 oz.; oil of orizinanum,
1/4 oz.; compound tincture benzoin, 1/2 oz.; spirits camphor, 1/4
oz.--_Dose_, 20 drops on moist sugar. To be rubbed outwardly also.

9. (Liverpool Preventive Powders.) Bicarbonate of soda, 20 gr.; ginger, 10
gr.; for a dose. One to be taken in a glass of water after breakfast and
supper daily.

These powders are said to have been used with good effect among the
workmen in the mining and manufacturing districts during a former
visitation of cholera.

10. (Police Remedy; Mr B. Child's Remedy.) Rectified sulphuric ether and
tincture of opium, of each 30 drops; for a dose for an adult; especially
during the earlier stages.

11. (Mr Ross's Astringent Pills.) Each pill contains 1 gr. of nitrate of
silver, made up with crum of bread, q. s.--_Dose._ One pill, to be
repeated after the interval of half an hour or an hour, should the
symptoms continue unabated.

12. (Russian Remedy.) Sumbul, in the form of tincture, concentrated
essence, in decoction, in cold infusion, and in powder in the form of
pill.--_Doses._ Tincture, from 20 to 60 drops; essence, from 5 to 10 or 20
drops; in a little camphor julep or plain water. The physicians of Moscow
and St. Petersburg ascribe to the virtues of this drug the saving of
thousands of lives during the last epidemic. See SUMBUL.

13. (Dr Stevens' Saline Powders.) Bicarbonate of soda, 1/2 dr.; common
salt, 20 gr.; chlorate of potassa, 7 gr.; for a dose.

14. (Sir M. Tierney's Remedy.) Cajeput oil, in doses of 20 to 30 drops,
every two or three hours. The oil excites the nervous system and equalises
the circulation. The late Sir M. Tierney and others prescribed it
frequently, it is said, with considerable success.

15. (Common Remedies of the Shops.) These generally consist of chalk
mixture, with a little laudanum, and some aromatic or carminative, as
cassia, cinnamon, cardamoms, nutmeg, or peppermint. In a few, some
astringent, as tincture of catechu, or extract of logwood, is added.

16. (Dr Beaven's Preventative and Remedy.) _The Preventative._--Sulphite
of magnesia, 2 dr.; sulphurous acid, 2 oz.; water, 2 oz.; tincture of
capsicum, 1/2 oz. Mix and dissolve, a teaspoonful night and morning.

_The Remedy._--Sulphite of magnesia, 2 dr., sulphurous acid, 2 oz.; water,
2 oz.; tincture of capsicum, 1/2 oz.; sulphate of morphia, 2 gr. Mix and
dissolve; a teaspoonful every half hour until relieved.

=CHOLERA MEDICINE.= The expressed juice of dandelion and milfoil mixed
with brandy spirit. (Dr Horn).

=CHOLES'TERIN.= C_{2}_{6}CH_{4}_{4}O.H_{2}O. This substance is found in
the bile, brain, nerves, blood, &c., and forms the principal ingredient of
biliary calculi (gall-stones).

_Note._--The remedies containing astringents are the most efficacious.

=CHOL'IC ACID.= _Syn._ GLYCO-CHOLAL'IC ACID. A peculiar acid, existing as
cholate of sodium, and associated with choleic acid in the bile. It is a
conjugate compound of cholalic acid with a nitrogenised substance called
glycocin.

=CHON'DRIN.= Gelatin obtained from cartilage. It differs from ordinary
gelatin in being precipitable by acetic acid, alum, and acetate of lead.

=CHOREA.= [_Syn._ _St. Vitus's Dance._] A spasmodic disease affecting
children and young persons, especially girls, between eight and sixteen
years of age. It is caused by a debilitated condition of the nervous
system, as well as by brain disease, scrofula, imprudent diet and worms.

The treatment recommended is the regulation of the bowels by mild
purgatives. If the disease can be traced to worms, these should be removed
by the proper remedies. If worms are not the cause, recourse should be had
to the cold, or shower-bath. The hot hip-bath will be found serviceable in
some cases. Where there is paleness of the skin any of the iron
preparations will prove of great use, the bowels being kept regular. The
best preparations of iron are either the tincture of the perchloride, or
nitrate, or the citrate of iron and quinine. Some practitioners recommend
arsenic--five drops of the solution (for an adult) twice a day after
meals; others valerianate of zinc.

_Treatment for the Horse and other Animals._--Similar to the above.

=CHRISTOFIA= is a stomachic brandy or wine made of 1500 parts white wine,
20 parts cinnamon, 10 parts cloves, 60 parts bitter almonds, digested
several days; 300 parts of sugar and 500 of spirit are then added, and the
whole filtered. (Hager).

=CHROMACOME.= For dyeing the hair black. This is said to be prepared from
harmless vegetable materials, but really consists of pyrogallic acid and
nitrate of silver.

=Chromacome.= This is a French preparation which "contains nothing
injurious to health." This hair dye consists of two fluids. The first, "Le
chromacome, teinture superieure de William W. A. T., No. 1, Bonn,"
weighing about 45 grammes, is tincture of galls. The other, No. 2, is a
solution of acetate of iron with a little nitrate of silver. When grey
hair is moistened first with No. 1, then with No. 2, it becomes
blackish-brown or black.

=CHRO'MATE.= _Syn._ CHRO'MAS, L. A salt in which the hydrogen of
(hypothetical) chromic acid, HCrO_{4}, is replaced by a metal or other
basic radical.

=Chromates=:--

_Prep._ The insoluble chromates, as those of barium, zinc, lead, mercury,
silver, &c., may be made by mixing a soluble salt of those bases with
neutral chromate of potassium. The first three are yellow; the fourth
brick-red; and the fifth reddish-brown, or ruby red when crystallised. The
soluble chromates may all be made by direct solution of the base in the
acid, or by double decomposition. The chromates of commerce are prepared
from either chrome ore or chromate of potassium.

_Prop., Uses &c._ The chromates are characterised by their yellow or red
colour, the latter predominating when the acid is in excess; and except
those with the alkaline bases, they are, for the most part, insoluble in
water. Both the chromate and the bichromate of potassium are extensively
used in dyeing and calico-printing. The former is employed in conjunction
with sulphuric acid in the laboratory as an oxidising agent and in the
manufactory for bleaching sperm oil. The bichromate of ammonium and
potassium are used in photography.

They are readily recognised by the following tests:--

On boiling a chromate in hydrochloric acid mixed with alcohol, chromic
acid is first set free, and then decomposed, forming a green solution of
chloride of chromium. Sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphurous acid effect
similar changes. With acetate of lead the chromates give a yellow
precipitate; with nitrate of silver, a reddish-brown; with nitrate of
mercury, a red one.

=CHROME ALUM.= See ALUMS.

=CHROME GREEN.= See GREEN PIGMENTS.

=CHROME IRON.= See IRON.

=CHROME RED.= See RED PIGMENTS.

=CHROME YELLOW.= See LEAD, CHROMATE OF.

=CHROMIC ACID.= See CHROMIC ANHYDRIDE.

=CHRO'MIUM.= Cr. A metal discovered in native chromate of lead by
Vauquelin in 1797. It is found in the state of oxide, combined with oxide
of iron, in some abundance, in the Shetland Islands, and elsewhere; as
chromate of lead it constitutes a very beautiful material.

Prepared in an impure condition as a white, very infusible, hard metal, by
igniting the oxide with charcoal, at a white heat, in a lime crucible.

=Chromous Chloride.= CrCl_{2}. _Syn._ PROTOCHLORIDE. _Prep._ Ignite the
chromic chloride in a current of dry hydrogen. A white, foliated mass,
soluble in water (evolving much heat), and yielding a blue solution, which
absorbs atmospheric oxygen with astonishing rapidity, acquiring a
deep-green colour, and passing into the state of oxychloride of chromium.
It is the most powerful reducing or deoxidising agent known.

=Chromic Chloride.= Cr_{2}Cl_{6}. _Syn._ SESQUICHLORIDE. _Prep._ Pass dry
chlorine over a mixture of sesquioxide of chromium and charcoal, heated to
redness, in a porcelain tube. The chloride collects as a sublimate, of a
peach or violet colour, in the cool part of the tube.

Dissolve chromic oxide in hydrochloric acid and evaporate to dryness; the
residue is chromic chloride. It forms a dark green mass, containing water,
which is evolved by igniting at a temperature of 400 deg., turning a purplish
red.

=Chromium Oxides=:--

=Chromous Oxide.= CrO. _Syn._ PROTOXIDE OF CHROMIUM. This oxide has not
yet been obtained in a satisfactory manner, but the hydrate is prepared by
the addition of potassium hydrate solution to a solution of chromous
chloride or sulphate. A brownish-red powder, speedily passing to a deep
foxy-red, with disengagement of hydrogen, and forming pale blue-coloured
salts with the acids, which absorb oxygen with avidity, whilst the metal
passes into a higher state of oxidation.

=Chromic Oxide.= CrO_{3}. _Syn._ SESQUIOXIDE. Prepared by igniting
potassium bichromate at a red heat and well washing the residue, and as
hydrate by cautiously adding equal parts of hydrochloric acid and alcohol
or sugar to a boiling solution of chromate of potassa in water, in small
portions at a time, until the red tint disappears, and the liquid assumes
a green colour; pure ammonia, in excess, is next added, and the
precipitate which subsides is collected and washed with water.

_Prop., &c._ The anhydrous oxide is a rich crystalline, green powder,
insoluble in both water and acids; fused with borax and glass, it imparts
a beautiful green colour.

The hydrate is soluble in the acids and in alkaline lyes; with the first
it forms salts which have a green or purple colour. These compounds may be
made by direct solution of the hydrate in the dilute acids. Chromic
sulphate combines with the sulphates of potassium and ammonium, giving
rise to salts (CHROME ALUMS) which crystallise in magnificent octahedrons
of a deep claret colour. The finest crystals are obtained by spontaneous
evaporation.

These salts of chromium are the most important, the chromous salts being
seldom met with, and are best recognised by the following
reactions:--Caustic alkalies precipitate the hydrate, easily soluble in
excess of the precipitant. Ammonia the same, but the precipitate is nearly
insoluble. The carbonates of potassium, sodium, and ammonium throw down a
green precipitate of carbonate and hydrate, slightly soluble in a large
excess. Sulphuretted hydrogen causes no change.--Sulphydrate of ammonium
precipitates the hydrate of a bluish-green colour.

=Chromic Anhydride.= CrO_{3}. _Syn._ CHROMIC ACID, ANHYDROUS CHROMIC ACID,
CHROMIC TRIOXIDE. _Prep._ By conducting gaseous fluoride of chromium into
a silver or platinum vessel, the sides of which are just moistened with
water, and the aperture covered with a piece of moist paper, the anhydride
will be deposited under the form of red, acicular crystals, which will
nearly fill the vessel. When the process is skilfully conducted, the
product is of exquisite beauty and chemically pure. The fluoride referred
to above is obtained from fluor spar, 3 parts; chromate of lead, 4 parts;
fuming (or the strongest) sulphuric acid, 5 parts; mixed cautiously in a
silver or leaden retort. A red-coloured gas is evolved, which acts rapidly
on glass, forming fluosilicic acid gas, and upon water forming
hydrofluoric acid and chromic anhydride. The moisture of the atmosphere is
sufficient to effect the decomposition last referred to; the former
substance escaping as gas, and the latter being deposited in small
crystals.

It is also prepared nearly pure by adding a cold saturated solution of
potassium bichromate to once and a half its bulk of pure strong sulphuric
acid. As the liquor cools, the anhydrous chromic acid is deposited under
the form of brilliant crimson-red prisms; the mother-liquor is then poured
off, and the crystals, placed between two tiles of glass or porcelain, are
submitted to strong pressure for some time, under a bell-glass or jar,
when the anhydride will be found sufficiently dry. It may be deprived of a
little adhering moisture by placing it over sulphuric acid for a short
time _in vacuo_.

Commercially, it is prepared by one of the two following processes:--

To a saturated solution of chromate of potassium, 100 parts, add oil of
vitriol (sp. gr. 1.845), 49 parts; and let the whole cool. This is the
common process. The product contains sulphate of potassium, but this does
not much interfere with its value as a bleaching agent.

From chromate of barium, decomposed by concentrated nitric acid. The
anhydrous chromic acid is separated from the nitrate of barium by
decantation, or, which is still better, by filtration through glass or
asbestos. It is then evaporated to dryness, when the nitric acid is
volatilised, and pure chromic anhydride left behind. The volatilised
nitric acid may be condensed, and again used for the same purpose. The
only precautions necessary to ensure the purity of the anhydrous chromic
acid prepared by this plan are--to use a sufficient quantity of nitric
acid and to take care that the nitric acid is sufficiently concentrated
and pure.

_Prop., &c._ Forms ruby-red anhydrous prisms, very soluble in water, with
formation of true chromic acid, and extensively manufactured for the
purpose of oxidising and bleaching substances.

=CHROME IRON-STONE.= _Syn._ CHROME IRON-ORE. FeO.Cr_{2}O_{3}. This, which
is the principal ore of chromium, corresponds in composition to brown
oxide of chromium and to the magnetic oxide of iron; part of the iron,
however, is generally displaced by the isomorphous metal magnesium, and
part of the chromium by aluminium.

Chrome iron-stone is often met with in the form of octohedral crystals.
Acids fail to dissolve it, and it cannot be fused in the furnace, but when
heated it absorbs oxygen from the air. This oxidation may be effected very
readily if the chrome ore reduced to very fine powder be mixed with a
carbonate of one of the metals of the alkalies or alkaline earths, a
chromate of the base being formed.

=CHRYSENE.= C_{18}H_{12}. A hydrocarbon found by Laurent in crude
anthracene. It occurs in bright yellow, glistening scales. It may be
obtained colourless by heating the yellow crystals with hydriodic acid and
amorphous phosphorus to 240 deg.. It cannot be sublimed without decomposition.
Chrysene is very slightly soluble in cold alcohol, ether, benzene, and
glacial acetic acid. In carbon disulphide it dissolves somewhat more
readily. Its melting point is from 248 deg. to 250 deg., and it boils at a
temperature beyond that which can be registered by the mercurial
thermometer.

=CHRYSOPHANIC ACID.= See RHEIN.

=CHYLE.= _Syn._ LYMPH. This is the name given to the nutritious milky
fluid generated during digestion, and absorbed from the intestines by a
set of vessels called the _lacteals_, which carry it to the thoracic duct,
whence it is immediately conveyed into the circulation.

=CHYME.= The pulpy mass formed by the food in its first great change, in
the process of digestion.

=CIDER.= _Syn._ CYDER; POMACEUM, L. Cider is the fermented juice of the
apple, and is a very ancient beverage. Pliny calls cider and perry the
"wine of apples and pears."

The attention of the cider farmer should be first directed to the culture
of the apple tree. The situation most appropriate for an orchard is one on
rising ground, rather dry than moist, and unexposed to sea air or high
winds. The soil should be strong, but not too heavy, and should be rich in
the alkaline and earthy bases, especially the phosphates. The selection of
the proper varieties of the apple for grafting is also a point on which
particular care should be taken. It is found that the juices of different
kinds of apples vary in the quantity of saccharine matter which they
contain, as well as in other particulars that influence the quality and
flavour of the cider prepared from them. As a general rule, those
varieties should be chosen that yield a juice rich in sugar, and contain
no undue amount of acid, and which, after the period of active
fermentation is past, furnishes a liquor which clarifies itself and keeps
well. This quality of the juice may generally be determined from its
specific gravity. The heaviest and clearest is the best, other points
being equal. The specific gravity of the juice of the different varieties
of apple varies from 1.060 to 1.100.

Cider apples are classed under three heads--bitter, sweet, and sour. The
first are the best; their juice has the greatest specific gravity, is the
richest in sugar, ferments the most freely, clarifies spontaneously the
quickest, and keeps the best after fermentation. They contain a minute
quantity of extractive matter which is not present in other apples. The
juice of sweet apples ferments tumultuously, clears with difficulty, and
the resulting cider does not keep so well as that produced from the first
variety. The juice of sour apples contains less sugar and more acid than
the other two, and consequently not only produces the weakest, but the
worst cider; it, however, "fines" well, although it "stores" badly. Sour
and "rough-tasted" apples are usually preferred by farmers for making
cider. This preference, which is very decided in the West of England, may
be readily accounted for. The sour and rough-tasted apples contain less
sugar and more malic acid than some of the other varieties, and the
presence of this acid impedes the conversion of the alcohol of the cider
into vinegar; a change which their rude mode of operating renders
otherwise inevitable. But cider made with such apples never equals in
quality that prepared at a low temperature, from fruit abounding in sugar,
provided equal skill is exercised in the manufacture as in the process of
converting malt-worts into beer.

The process of making cider varies in different places, but in every case
essentially consists of the collection of the fruit, the expression and
fermentation of the juice, and the storing and management of the fermented
liquor.

The collection of the fruit should not be commenced before it has become
sufficiently mature, and should be performed with greater care than is
commonly bestowed upon it. The apples, after being gathered, are usually
left for 14 or 15 days in a barn or loft to mellow, during which time a
considerable portion of the mucilage is decomposed, and alcohol and
carbonic acid developed. If this "ripening" is allowed to go too far, loss
arises, notwithstanding the vulgar prejudice in its favour. The spoiled
apples are then separated from the sound ones, as they not only impart a
bad flavour to the cider, but impede its spontaneous clarification.

The expression of the juice is the next step in the process of
cider-making. The apples are crushed or ground in mills consisting of two
fluted cylinders of hard wood or cast-iron, working against each other.
The common practice is next to sprinkle the pulp with 1/6th to 1/4th of
its weight of spring or river water, and then to allow it to remain in
tubs or wooden cisterns for 12 or 14 hours, during which time incipient
fermentation commences, and the breaking up of the cells of the membrane
takes place, by which the subsequent separation of the juice is
facilitated. This plan, though general among cider manufacturers, is
prejudicial to the quality of the future liquor; as not only is a portion
of the newly formed alcohol lost, but the skins and pips often impart to
it a disagreeable flavour. By employing more efficient crushing machinery
this system of vatting is rendered quite unnecessary. A machine furnished
with a revolving circular rasp, similar to that used in making potato
starch, is admirably adapted to this purpose.

The pulp of the crushed or ground apples is now placed on a kind of wicker
frame, or in hair-cloth or coarse canvas bags, and after being allowed to
drain into suitable tubs or receivers, is subjected to powerful pressure,
gradually applied, in the cider press. The liquor which runs off first is
the best, and is usually kept separately; whilst that which follows,
especially the portion obtained by much pressure, tastes of the pips and
skins.

The expressed juice or "must," obtained as above, is next put into clean
casks with large bung-holes, and freely exposed to the air and the shade,
where they are placed on "stillions," with flat tubs under them to catch
the waste. They are now constantly attended to and kept quite full, in
order that the yeast, as it forms, may froth over and be carried off from
the surface of the liquor. After 2 or 3 days for weak cider, and 8 or 10
days for strong cider, or as soon as the sediment has subsided, the liquor
is "racked off" into clean casks, which have been (according to the common
practice) previously sulphured with a cooper's match. The casks containing
the "racked cider" are then stored in a cellar, shaded barn, or other cool
place, where a low and regular temperature can be ensured, and are left to
mature or ripen. By the following spring the cider is commonly fit for
use, and may be "re-racked" for sale.

The marc, or pressed pulp, is generally again sprinkled with 1/3 or 1/2
its weight of water, and re-pressed. The resulting liquor, when fermented,
forms a weak kind of cider (cider moil, water moil), which is reserved for
domestic use in the same way as table-beer. The refuse-pulp (apple-marc,
pomace, pommage, apple cheese) is used as food for pigs and store cattle,
and is very acceptable to them.

The storing and management of cider are matters of vast importance to the
cider farmer, the factor, the wholesale dealer, and the bottler. The
principles by which these should be directed are precisely similar to
those which are explained under the heads BREWING, FERMENTATION, and MALT
LIQUORS; and which, indeed, refer, with slight modifications, to all
fermented liquors.

Preparatory to bottling cider it should be examined, to see whether it is
clear and sparkling. If not so, it should be clarified in a similar way to
beer, and left for a fortnight. The night before it is intended to put it
into bottles the bung should be taken out of the cask, and left so until
the next day, and the filled bottles should not be corked down until the
day after; as, if this is done at once, many of the bottles will burst by
keeping. The best corks should alone be used. Champagne bottles are the
variety generally chosen for cider. It is usual to wire down the corks,
and to cover them with tinfoil, after the manner of champagne. A few
bottles at a time may be kept in a warm place to ripen. When the cider is
wanted for immediate use, or for consumption during the cooler portion of
the year, a small piece of lump sugar may be put into each bottle before
corking it; or, what is the same thing in effect, the bottles may be
corked within 2 or 3 hours after being filled. In summer, and for long
keeping, this practice is, however, inadmissible. The bottled stock should
be stored in a cool cellar, when the quality will be greatly improved by
age. Cider for bottling should be of good quality, sound and piquant, and
at least a twelvemonth old. When out of condition it is unfit for
bottling.

_Qual., &c._ Cider, when of good quality, and in good condition, is
doubtless a very wholesome liquor. Cider consumers, living in the cider
districts, appear to enjoy almost an immunity from cholera, and often from
other diseases which are common in other parts of the kingdom. At the same
time, however, it is right to mention, that the dry colic or belly-ache
(_colica pictonum_) is far from uncommon in these districts, but is wholly
confined to those who drink early, hard, or inferior cider, made from
harsh, unripe fruit. We believe that, in most cases, it may be referred to
the acid of the common cider having acted on the lead, pewter, or copper
of the articles or utensils with which it has come in contact, and of
which it has dissolved a very minute portion. The best cider contains from
8% to 10% of absolute alcohol; ordinary cider from 4% to 6%.

_Concluding Remarks._ Much of the excellence of cider depends upon the
temperature at which the fermentation is conducted; a point utterly
overlooked by the manufacturers of this liquor. Instead of the
apple-juice, as soon as it is expressed from the fruit, being placed in a
cool situation, where the temperature should not exceed 50 deg. or 52 deg. Fahr.,
it is frequently left exposed to the full heat of autumn. In this way much
of the alcohol formed by the decomposition of the sugar is converted into
vinegar by the absorption of atmospheric oxygen, and thus the liquor
acquires that peculiar and unwholesome acidity known in the cider
districts by the name of "roughness." When, on the contrary, the
fermentation is conducted at a low temperature, nearly the whole of the
sugar is converted into alcohol, and this remains in the liquor, instead
of undergoing the process of acetification. The acetous fermentation, by
which alcohol is converted into vinegar, proceeds most rapidly at a
temperature of about 90 deg. Fahr., and at lower temperatures the action
becomes gradually slower, until at 46 deg. to 50 deg. Fahr. no such change takes
place. (Liebig.) It is therefore evident that if the saccharine juice of
apples, or any other fruit, is made to undergo the vinous fermentation in
a cool situation, less of the spirit resulting from the transformation of
the sugar will be converted into acetic acid, and, consequently, more will
be retained in an unaltered state in the liquor, to improve its quality,
and by its conservative and chemical action to preserve it from future
change. This is the principal cause, other circumstances being alike, of
the difference in the quality of the cider made by persons living in the
same district. The one has probably a cooler barn and cellar than the
other to store his liquor in, and is more careful to keep the pulp and
juice cool during the early part of the process. In Devonshire the
pressing and fermentation are conducted in situations where the
temperature varies little from that of the external air, and fluctuates
with all its changes; the result is that Devonshire cider, of the best
class, will rarely keep more than 4 or 5 years, and seldom improves after
the second or third year; whilst the cider of Herefordshire and
Worcestershire, where these operations are more carefully attended to,
will keep for 20 or 30 years.

When the pressing the apples for the juice is deferred until late in the
season, it sometimes happens that the fermentation is sluggish. Though the
juice has been set on the old system, in November or December, the working
hardly commences until March. At this time the cider is sweet; it now
rapidly becomes pungent and vinous, and is soon ready to be racked for
use. If the fermentation still continues, it is again racked into a clean
cask that has been sulphured; or two or three cans of the cider are put
into a cask, and a brimstone-match burned in it. The cask is then
agitated, after which it is nearly filled with the cider. By this process
the fermentation is checked, and the cider in a short time becomes fine.
Great care must be taken that the sulphuring be not overdone, as it is apt
to impart a slightly unpleasant flavour to the liquor. If, on the first
operation, the fermentation is not checked, the process of 'racking' is
repeated, until the liquor becomes clear, and is continued from time to
time, till the cider is in a quiet state and fit for drinking.

A common practice in Devonshire is to add a stuff called 'stum,' sold by
the wine-coopers, or an article called 'antiferment,' sold by the
druggists, for the purpose of checking the fermentation, but a much better
plan is that described above.

To improve the flavour of weak cider, or to render ordinary cider more
vinous, various plans are followed by the cellarmen and bottlers. An
excellent one is to add to each hogshead 1-1/2 gall. of good brandy or
rum, with 2 oz. of powdered catechu (dissolved in water), 10 lbs. of good
moist sugar or honey, 1/2 oz. each of bitter almonds and cloves, and 4 oz.
of mustard seed (all in powder). These must be well 'rummaged' into the
liquor, and the whole occasionally stirred up for a fortnight, after which
it must be allowed to repose for 3 or 4 months, when it will usually be
found perfectly 'bright,' and no bad substitute for foreign wine. Should
this not be the case, the liquor must be 'fined' with a pint of isinglass
finings, or a dozen eggs, and allowed to rest for a fortnight. If the
cider is preferred pale, the catechu must be omitted, and instead of
isinglass, a quart of skimmed milk is to be used as 'finings.' When
desired of a pinkish tint, 1 oz. of cochineal (in powder) may be added
instead of the catechu.

About 13 cwt. of November apples commonly yield one hogshead of cider. In
Devonshire about 6 sacks or 24 bushels are the common quantity for the
hogshead of 63 galls.

The best cider made at the present day is that of Normandy, Herefordshire,
and New Jersey (U.S.), and next that of Devonshire and Somersetshire. See
ANTIFERMENT, FERMENTATION, &c.

=Cider, Champagne.= This name is given in the United States of America to
a fine, pale variety of cider, much used for bottling, which has a great
resemblance to inferior champagne. The best variety comes from New Jersey.
The name is also applied in this country in a similar manner. The
following is a good form for a 'made' cider of this class:--

_Prep._ Good pale vinous cider, 1 hhd.; proof spirit (pale), 3 galls.;
honey or sugar, 14 lbs.; mix well, and let them remain together in a
temperate situation for 1 month; then add orange-flower water, 3 pints;
and in a few days fine it down with skimmed milk, 1/2 gall. A similar
article, bottled in champagne bottles, silvered, and labelled, is often
sold to the ignorant for champagne.

=Cider, Made.= An article under this name is made in Devonshire, chiefly
for the supply of the London market, it having been found that the
ordinary cider will not stand a voyage to the metropolis without some
preparation. The finest quality of 'made' cider is simply ordinary cider
racked into clean and well-sulphured casks; but the mass of that which is
sent to London is mixed with water, treacle, and alum. The cider sold in
London under the name of Devonshire cider would be rejected even by the
farmers' servants in that county.

=Cider, Raisin.= This is made in a similar way to raisin wine, but without
employing sugar, and with only 2 lbs. of raisins to the gall., or even
more, of water. It is usually fit for bottling in 10 days, and in a week
longer is ready for use.

=CIDER SPIRIT.= See BRANDY.

=CIGAR.= _Syn._ SEGAR; CIGARRE, Fr.; CIGARRO, Span. A small roll of
tobacco-leaf used for smoking. The leaf is stalked or stripped of its
midrib, and damped before it passes into the hands of the cigar-roller.
The envelope or skin is cut from a smooth, unbroken leaf, and is quickly
rolled round sufficient tobacco to form the inside. To secure the loose
end of the envelope a small quantity of paste, coloured brown with
chicory, is generally used. Only those who have had great practice can
make cigars of a good shape. A full account of the manufacture of cigars
does not come within the scope of this work. Although cigars of British
make cannot compete in point of flavour with those manufactured in
tobacco-growing countries, they have obtained a high degree of favour
from the excellent manner in which they are made, and from their
comparative cheapness. For information respecting the adulteration of
cigars, and the influence of their use upon health, see TOBACCO.

=CIGARS.= (In _pharmacy_.) _Syn._ MED'ICATED CIGARS, M. CIGARETTES'. The
administration of medicinal agents in the form of cigars is of recent
introduction, and as yet in only very limited use. The medicinal
substance, if of a suitable description, as the leaves of plants, is made
up into small rolls, like cheroots, and then smoked in the usual manner.
In some cases, common cigars, or paper cigars (cigarettes), are medicated
by moistening them in a preparation of the article to be administered.
When the narcotic property of the tobacco would prove injurious, it is
first exhausted by soaking and washing it in water.

=Cigars, Aromatic.= _Syn._ AROMATIC CIGARETTES; CIGARETTAE AROMAT'ICAE, L.;
CIGARETTES AROMATIQUES, Fr. Aromatic spices, lavender flowers, &c., made
into cigarettes. Smoked for their odour; and in tooth-ache, face-ache, &c.
See CIGARS, SCENTED.

=Cigars, Arsenical.= _Syn._ CIGARR'AE ARSENICALES, L. _Prep._ Dissolve
arseniate of soda, 1 part, in water, 30 parts; dip white, unsized paper
into the solution, and form it into small rolls, 3 or 4 inches long. Used
in pulmonary consumption; 4 or 5 whiffs as many times a day.

=Cigars, Balsamic.= _Syn._ BALSAMIC CIGARETTES; CIGARRAE BALSAMICAE,
CIGARETTAE B., L. Thick, unsized paper is soaked in a solution of saltpetre
and dried; after which it is brushed over first with tincture of
cascarilla, and when again nearly dry, with compound tincture of benzoin;
in about half an hour it is cut into pieces (1-1/2 x 4 inches), and rolled
into cigarettes. Used in hoarseness, loss of voice, asthma, &c.

=Cigars, Belladonna.= _Syn._ BELLADONNA CIGARETTES; CIGARETTAE BELLADONNAE,
L. _Prep._ 1. Belladonna leaves made into cigarettes of 1 dr. each.

2. (Compound--C. B. COMPOS'ITUM.) From belladonna leaves, 4 parts;
moistened with tincture of opium (Ph. L.), 1 part; dried and made into 1
dr. cigarettes, as before.

Used as an anodyne and antispasmodic, in troublesome coughs,
hooping-cough, toothache, sore throat, tic douloureux, &c.

=Cigars, Camphor= (Raspail, Paris). A remedy for various chest diseases,
such as catarrh, hoarseness, loss of voice, coughs, spasms, hooping-cough,
phthisis; also, if the saliva be swallowed, for heartburn, pains in the
stomach, and gastritis. They consist either of a straw or quill filled
with broken camphor, or of a bone or horn mouthpiece, furnished at the
outer end with a little capsule for the camphor. (Wittstein.)

=Cigars, Cam'phor.= _Syn._ CAMPHOR CIGARETTES; CIGARETT'AE CAMPHO'RAE, L.;
CIGARETTES DE CAMPHRE, Fr. _Prep._ 1. Bibulous paper, moistened with 2 or
3 drops of essence of camphor, and rolled into cigarettes. For use they
are loosely placed in a tubular cigar-holder.

2. (Raspail.) These are made by loosely filling a quill or large straw
with small fragments of camphor, closing the open end with a little cotton
wool or bibulous paper, and piercing the closed end with a pin, to allow
the passage of air.

_Obs._ Both the above are used unlighted by drawing the air through them
into the mouth, which then becomes very slightly charged with the vapour
of camphor. In cold weather the vaporisation is promoted by holding the
cigarette for a few minutes in the warm hand. The hom[oe]opathists regard
them as prophylactic of cholera, and the common people hold them to
possess the same virtue in reference to contagious diseases generally, but
especially typhus and scarlet fever. They should not be employed oftener
than 3 or 4 times a day.

=Cigars, Hen'bane.= _Syn._ CIGARR'AE HYOSCY'AMI, L. From henbane leaves, as
directed under BELLADONNA CIGARS.

=Cigars, Indian Hemp.= The plant is made into cigarettes, which are used
in asthma. They must be used with caution.

=Cigars, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ CIGARR'AE MERCURIA'LES, L. _Prep._ (Paul
Bernard.) Ordinary cigars are deprived of their narcotic properties by
soaking them in water, and are then wetted with a weak solution of
corrosive sublimate, to which a little opium is generally added. The
proportion may be, of corrosive sublimate, 1 gr.; rectified spirit, 20
drops; dissolve; add laudanum, 15 drops; with this solution 6 cigars are
to be equally moistened to within about 1-1/2 inch of the mouth end, and
then set aside to dry.

Used by persons afflicted with syphilitic affections of the throat and
palate, as a convenient method of mercurial fumigation. For those
accustomed to the use of tobacco, mild cigars, undeprived of their
nicotine, may be employed for the purpose.

=Cigars, Scent'ed.= _Syn._ PERFU''MED CIGARS; CIGARR'AE AROMAT'ICAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. By moistening ordinary cigars with a strong tincture of
cascarilla, to which a little gum benzoin and storax may be added. Some
persons add a small quantity of camphor, or of oil of cloves or cassia.

2. By soaking the tobacco, of which the cigars are to be made, or the
cigars themselves, for a short time in a very strong infusion of
cascarilla, and then allowing them to dry by a very gentle heat.

3. By simply inserting very small shreds of cascarilla bark between the
leaves of the cigar or in small slits made for the purpose.

_Obs._ The above yield a very agreeable odour when smoked; but are said to
intoxicate quicker than unprepared cigars of equal strength and quality.
They lose much of their fragrance by age.

=Cigars, Stramo''nium.= _Syn._ DATU'RA CIGARS; CIGARRAE STRAMO''NII, L.
From the leaves of _Datura stramonium_, or preferably those of the eastern
species, _Datura tatula_. See ASTHMA, DATURA.

=CINCHONA BARKS.= _Syn._ CINCHONAE CORTEX; PERUVIAN BARK; JESUIT'S BARK.
The native names are _quinquino_ and _quina_, _quina_. Of the nearly forty
different known species of cinchona trees, the barks of about a third are
employed, some either directly in medicine, but by far the larger number
as sources of quinine and the other cinchona alkaloids. The original
habitat of the genus _Cinchona_ is the Andes, where it is found at a
height of between 3000 and 12,000 feet above the sea, growing mostly in
patches, distributed amongst the palms, plantains, and other tropical
trees that form the vast forests, for the most part clothing the eastern
slopes of the Cordilleras, and extending from 10 deg. north to about 19 deg. south
latitude. In this district there is always an abundance of moisture and a
mean temperature of about 62 deg.. In 1853 the Dutch government introduced the
cinchona into Java, and in 1861 the East Indian government, following
their example, introduced it into British India, where it is now
acclimatised, large plantations of it growing on the Neilgherries and in
the valleys of the Himalayas. The cinchona is now also successfully
cultivated in Ceylon and Jamaica.

The method followed in the collection of the bark by the Peruvians is a
very wasteful and destructive one, and consists either in stripping the
bark from the trees when they have attained a sufficient age, or in
felling the tree a little above the roots. If the latter method be
adopted, the roots give out a growth of suckers, which yield a good bark.
The bark is never removed during the rainy season.

Previous to being stripped off, the bark is sometimes cleaned with a
brush, and then peeled off in pieces varying from 15 to 18 inches long,
and from 4 or 5 in width. The thinnest pieces, which are derived from the
branches or the trunks of small trees, are dried in the sun, and thus
acquire the well-known quill-like form. The larger trunks yield the flat
specimens, which are submitted to a kind of pressure as they are being
dried. The inferior specimens being rejected, the dried barks (mostly of
the same kind) are sewed in canvas, and thus conveyed to the nearest
depot, from whence, previous to being shipped, they are enclosed in
another envelope of fresh hide, the package being then known under the
name of a _seron_.

_Structure of Cinchona Barks._ A few general observations on the structure
of the bark of cinchona will be appropriate here. The epidermis is only
found on the youngest bark, before it has attained sufficient age for
medicinal use; it is then replaced by the corky layer. In most species
this cracks, and is easily separable, but in some it is firmly attached to
the internal layers. These are composed of the middle layer of the bark or
mesophlaeum, formed of parenchyma, and the innermost layer endophlaeum, or
liber. The middle layer disappears in some barks, which are thus wholly
composed of liber. This is a means of distinguishing them. The liber is
traversed by medullary rays, which project into the mesophlaeum. It is,
therefore, composed of woody fibres (prosenchyma) and soft parenchyma.

The arrangement of the woody fibres, their colour, size, and shape, give a
special character to the cinchona barks.

As compared with other barks, the fibres of the liber are shorter and more
loosely arranged, being for the most part separate or united into very
short bundles. The fibres, therefore, are easily isolated; they are
spindle-shaped, sub-quadrangular, rarely exceeding 1-10th of an inch in
length, usually straight, and are very brittle, the cavity of the cell of
which each is composed being reduced by secondary deposits to a fine
canaliculus. This short and loose fibrous structure is not found in other
barks.

In some cinchona bark a system of lactiferous vessels is found between the
liber and mesophlaeum.[247]

[Footnote 247: Royle.]

The parenchyma of the barks abounds in starch and oxalate of lime, or else
contains a soft brown deposit.

The 'British Pharmacop[oe]ia' divides the cinchona barks into the three
classes of--

1. YELLOW CINCHONA BARK. _Syn._ CINCHONAE FLAVAE CORTEX. The _Cinchona
Calisaya_ of Weddell.

2. PALE CINCHONA BARK. _Syn._ CINCHONAE PALLIDAE CORTEX. The bark of
_Cinchona officinalis_; var. _Condaminea_ of Hooker. This bark is also
known under the name of _Crown-bark_, from its having formerly been used
by the royal family of Spain.

3. RED CINCHONA BARK. _Syn._ CINCHONAE RUBRAE CORTEX. The _Cinchona
succirubra_ of Pavon.

The therapeutic properties of the cinchona barks are due to the following
alkaloids:--

Quinia, or quinine, having the composition C_{20}H_{24}N_{2}O_{2}.

Quinidia, or quinidine, having the composition C_{20}H_{24}N_{2}O_{2}.

Cinchonia, or cinchonine, having the composition C_{20}H_{24}N_{2}O.

Cinchonidia, or cinchonidine, having the composition C_{20}H_{24}N_{2}O.

Quinamina, or quinamine, having the composition C_{20}H_{24}N_{2}O_{2}.

Besides the above, an alkaloid, which has been named _Paracina_, has been
obtained from the bark of the _Cinchona succirubra_; whilst in those barks
which contain only small portions of the more active constituents above
named there have been found two alkaloids, named respectively _Aricia_ and
_Cusconia_, which have lately been accurately investigated by Hesse, who
has determined their chemical constitution (Liebig's 'Annalen und Berichte
der Chemische Gesselschaft in Berlin').

_The following Prospectus of the principal Species of Cinchona is from_
FLUeCKIGER and HANBURY'S '_Pharmacographia_,'

  --------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------
    Species (excluding Sub-species and  |                     |   Native    |      Where         |
    Varieties) according to Weddell.    |   Where figured.    |   Country.  |    cultivated.     |      Product - Cinchona Barks.
  --------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------
  I. STIRPS CINCHONAE OFFICINALIS--      |                     |             |                    |
     1. Cinchona officinalis, Hook.     |'Bot. Mag.,' 5364    |Ecuador Loxe,|India, Ceylon, Java |Loxa, or Crown Bark, Pale Bark.
     2.  "       macrocalyx, Pav.       |Howard, 'N. Q.'      |Peru         |        --          |Ashy Crown Bark. The sub-species
                                        |                     |             |                    | _C. Palton affords_ an
                                        |                     |             |                    | important sort called _Palton Bark_,
                                        |                     |             |                    | much used in the manufacture of
                                        |                     |             |                    | quinine.
     3.  "      lucumaefolia, Pav.       |   "                 |Ecuador, Peru|        --          |Carthagena Bark, confounded with
                                        |                     |             |                    | Palton Bark, but is not so good.
     4.  "      lanciolata, R. and P.   |   "                 |Peru         |        --       }  |Columbian Bark. Imported in immense
                                        |                     |             |                 }  | quantities for manufacture of
     5.  "      lancifolia, Mutis.      |Karst., tab. 11, 12  |New Granada  |India            }  | quinine. The soft Columbian Bark
                                        |                     |             |                 }  | is produced by Howard's var.
                                        |                     |             |                 }  | _oblonga_.
     6.  "      amygdalifolia, Wedd.    |Wedd., tab. 6        |Peru, Bolivia|        --          |A poor bark, not now imported.
  II. STIRPS CINCHONAE RUGOSAE--          |                     |             |                    |
     7. Cinchona Pityrensis, Wedd.      |Karst., tab. 22 (G). |New Grenada, |India               |Pitayo Bark. Very valuable; used by
                                        | Triane              | Popayan     |                    | makers of quinine. It is the chief
                                        |                     |             |                    | source of quinidine.
     8.  "      rugosa, Pav.            |Howard, 'N. Q.'      |Peru         |        --          |Bark unknown, probably valueless.
     9.  "      Mutisii, Lamb.          |  "                  |Ecuador      |        --          |Bark, not in commerce, contains only
                                        |                     |             |                    | aricine.
    10.  "      hirsuta, R. and P.      |Wedd., tab. 21       |Peru         |        --          |
    11.  "      Carabayensis, Wedd.     |Wedd., tab. 19       |Peru, Bolivia|        --          |Bark, not collected.
    12.  "      panudiana, How.         |Howard, 'N. Q.'      |Peru         |India, Java         |A poor bark, yet of handsome
                                        |                     |             |                    | appearance; propagation of tree
                                        |                     |             |                    | discontinued.
    13.  "      asperfolia, Wedd.       |Wedd., tab. 20       |Bolivia      |        --          |Bark not collected.
    14.  "      umbelluliferae, Pav.     |Howard, 'N. Q.'      |Peru         |        --          |Bark not known as a distinct sort.
    15.  "      glandulifera, R. and P. |  "                  |Peru         |        --          |      "             "
    16.  "      Humboldtiana, Lamb.     |  "                  |Peru         |        --          |False Loxa Bark, Jaen Bark. A very
                                        |                     |             |                    |  bad bark.
  III. STIRPS CINCHONAE MICRANTHAE--      |                     |             |                    |
    17. Cinchona Australis, Wedd.       |Wedd., tab. 8        |South Bolivia|        --          |An inferior bark, mixed with
                                        |                     |             |                    | Calisaya.
    18.  "      scrobiculata, H. and B. |  "                  |Peru         |        --          |Bark formerly known as _Red Cusco
                                        |                     |             |                    | Bark_ or _Santa Anna Bark_.
    19.  "      Peruviana, How.         |Howard, 'N. Q.'      |Peru         |India            }  |
    20.  "      nitida, R. and P.       |  "                  |Peru         |India            }  |Grey Bark, Huanuco, or Lima Bark.
    21.  "      micrantha, R. and P.    |  "                  |Peru         |India            }  | Chiefly consumed on the Continent.
  IV. STIRPS CINCHONAE CALISAYAE--        |                     |             |                    |
    22. Cinchona Calisaya, Wedd.        |Wedd., tab. 9        |Peru, Bolivia|India, Ceylon, Java,|Calisaya Bark, Bolivian Bark, Yellow
                                        |                     |             | Jamaica, Mexico    | Bark. The tree exists under many
                                        |                     |             |                    | varieties; bark also very variable.
    23.  "      elliptica, Wedd.        |  "                  |Peru,        |        --          |Carabaya Bark. Bark scarcely now
                                        |                     | Carabaya    |                    | imported. _C. cuneura_, Miq.
                                        |                     |             |                    | (flower and fruit unknown), may
                                        |                     |             |                    | perhaps be this species.
  V. STIRPS CINCHONAE OVATAE--            |                     |             |                    |
    24. Cinchona purpurea, R. and P.    |Howard, 'N. Q.'      |Peru,        |                    |Huamalies Bark, not now imported.
                                        |                     | Huamalies   |                    |
    25.  "      rufinervis, Wedd.       |  "                  |Peru, Bolivia|        --          |Bark a kind of light Calisaya.
    26.  "      succirubra, Pav.        |         --          |Ecuador      |India, Ceylon, Java,|Red Bark; largely cultivated in
                                        |                     |             |  Jamaica           | British India.
    27.  "      ovata, R. and P.        |  "                  |Peru, Bolivia|India (?), Java (?).|Inferior brown and grey barks.
    28.  "      cordifolia, Mutis.      |Karst., tab. 8       |New Granada, |        --          |Columbian Bark (in part). Tree exists
                                        |                     | Peru        |                    | under many varieties; bark of some
                                        |                     |             |                    | used in manufacture of quinine.
    29.  "      Tucujensis, Karst.      |Karst., tab. 9       |Venezuela    |        --          |Maracaibo Bark.
    30.  "      pubescens, Vahl.        |Wedd., tab. 16       |Ecuador,     |        --          |Areca Bark (Cusco Bark from var.
                                        |                     |Peru, Bolivia|                    | _Pelletieriana_). Some of the
                                        |                     |             |                    | varieties contain aricine.  _C.
                                        |                     |             |                    | caloptera_, Miq., is probably a
                                        |                     |             |                    | variety of the species.
    31.  "      purpurascens, Wedd.     |Wedd., tab. 18       |Bolivia      |        --          |Bark unknown in commerce.
  --------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------------------------------

The cinchona barks vary greatly in the amount of alkaloids they contain
and in their proportion to each other, these being dependent upon the
species or varieties, and many other circumstances. Of the alkaloids,
quinia and cinchonia were till lately the most abundant, but since the
introduction of cinchona cultivation into India, cinchonidia has been
found in very large quantity. Royle says:--"Good Calisaya bark usually
contains from 5 to 6 per cent. of quinia," but actually South American
calisaya containing such an amount of quinia is rare in the market. Some
barks, however, derived from cinchonas cultivated in India, such as _C.
Calisaya_, var. _Ledgeriana_, and some varieties of _C. officinalis_,
yield even a still higher per-centage of quinine.

The South American crown, or loxa bark, is very variable, and contains
chiefly cinchonia.

Red bark also varies considerably, yielding from 3 to 10 per cent. of
alkaloids, of which quinia forms only a small fraction, whilst generally
cinchonidia is predominant. The development of the alkaloids is greatly
influenced by cultivation, but particularly by the "renewing process,"
which, applied to the _C. succirubra_, trebles the amount of quinine in
the bark.

In addition to the alkaloids already mentioned, the cinchona barks contain
the following acid principles:--KINIC ACID, CINCHO-TANNIC ACID, and
QUINOVIC or CHINOVIC ACID. The quinovic acid is accompanied by an
amorphous bitter substance, named CHINOVIN or QUINOVIA, which is present
in much greater proportion than the acid, of which generally there are
only traces. A description of these bodies will be found by referring to
them under their respective names. CINCHONA-RED is another amorphous
substance which is the body to which the red hue of the cinchona barks is
due. It is produced when cincho-tannic acid is boiled with dilute
sulphuric acid, sugar being formed at the same time.

When fused with potash, proto-catechinic acid is formed. Cinchona red
dissolves sparingly in alcohol, freely in alkaline solutions, but neither
in water nor ether. Thick red bark contains it to the amount of more than
10 per cent.

Cinchona red is the product of the oxidation of cincho-tannic acid, and is
contained largely in South American red bark, because this is the product
of old trees; but sparingly in Indian red bark, because this is always
collected from trees not more than fourteen years old.

_Medicinal Properties of the Cinchona Barks._ The therapeutic effects of
the cinchona barks are doubtless due to the alkaloids they contain; but
spite of their variability of composition in this respect, which has been
shown to be very great, they are very extensively employed in medical
practice in the forms of powder, decoction, tincture, and extract.

Dr de Vrij, the eminent quinologist, is of opinion that the therapeutic
effects of bark are chiefly due in part to the alkaloids, and in part to
the cincho-tannic acid they contain; and as red Indian bark is rich in
both these constituents, he considers it the best suited for medical
practice. See QUINETUM.

Garrod says:--"Given in small doses, bark causes an increase of appetite,
especially in weak patients, and at the same time improves the condition
of the muscular system; hence the improvement of the blood and general
health. It may, therefore, be well designated a tonic.

Its power in bracing up the system is also seen in the check given to the
colliquative sweating occurring in extreme debility. The pulse is not
quickened by the use even of large doses of quinine, although it is
frequently made stronger, nor does bark itself, in the majority of cases,
increase the heart's action.

Bark also produces a peculiar influence upon the nervous system, which is
exhibited in the extraordinary power it possesses of arresting the
progress of certain diseases characterised by a periodical recurrence of
their symptoms, as ague, the different forms of neuralgia, and certain
inflammatory affections; how this effect is produced is at present
unknown. Bark acts likewise as an astringent, and this property, combined
with the tonic and antiperiodic powers, is often of much therapeutic
value."

For the method of estimating the alkaloids in cinchona bark, see
QUINOMETRY, QUININE, QUINIDINE, QUINOIDINE, QUINICONE, QUINAMINE,
CINCHONINE; also the different pharmaceutical preparations of CINCHONA
BARK.

=CINCHONIDINE.= _Syn._ CINCHONIDIA. C_{20}H_{24}N_{20}. This cinchona
alkaloid is isomeric with cinchonine. It occurs in large, shining
striated, rhombic prisms, which are anhydrous. It dissolves in .76 parts
of ether and 20 of spirit of wine. The solutions are fluorescent, but do
not answer to the chlorine and ammonia tests.

"The great powers and activity of this alkaloid have only of late been
appreciated. As a protoplasm-poison, and probably in every other
physiological action, it comes next to quinine and quinidine, and
decidedly above cinchonine."[248]

[Footnote 248: Dr C. D. Phillips.]

If it is chemically pure, cinchonidine belongs to the non-fluorescent
alkaloids.

=CINCHONINE.= _Syn._ CINCHONIA. C_{20}H_{24}N_{2}O. This alkaloid abounds
most in the paler varieties of the cinchona barks. It occurs in clear,
colourless, four-sided prisms, which are soluble in 30 parts of water, and
in about 400 parts of ether and 120 of spirits of wine. With acids it
forms soluble salts, which do not fluoresce in solution, and are turned
lightish brown-yellow by the chlorine and ammonia tests. Of its salts, the
hydriodate is readily soluble in water, and still more so in alcohol,
whether dilute or strong. Cinchonine may be prepared from its sulphate or
disulphate in the same way as quinine.

=Cinchonine, Sulphate of.= _Syn._ CINCHONIAE SULPHAS. (Ph. U. S.) Take of
the mother-water remaining after the crystallisation of sulphate of quinia
in the process for preparing that salt a convenient quantity, solution of
soda, alcohol, diluted sulphuric acid, animal charcoal in fine powder,
each a sufficient quantity. To the mother-water add gradually with
constant stirring solution of soda, until the liquid becomes alkaline.
Collect on a filter the precipitate formed, wash it with water, and dry
it. Then wash it with successive small portions of alcohol to remove other
alkaloids which may be present, mix the residue with 8 times its weight of
water, and having heated the mixture, add gradually diluted sulphuric acid
until it is neutralised and becomes clear. Then boil the liquid with
animal charcoal, filter it while hot, and set it aside to crystallise.
Lastly, drain the crystals and dry them on bibulous paper. By evaporating
the mother-liquid more crystals may be obtained.

=CINCHO-TANNIC ACID.= This acid is precipitated from a decoction of bark
by acetate of lead, after the decoction has been freed from cinchona red
by means of magnesia.

If the cincho-tannate of lead thus formed be decomposed by sulphuretted
hydrogen, and the solution carefully evaporated in vacuo, the acid may be
obtained as an amorphous, hygroscopic substance, readily soluble in water.
A ferric salt added to a solution of this acid imparts a greenish colour
to it.

Cincho-tannic acid is very soluble in water, but not in acids. Therefore a
concentrated watery infusion (1 to 4) of Indian bark gives a precipitate
upon the addition of strong hydrochloric acid. By this means a rough
estimation may be formed of the amount of cincho-tannic acid in a sample
of bark.

=CINCHOVATINE.= The substance known under this name does not exist as an
alkaloid, _sui generis_. It is nothing more than quinidine, or
cinchonidine, or a mixture of both.

=CINNABAR.= _Syn._ NATIVE VERMILLION. This compound, which is one of the
most abundant of the ores of mercury, is a product of considerable
importance in the arts, and some portions of it are sometimes sufficiently
pure in colour to be used after mere levigation. Generally, however, the
factitious kind is employed. See VERMILION.

=CINNAMEIN.= C_{16}H_{14}O_{2}. _Syn._ OIL OF BALSAM OF PERU. A volatile
oil existing in balsam of Peru.

=CINNAMIC ACID.= HC_{9}H_{7}O_{2}. A colourless, transparent, crystalline
substance, obtained from oil of cinnamon, liquid storax, balsam of Peru,
and balsam of tolu. It is freely dissolved by alcohol, but nearly
insoluble in water. At 248 deg. Fahr. it fuses, and at 560 deg. Fahr. it sublimes
unchanged. Distilled with dichromate of potassium and sulphuric acid it is
converted into benzoic acid. Its salts are called cinnamates.

=CINNAMON.= _Syn._ CINNAMON BARK; CINNAMOMI CORTEX (B. P.), L. The inner
bark of shoots from the truncated stock of the _Cinnamomum Zeylanicum_,
imported from Ceylon, and distinguished in commerce as Ceylon cinnamon.
The best is obtained from branches about three years old.

Used in _medicine_ as a carminative and astringent, chiefly as an adjuvant
to other medicines, _e.g._ with chalk, in diarrh[oe]a.--_Dose_, 10 to 20
grains.

_Obs._ Owing to the high price of this drug it has become a general
practice to substitute the bark of cassia (_Cassia_; _Cortex cinnamomi
cassia_) for it, which so closely resembles it in flavour that the
uninitiated regard them as the same. Cassia, however, is not only thicker
and coarser than cinnamon, but its fracture is short and resinous, and its
flavour is more biting and hot, whilst it lacks the peculiar sweetish
taste of cinnamon. The thickness of cinnamon seldom exceeds that of good
drawing paper.

=CISTERNS.= See TANKS.

=CITRATE.= A salt in which the hydrogen of citric acid is replaced by a
metal or other basic radical.

=CIT'RIC ACID.= H_{3}C_{6}H_{5}O_{7},H_{2}O. _Syn._ ACID OF LEMONS,
CONCRETE A. OF L.; AC'IDUM LIMO'NIS, ACIDUM CIT'RICUM (B. P.), L.; ACIDE
CITRIQUE, Fr.; CITRONENSAUeRE, Ger. An acid peculiar to the vegetable
kingdom. It is obtained in large quantity from the juice of lemons and
other fruits of the genus CITRUS; it is also found in gooseberries,
currants, cranberries, whortleberries, cherries, &c.; and Dr Wright has
lately found it in great abundance in unripe mulberries, in conjunction
with malic acid.

When currants or gooseberries are employed as a source of citric acid,
they are first subjected to pressure, and the juice so obtained from them
is then fermented. The fermented liquor is next submitted to distillation,
and the alcohol collected.

The residue in the retort containing the citric acid is saturated with
chalk, and the resulting citrate of lime is decomposed by means of
sulphuric acid.

100 lbs. of the fruit are said to yield 10 lbs. of spirit and 1 lb. of
acid.

_Prep._ The citric acid manufacture consists in separating it from the
mucilage, sugar, and other foreign matter with which it is combined in
the juice of lemons and limes.

1. (Ph. L. 1836,--Scheele's process.) Take of lemon juice 4 pints;
prepared chalk, 4-1/2 oz.; diluted sulphuric acid, 27-1/2 fl. oz.;
distilled water, 2 pints. Add the chalk by degrees to the lemon juice,
made hot, and mix well; set by, that the powder may subside, and
afterwards pour off the supernatant liquor. Wash the precipitated citrate
of lime frequently with warm water; then pour upon it the diluted
sulphuric acid, mixed with the distilled water, and boil the whole for 15
minutes in glass, stoneware, or lead; press the mixture strongly through a
linen cloth, and filter it. Evaporate the filtered liquor with a gentle
heat, and set it aside, that crystals may form. To obtain the crystals
pure, dissolve them in water a second and a third time; filter each
solution, evaporate, and set it apart to crystallise.

2. (Ph. L. 1851.) Merely placed in the materia medica.

3. (Ph. E. 1841.) Similar to that of Ph. L. 1836, except that the washed
citrate of lime is ordered to be squeezed in a powerful press, and that
the filtered solution of citric acid is ordered to be tested with nitrate
of baryta, and if the precipitate is not nearly all soluble in nitric
acid, to add a little citrate of lime to the whole liquor, till it stands
this test.

4. (Ph. D. 1826.) Same as that of Ph. L. 1836.

5. (Ph. D. 1851.) Included in the materia medica.

6. (P. B. 1867.) Differs from the process of the Ph. L. 1836 in some
unimportant detail only.

7. (Dr Price.) The crude juice is saturated with ammonia, potassa, or soda
(carbonates), or with the ammoniacal product distilled from gas-liquor;
chalk, 150 parts, or hydrate of lime, 90 parts, are then added for every
192 parts of citric acid contained in the liquor, and the whole stirred
well together; heat is next applied, and the ammonia distilled into
another quantity of lemon juice; the citrate of lime thus obtained is then
decomposed with dilute sulphuric acid, and the whole process conducted as
before. When potassa or soda is used the distillation is omitted, and the
expressed liquor, after filtration, used to decompose fresh lemon juice.

8. (Ordinary manufacturing process.) To crude lemon or lime juice, mixed
with water, is added ground chalk; the precipitate is washed to free it
from the impurities dissolved in the water, and afterwards decomposed by
sulphuric acid. If the citric acid is not sufficiently white, it is
decolorised by digestion with animal black.

9. (Kuhlman.) This chemist proposes saturating the hot lemon juice as far
as possible with very finely divided barium carbonate, and afterwards
completing the neutralisation with barium hydrate or sulphide. The
precipitated barium citrate is then to be washed, and decomposed with the
requisite quantity of sulphuric acid. The advantage of barium over lime as
a precipitant is the more ready crystallisability of the citric acid from
the solution thus obtained. Sulphate of baryta is absolutely insoluble in
solution of citric acid, whilst sulphate of lime is not; and the presence
of the latter impedes the crystallisation of the acid.

_Obs._ If the lemon or lime juice be allowed to ferment a short time, the
mucilage and other impurities will, to a certain extent, separate and
subside. See _Concluding Remarks_.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ Citric acid forms rhomboidal prisms, which are clear,
colourless, odourless, sour, and deliquescent in a moist atmosphere. It is
an agreeable acid, at once cooling and antiseptic. It is much used in
medicine as a substitute for lemon juice, and to form effervescing
draughts, citrates, &c.

  17 gr. citric acid, in crystals, or 1/2 fl. oz. of
  lemon juice,

  \---------------------v--------------------------/
                 are equivalent to
             /----------^---------------\
            25 gr. bicarbonate of potash;
            20 " carbonate of potash;
            15 " carbonate of ammonia;
            20 " bicarbonate of soda;
            35 " carbonate of soda.

The bicarbonate of potassa is that generally preferred for making saline
draughts with citric acid; and when flavoured with a little tincture of
orange peel and simple syrup, or syrup of orange peel alone, it forms a
most delicious effervescing beverage. Citric acid in pure crystals or in
lime juice is much used by the calico-printer, being the best known
'resistant' for iron and alumina mordants.

_Pur._ Citric acid is frequently met with adulterated with tartaric acid;
the fraud is easily detected by dissolving the acid in a little cold
water, and adding to the solution a small quantity of acetate of potash.
If tartaric acid be present, a white, crystalline precipitate of cream of
tartar will be produced on agitation. When pure it is devoid of colour, is
entirely, or almost entirely, decomposed by heat. It is soluble in water
and in spirit, and what is thrown down from its watery solution by acetate
of lead is dissolved by nitric acid. No salt of potassium precipitates
anything with citric acid except the tartrate. When a few drops of a
solution of citric acid are added to lime water, a clear liquid results,
which, when heated, deposits a white powder, soluble in acids without
effervescence. By the action of nitric acid citric acid is converted into
oxalic acid.

When the crystals of citric acid are very deliquescent, the presence of
free sulphuric acid may be suspected. This latter may be detected with
facility by dissolving the citric acid in a little water, strongly
acidifying the solution with hydrochloric acid, and adding chloride of
barium, when, if sulphuric acid be present, an insoluble precipitate of
sulphate of barium will fall down after a short time. Oxalic acid is
sometimes present in citric acid, the cause of its presence being
explained further on. To test for it proceed as follows:

Dissolve a small quantity of the citric acid in water, and add to the
solution an excess of ammonia; acidify with acetic acid, filter, and test
the filtrate with calcium sulphate.

_Estim._ See ACIDIMETRY and LIME JUICE.

_Tests._ See _above_.

_Concluding Remarks._ The preparation of citric acid has now become an
important branch of chemical manufacture, from the large consumption of
this article in various operations in the arts. In conducting the
different steps of the process some little expertness and care are,
however, necessary to ensure success. The chalk employed, which should be
dry, and in fine powder, is added to the juice from a weighed sample,
until the latter is perfectly neutralised, and the quantity consumed is
exactly noted. The precipitated citrate of lime is next thoroughly washed
with water, and the sulphuric acid, diluted with 6 or 8 times its weight
of water, whilst still warm, is poured upon it, and thoroughly mixed with
it. The agitation is occasionally renewed for 8 or 10 hours or longer,
when the solution of citric acid is poured off, and the residuum of
sulphate of lime thoroughly washed with warm water, the washings being
added to the liquid acid. This last is then poured off from the impurities
that may have been deposited, and evaporated in a leaden boiler, over the
naked fire, or by high-pressure steam, until it acquires the gravity of
1.13, when the process is continued, at a lower temperature, until a
syrupy aspect is assumed, and a pellicle appears on the surface of the
liquor. Without great care at this part of the process the whole batch may
be carbonised and spoiled. At this point the concentrated solution is
emptied into warm and clean crystallising vessels, set in a dry apartment,
where the thermometer does not fall below temperate. At the end of 4 days
the crystals are found ready for removal from the pans. They are
thoroughly drained, redissolved in as little water as possible, and after
being allowed to stand for a few hours to deposit impurities, again
evaporated and crystallised.

The acid of the second crystallisation is usually sufficiently pure for
the market; when this is not the case a third, or even a fourth,
crystallisation must be had recourse to. The mother-liquors from the
several pans are now collected together, and a second or third crop of
crystals obtained from them, by evaporation as before.

A frequent cause of difficulty in obtaining crystals from the solutions is
the employment of too little sulphuric acid to decompose the whole of the
citrate of lime; the consequence of which is that a little of that salt is
taken up by the free citric acid, and materially obstructs the
crystallisation. Forty parts of dry sulphuric acid are required to
decompose 50 parts of chalk. Commercial sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) is
usually of the sp. gr. of 1.845, and it therefore requires 49 lbs. of this
acid for every 50 lbs. of chalk employed in the process. In practice it is
found that a very slight excess of sulphuric acid is preferable to a
preponderance of undecomposed citrate of lime.

The first crop of crystals is called 'brown citric acid,' and is chiefly
sold to the calico-printers. Sometimes a little nitric acid is added to
the solution of the coloured crystals, for the purpose of bleaching them,
but in this way a minute quantity of oxalic acid is formed. A more general
plan is to bleach the citrate of lime by covering it with a weak solution
of chloride of lime, exposing it in shallow vessels to the sun's rays, and
rewashing it before decomposing it with sulphuric acid. A safer plan is to
dissolve the crude citric acid, digest with animal charcoal, and again
concentrate the solution to the crystallising point.

When the aqueous solution of citric acid obtained, as already described,
is concentrated by boiling in an open evaporating pan, the acid is not
only liable to suffer partial decomposition by its long exposure to the
air, but it not unfrequently acquires a brown colour from the
carbonisation those portions of the liquid undergo which are in contact
with the bottom of the pan, which being heated by high-pressure steam
frequently reaches a temperature exceeding 200 deg. F. This latter result is
brought about in consequence of the slight movement in the dense acid
liquor in the pan. To remedy the loss and inconvenience arising from the
employment of the open evaporating pan, some years back Mr Pontifex
devised an apparatus which effects the evaporation of acid liquor _in
vacuo_ (and therefore out of contact with air), and at a temperature never
exceeding 130 F deg.. Moreover, in Mr Pontifex's boiler the time necessary for
the concentration of the citric-acid liquor is diminished to about an
eighth, and as the strong ebullition keeps the liquid in constant motion
its charring is entirely prevented.

Mr Row says that lemon juice may be purified to a great extent by diluting
it with water until it contains about 12 oz. of acid to the gallon, and
then filtering from the flocculent precipitate of mucilage thus thrown
down. The citrate of lime obtained from juice so treated is comparatively
pure.

Good lemon juice yields about 6-1/2% of crystallised lemon acid; 2 galls.
yield fully 1 lb. of crystals. See LEMON JUICE, LIME JUICE. &c.

=CIT'RON.= The fruit of the citron tree (_Citrus medica_) is acidulous,
antiseptic, and antiscorbutic; it excites the appetite, and stops
vomiting; and, like lemon juice, has been greatly extolled in chronic
rheumatism, gout, and scurvy. Mixed with cordials, it is used as an
antidote to the manchineel poison.

=Citron, Oil of.= See OIL.

=Citron Peel.= This is prepared in the same way as candied orange and
lemon peel, which it for the most part resembles.

=Citron.= _Syn._ LEM'ON COLOUR. The term applied to a pale and delicate
shade of yellow. See YELLOW DYES, &c.

=CIT'RONELLE.= See LIQUEURS and OILS (Lemon-grass).

=CITRUS.= A genus of plants belonging to the natural order _Aurantiaceae_,
the species of which yields useful fruits. From _Citrus Aurantium_, and
its varieties, all the various descriptions of sweet oranges are obtained.
The species _C. Bigaradia_ or _vulgaris_ yields the bitter or Seville
orange; _C. Limonum_ and its varieties, yield the lemons; _C. Limetta_ is
the source of the lime; _C. medica_ of the citron; _C. Decumana_ of the
shaddock; _C. paradisi_ of the forbidden fruit; _C. Pampelmos_ of the
Pampelmoose; and _C. japonica_ of the kumquat.

=Citrus Bergamia.= (Ind. Ph.) _Syn._ THE LIME TREE. _Habitat._ Commonly
cultivated in India and other tropical countries.--_Officinal part._ The
fruit (lime) closely resembles the lemon, but is smaller, with a smoother,
thinner rind, and of somewhat less fragrant odour. Its juice (lime juice)
has the same pungent acid taste, and contains the same ingredients as
lemon juice, though in somewhat different proportions, that of the citric
acid being larger and that of the mucilage less in quantity. Much of the
article imported into England under the name of lemon juice is obtained
from the lime.--_Properties and Uses._ Very similar to those of the lemon,
the juice being equally refrigerant and antiscorbutic; indeed, it is
preferred by many tropical practitioners.

The fresh juice of the lime is procurable in almost every portion of the
tropics, and is considered more effectual than preserved lemon juice.

Lime juice may be advantageously employed in the manufacture of citric
acid, the proportion of this acid being larger than in lemon juice.

=CIV'ET.= _Syn._ CIVET'TA ZYBETH'UM, L. A perfume obtained from the civet
cat (_Viverra civella_, Linn.), a fierce, carnivorous quadruped, somewhat
resembling a fox, found in China and the East and West Indies. The civet
is secreted in a sort of pouch between the anus and the sexual organs.
"Several of these animals have been brought into Holland, and afford a
considerable branch of commerce, especially at Amsterdam. The civet is
squeezed out in summer every other day, in winter twice a week; the
quantity procured at once is from 2 scruples to 1 drachm or more."

Civet is frequently adulterated with spermaceti and butter, and a similar
substance to civet, but of a darker colour, obtained from the polecat.
When pure it has an odour intermediate between that of musk and ambergris,
but less refined; a pale-yellow colour; an acrid taste; and the
consistence of honey. It is used in perfumery.

=CLAIRET.= See LIQUEUR.

=CLAR'ET RAGS.= _Syn._ TOURNESOL EN DRAPEAU, Fr.; BEZET'TA C[OE]RU'LEA, L.
1. Pieces of clean linen coloured with Auvergne--or ground archil.

2. Pieces of linen dipped into the juice of mulberries, blood-red grapes,
lees of red wine, &c. Used to colour jellies, confectionery, the rind of
cheeses, &c.

=CLARIFICATION.= The act of clearing or making bright; commonly applied to
the process of 'clearing' or 'fining' the liquids by chemical means,
instead of by filtration. The substances used for this purpose are
popularly known as 'clarifiers' or 'finings.'

The substances employed in the clarification of liquids operate by either
mechanically embracing the feculous matter, and subsiding with it to the
bottom of the vessel, or by inducing such a change in its nature or bulk
that it subsides by its own density, in each case leaving the liquor
transparent. Albumen, gelatin, the acids, certain salts, blood, lime,
plaster of Paris, alum, heat, alcohol, &c., serve in many cases for this
purpose. The first is used, under the form of white of egg, for the
clarification of syrups, as it combines with the liquid when cold, but on
the application of heat rapidly coagulates and rises to the surface,
carrying the impurities with it, forming a scum which is easily removed
with a skimmer. It is also much used for fining wines and liqueurs,
particularly the red wines and more limpid cordials. Gelatin, under the
form of isinglass, dissolved in water or weak vinegar, is used to fine
white wines, beer, cider, and similar liquors that contain a sufficient
quantity of either spirit or astringency (tannin), to induce its
precipitation. Sulphuric acid is frequently added to weak liquors for a
similar purpose, either alone or after the addition of white of egg or
gelatin, both of which it rapidly throws down in an insoluble form. A
pernicious practice exists among some unprincipled manufacturers of using
certain salts of lead and potash to clear their liquors; especially those
that are expected to sparkle in the glass, as 'cordial gin,' &c. For this
purpose a little sugar of lead, dissolved in water, is first mixed up with
the fluid, and afterwards a little more than half its weight of sulphate
of potassa, also dissolved in water, is added, and the liquor is again
'roused' up. By standing, the sulphate of lead, formed by this mixture,
subsides, and leaves the liquor clear. Bullock's blood is used in the same
way as isinglass or white of eggs, for fining red wines, beer, and porter.
Lime, alum, alcohol, acids, and heat, act by curdling or coagulating the
feculencies, and thus, by increasing their density, induce their
subsidence. Plaster of Paris acts, partly like the above, and partly like
albumen, or gelatin, by developing and forcing down the suspended matter.
Sand is often sifted over liquors (especially cordials and syrups), for
the simple purpose of acting by its gravity, but appears to be quite
useless, as it sinks too rapidly. The juices of plants are clarified by
heat, which coagulates the albumen they contain. Marl or clay is
frequently used to clear cider and perry. A strip of isinglass is
generally employed to clarify coffee. See WINE, BREWING, CORDIALS, COFFEE,
FININGS, INFUSION, &c.

=CLAY.= Clay is formed from the disintegration of felspathic rocks, by the
combined action of air and water. Its plasticity, when moist, and its
capability of being made hard by heat, are properties which render it
available for many useful purposes. The purest kind of clay is kaolin, or
China clay, which consists almost entirely of silicate of aluminum. It is
found in China; but a precisely similar substance is obtained from
deposits in Cornwall and some parts of France. Pipe-clay, a white clay
nearly free from iron, is found in large quantity in the island of
Purbeck. Potter's clay is found in many parts of Britain; that of
Devonshire and Dorsetshire is much valued. Brick clay contains varying
proportions of iron; hence the different colours of the bricks used in
different countries. See ALUMINUM, FULLER'S EARTH, OCHRE, &c.

=CLEAN'ING.= In domestic economy the best way to clean a house is to keep
it clean by a daily attention to small things, and not allow it to get
into such a state of dirtiness and disorder as to require great and
periodical cleanings. Some mistresses, and also some servants, seem to
have an idea that a house should undergo regular cleanings, or great
washing and scrubbing matches, once every three or six months, on which
occasions the house is turned almost inside out, and made most
uncomfortable. All this is bad economy, and indicates general slovenliness
of habits. (Chambers.) For hints upon cleaning, see CARPETS, CLOTHES, &c.

=CLEAN'LINESS.= See ABLUTION, BATHING, and SICKNESS.

=CLIPPING= (HORSES). Some horses should be worked in autumn in cloths, or
with their coats on, as, on account of the extra sweating thus caused,
they will be in better condition for the hunting season. Such horses
should be clipped or shaved. The horse's coat should be fully set before
it is clipped. Those horses which sweat much in autumn should be singed.
Singeing cannot be begun too early. The fresh growth must be removed every
week. Singeing may be best accomplished by means of gas.

=CLOTHES.= Economy and cleanliness require due attention to be paid to
every article of clothing, but more especially to those which are the most
exposed to dirt and the weather. The following remarks, having reference
chiefly to woollen articles, may prove useful to the reader:--If very
dusty, hang them on a horse or line, and gently beat them with a cane;
then lay them on a clean board or table and well brush them, first with a
stiff brush, to remove the spots of mud and the coarsest of the dirt, and
next with a softer one, to remove the dust and to lay the nap properly. If
clothes are wet and spotted with dirt, dry them before brushing them, and
then rub out spots with the hands. The hard brush should be used as little
as possible, and then with a light hand, as it will, if roughly and
constantly employed, soon render the cloth threadbare. Spots of
tallow-grease on the clothes may be taken off with the nail, or, if that
cannot be done, have a hot iron with some thick brown paper, lay the paper
on the part where the grease is, then put the iron upon the spot; if the
grease comes through the paper put on another piece, till it ceases to
soil it. Moths may be prevented attacking clothes by putting a few cloves
or allspice into the box or closet with them. See BALLS, CLOTHES, and
SCOURING, &c.

=CLO''THING.= In our changeable climate great care should be taken to
clothe the body effectually; for when the skin is chilled the blood is
determined in increased and injurious quantity to the internal organs,
causing colds and inflammations. The ordinary materials for clothing are
cotton, linen, woollen, and silk. Cotton is generally employed for
undergarments, for which its softness and warmth render it well adapted.
Linen is not nearly so warm, but it keeps its colour better; it is more
expensive, and although it wears much longer, it is not so economical as
cotton. Woollen garments are, in cold and variable climates, almost
essential to comfort; the warmth obtained by wearing flannel next the body
is very beneficial, and the slight stimulating effect arising from its
roughness tends to keep the skin in healthy action.

The practice of dressing infants in long clothes is a very objectionable
one, for besides being injurious to health it cramps the action of the
legs, the feet, and the toes, and by so doing prevents their proper and
healthy development.

An infant should be so clothed as to combine sufficient warmth with
perfect freedom of the limbs; hence his garments should be loose instead
of tight, more particularly round his waist.

In the selection of winter clothes for children, if for in-door wear,
choice should be made of a dark woollen frock, and of stockings in
preference to socks. The stockings should be of merino, and made to draw
above the knees and fastened to the dress with a loop and tape instead of
garters, which are very objectionable.

A child's out-of-door attire in winter should additionally comprise a warm
and properly-lined coat, made of cloth or some woollen fabric. It should
button close to the chin and cover his neck. Mr Chavasse says, for this
latter purpose a woollen neckerchief or scarf is preferable to furs. It is
very important that the child's feet and legs should be kept warm, but not
too warm. In infancy and childhood--in summer as well as winter--the
wearing of flannel next the skin is more necessary, and beneficial even,
than when practised by adults.

=CLOVE.= _Syn._ CARYOPH'YLLUM (B. P.), L. The flower-buds of the
_Ciryophyllus aromaticus_ (Linn.), or clove tree collected before they
open, dried, and smoked. Cloves are aromatic, stimulant, carminative, and
stomachic; and, according to some, possess febrifuge properties. They are
chiefly used as an adjuvant in compound medicines. A few cloves kept in a
closet or box prevent moths or mould attacking furs, woollens, &c.

It is a common practice to adulterate this spice in the same manner as
cinchona bark. Cloves from which the oil has been distilled are dried and
rubbed between the hands, previously moistened with a little sweet oil, to
brighten their colour, after which they are mixed up with fresh spice for
sale.

=Cloves, Mother of.= The unripe fruit of the clove tree; they are
frequently imported preserved (preserved mother of cloves), and are
reputed stomachic and antispasmodic.

=Cloves, Oil of.= _Syn._ O'LEUM CARYOPH'YLLI (B. P.), L. This possesses
similar virtues to the unexpanded flower-buds, and is esteemed as a remedy
for the tooth-ache. Used to flavour liqueurs and confectionery. Sp. gr.
1.055-1.060.

M. Jacquemin recommends the following as a very delicate test for the
presence of carbolic acid when used as an adulterant for oil of cloves.
One drop of the suspected oil is mixed with a small trace of solution of
aniline by means of a glass rod, and then shaken with 5 or 6 c. c. of
distilled water. By the addition of a few drops of sodium hypochlorite to
the mixture the characteristic blue coloration due to carbolic acid will
be developed in a few minutes, whereas with the pure oil nothing but the
purplish-violet colour of aniline will be perceived. Stirring or shaking
must be avoided after the addition of the hypochlorite.

=CLYS'TERS.= See ENEMA.

=COAL.= The varieties of this valuable substance may be conveniently
described under the three heads ANTHRACITE, LIGNITE, and PIT-COAL (which
_see_). See also FUEL.

=COAL-TAR.= Coal-tar, one of the products of the destructive distillation
of the coal employed in the manufacture of gas, is a very complex
substance, consisting of various hydrocarbons, acids, and bases, together
with certain resinoid and empyreumatic substances. The principal
hydrocarbons yielded by coal-tar on distillation are: benzol, toluol,
propyl, naphthalin, and anthracin; of these the first three are fluids,
and the last two solids; the most important acids are: carbolic, cresylic,
phlorylic, and nosolic; the chief bases are: aniline, chinoline, and
lepidine. The quantity as well as the quality of the tar obtained from the
distillation of coals varies considerably with the kind of coal used, as
well as with the temperature at which the distillation is carried on, the
yield of tar being smaller at very high temperatures than when lower ones
are employed. Coal-tar, from its antiseptic properties (due chiefly to the
carbolic acid it contains), is painted on wood to preserve the latter from
decay when exposed to wind and weather. Mixed with coal-dust, saw-dust,
and peat-dust, it forms a useful artificial fuel, and when incorporated
with pebbles makes an excellent artificial asphalt for pavements. The
chief value of coal-tar, however, consists in its being the source of
those brilliant dye-stuffs, the coal-tar colours. These, together with the
naphtha obtained from its distillation, have converted coal-tar from a
worthless and unwelcome waste product of gas manufacture--for the removal
of which from their premises the gas makers were formerly only too glad to
pay--into a very considerable and important branch of profit and revenue.

The different constituents of the tar are separated from each other by
distillation, the various products so obtained being further purified by
various processes.

See TAR COLOURS, NAPHTHA, BENZOL, ANTHRACENE, &c.

=CO'BALT.= Co. _Syn._ REG'ULUS OF COBALT; COBALT'TUM, L. A metal
discovered by Brandt, in 1733. It generally occurs in the same ore as
nickel, and the separation of the two metals is a task requiring great
patience and expertness. Speiss cobalt and cobalt glance are the ores from
which the metal is commonly extracted.

_Prep._ 1. Dissolve oxide of cobalt in hydrochloric acid, and pass
sulphuretted hydrogen gas through the solution, until all the arsenic is
thrown down; filter, and boil with a little nitric acid, then add
carbonate of potassium, in excess, and digest the precipitate in a
solution of oxalic acid, to remove any oxide of iron; wash and dry the
residuum (oxalate of cobalt), and expose it to great heat, in a covered
crucible lined with charcoal; the product is pure metallic cobalt.

2. Mix equal parts of oxide of cobalt or roasted Cornish cobalt ore, and
soft soap, and expose them to a violent heat in a covered crucible.

3. Pass hydrogen gas over oxide of cobalt strongly heated in a porcelain
tube.

_Prop., Use, &c._ Cobalt is a white, brittle metal; unchanged in the air;
feebly acted on by dilute hydrochloric and sulphuric acids; has a high
melting-point, and is strongly magnetic; sp. gr. 8.5. It is seldom
employed in the metallic state, from the great difficulty of reducing its
ores, but its oxide (black oxide) is largely employed in the arts. It
forms salts with the acids, which are interesting from the remarkable
changes of colour which they exhibit. See INK, SMALTS, ZAFFRE, and
_below_.

_Char., Tests._ Solutions of the salts of cobalt are known as follows:--1.
Ammonia gives a blue precipitate, slightly soluble in excess, giving a
brownish-red colour.--2. Potassa gives a blue precipitate, turning to
violet and red when the solution is heated.--3. Carbonate of ammonium and
carbonate of sodium give pink precipitates; that from the former is
soluble in excess.--4. Cyanide of potassium gives a yellowish-brown
precipitate, soluble in excess; and the clear solution, after being
boiled, is unaffected when mixed with hydrochloric acid.--5. Sulphuretted
hydrogen produces no change in acid solutions.--6. Sulphydrate of ammonium
gives a black precipitate in neutral solutions.--7. Melted with borax,
before the blowpipe, it gives a bead of a magnificent blue colour, almost
verging on black, if much is present. Phosphate of sodium and ammonium
give a similar bead; but the colour is less intense.

=Cobalt, Ac'etate of.= Co(C_{2}H_{3}O_{2})_{2}. _Prep._ From the carbonate
or protoxide and acetic acid. It forms a sympathetic ink which turns blue
when heated.

=Cobalt, Arseniate of.= Co_{3}2AsO_{4}, 8H_{2}O. A hydrated native
tricobaltous arseniate of cobalt, known as "cobalt bloom."

=Cobalt, Car'bonate of.= CoCO_{3}. _Prep._ By adding an alkaline carbonate
to a solution of the nitrate or sulphate. A pale peach-coloured powder,
soluble in acids. It contains some hydrate.

=Cobalt, Chlo''ride of.= CoCl_{2}. _Syn._ HYDROCHLO''RATE OF C., MU''RIATE
OF C. _Prep._ By dissolving the carbonate or protoxide in hydrochloric
acid; the solution deposits deep rose-red crystals on standing, which
contain water. By evaporating the solution by heat, anhydrous blue
crystals of the chloride are obtained. Both of them yield a deep rose-red
solution with water, which is turned green by a little acid. This solution
forms a well-known sympathetic ink, the traces of which become blue when
heated. If the solution contains either chloride of iron or chloride of
nickel, the traces become green. (Klaproth.) The addition of a little
nitrate of copper to the above solution forms a sympathetic ink, which by
heat gives a very rich greenish-yellow colour. (Ure.) The addition of a
very little common salt makes the traces disappear with greater rapidity,
on the withdrawal of the heat. In each case, when the paper is laid aside,
moisture is absorbed, and the writing once more disappears. If, however,
much heat has been used the traces become permanent.

=Cobalt, Ni'trate of.= Co(NO_{3})_{2}. _Prep._ As the last, substituting
nitric for hydrochloric acid; it forms deliquescent crystals.

=Cobalt, Ox'alate of.= CoC_{2}O_{4}. _Prep._ As the acetate, from oxalic
acid and the carbonate or protoxide; or by double decomposition.

=Cobalt, Ox'ides of.= Of these there are two, the protoxide and the
sesquioxide; besides an acid compound of cobalt and oxygen, to which the
name cobaltic acid has been given.

1. =Cobalt, Protox'ide of.= CoO. _Syn._ OXIDE OF COBALT, GREY O. OF C.,
BLACK O. OF C., COBALT BLACK. _Prep._ 1. By precipitating a solution of
sulphate of chloride of cobalt with carbonate of sodium, and washing,
drying, and igniting the powder which subsides.

2. By boiling powdered bright-white cobalt ore (from Cornwall) in dilute
nitric acid, and adding a solution of carbonate of potassium, very
gradually, until the clear liquor, after the impurities have settled,
becomes of a rose colour; and then as long as a precipitate falls; wash
and dry it as before.

_Prop., &c._ A grey powder, turning black on exposure to the air; strongly
basic; and forming salts with the acids, having a fine red tint. It is
remarkable for the magnificent blue colour it communicates to glass, and
by this character its presence may be readily detected before the
blowpipe; the substance to be examined being fused with borax on a loop of
platinum wire. Used to make blue colours for painters, stains and glazes
for enamellers, glass-melters, potters, &c. In _medicine_ it has
occasionally been given as a remedy for rheumatism.

2. =Cobalt, Sesquiox'ide of.= Co_{2}O_{3}. _Syn._ PEROX'IDE OF COBALT. A
black, insoluble, neutral powder, obtained by mixing solutions of cobalt
and of chloride of lime; or, by heating the protoxide to redness in an
open vessel.

=Cobalt, Phos'phate of=. Co_{3}(PO_{4})_{2}. _Prep._ As the acetate,
substituting phosphoric for acetic acid. An insoluble purple powder,
which, when heated along with eight times its weight of gelatinous
alumina, produces a blue pigment (COBALT BLUE, COBALT ULTRAMARINE), almost
equal in beauty to ultramarine. (See _below_.)

=Cobalt, Sul'phate of.= CoSO_{4}. By boiling sulphuric acid on the metal,
or by dissolving the oxide in the acid. It forms reddish crystals, soluble
in 24 parts of water.

=Cobalto-Ultramarine.= A fine blue pigment, prepared by mixing freshly
precipitated alumina, 8 parts, with phosphate or arseniate of cobalt, 1
part; drying the mixture, and then slowly heating it to redness. By
daylight the colour is pure blue, but by artificial light it is violet.
See BLUE PIGMENTS.

=COCA. Erythroxylon Coca.= This plant is grown largely in Peru and
Bolivia. The Bolivian coca is said to be much superior to the Peruvian.
The best kind is believed to come from the province of Yungas, and the
most inferior description from Peru. The consumption of Coca in Peru,
Bolivia, and in some of the provinces of the Argentine Confederation
is enormous. In small doses it is supposed to act as a stimulant and to
aid digestion; in large ones it is said to possess dangerous narcotic
properties. The mountaineers in South America state they are enabled to
reach high elevations without difficulty of respiration, and to stave off
the feeling of hunger by chewing the leaves during their ascents. "Good
quality coca should have its leaves unbroken, of a medium size, bright
green in colour, and of an odour somewhat combining that of hay and
chocolate. The taste is bitter, and when masticated, coca is said to yield
easily to the teeth. Infused in hot water, it has a beautiful green
colour, which, however, is much darker from inferior leaves. An infinite
number of varieties are recognised between the best and the lowest
quality, which has a disagreeable smell and a colour resembling roasted
coffee. The leaves are also bent and broken, scarcely a whole leaf being
found amongst them."[249] The statements as to the effects of coca are
conflicting, as will be seen from what follows:--Sir R. Christison,
writing to the 'British Medical Journal,' April 29th, 1876, states he was
hardly sensible of the fatigue of two mountain descents made from Ben
Vorlich after chewing coca leaves. That, as a consequence of his doing so,
hunger and thirst were suspended for a long time, but that eventually
appetite and digestion were unaffected. He made trial during the first
descent of 60 grains, and of the second, undertaken eight days after, of
90 grains of coca.

[Footnote 249: 'Pharmaceutical Journal.']

Mr Dowdeswell, in a communication to the 'Lancet,' May 6th, 1876, says
that, contrary to the experience of Sir R. Christison, he found no decided
effects produced after consuming nearly a pound of the leaves, which were
taken in all forms and at all hours for nearly a month. They failed to
produce the slightest excitement, not giving rise even to the feeling of
buoyancy and exhilaration which is experienced from mountain air or a
draught of spring water.

In the 'Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal' for August, 1877, there is a
paper by Mr Shuttleworth, wherein results the opposite to those of the
last-named gentlemen are recorded. Mr Shuttleworth states that the members
of a club established at Toronto for the purpose of playing at La Crosse,
a very violent and fatiguing pastime, were almost unanimous in ascribing
their invariable success over their numerous adversaries to the use of
coca leaves during their contests; their opponents not employing the
plant. The antagonists of the club were men of stronger build and physique
as well as more accustomed to out-of-door pursuits, and were besides
trained players.

The same writer says that in South America care is taken to procure the
leaves in as fresh a state as possible, and that many writers have
ascribed the want of effect to old leaves.

The 'British Medical Journal' of March 10th, 1877, contains a
communication from Dr T. McBean, who states that he has found the
administration of coca leaves useful in typhoid fever, as well as in other
febrile diseases.

=CO'COA= (k[=o]'-ko). _Syn._ CACA'O. An alimentary substance formed of the
roasted seeds of the _Theobroma Cacao_, a tree belonging to the natural
order _Byttneriaceae_. This definition is equally applicable to chocolate,
but we commonly class the preparations containing sugar and flavouring
substances under that head, and the unsweetened and cheap preparations
under COCOA. The cocoa-seed or berry must not be confounded with the
cocoa-nut, which is the fruit of a palm (_Cocus nucifera_). The cocoa tree
is a native of Mexico, and is now more or less extensively grown
throughout Central America, Brazil, Peru, Venezuela, Caraccas, Ecuador,
Grenada, Demerara, Essequibo, Guayaquil, and Surinam; with some of the
West India Islands, foremost among which stands Trinidad. It has also been
introduced with more or less success into Africa, the Mauritius,
Madagascar, Bourbon, the East Indies, Australia, and the Philippine
Islands. The following is a list of the principal kinds of cocoa, in the
order of their commercial value:--Caraccas, Surinam, Trinidad, Grenada,
Jamaica, Dominica, Guayaquil, Venezuela, Bahia, Brazil, St. Lucia. It
seems probable that some of the highest kinds of cocoa do not find their
way into this country, but are consumed by the inhabitants of Spain.

_Prep._ The pods containing the seeds are gathered when ripe, and after
having lain for a day and a night are opened, and the seeds, which are
taken out by hand, are submitted to what is termed the sweating process.
They are first placed on a sloping floor or in baskets, so that the chief
part of the pulp in which they are enveloped may drain off, and are then
shut up in a close box, and left for 24 to 48 hours, according to the
season and weather, after which they are turned out in the sun to dry.
Upon a nice performance of the sweating process, which may be likened to
malting, the value of the cocoa greatly depends. When quite dry, the seeds
are packed in barrels or bags, and are ready for shipment. The process of
roasting is effected in a metal cylinder, with holes at each end, through
which the vapour generated is allowed to escape. When the aroma is
sufficiently developed the seeds are cooled, and then passed to a 'kibling
mill,' which removes the husks and skins from the 'nibs' (see _below_).

_Prop., Constituents, &c._ Cocoa, when unadulterated, forms a wholesome
and highly nutritious beverage. Its active principle is theobromine, an
alkaloid greatly resembling caffeine, the active principle of coffee and
tea. A peculiar concrete oil, called cocoa-butter, or, more correctly,
butter of cacao, is another important constituent, forming more than half
the weight of the seed. The presence of about 20% of albumen gives to
cocoa its nutritive character.

        _Average composition of cocoa seeds._--(Wanklyn.)

  +-------------------------------+-----------+
  |                               | Per cent. |
  | Fat (cocoa butter)            |  50.00    |
  | Albumen, fibrine, and gluten  |  18.00    |
  | Starch                        |  10.00    |
  | Gum                           |   8.00    |
  | Colouring matter              |   2.60    |
  | Water                         |   6.00    |
  | Theobromine                   |   1.50    |
  | Ash                           |   3.60    |
  | Loss                          |   0.30    |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+
  |                               | 100.00    |
  +-------------------------------+-----------+

Dr Letheby calculated that a pint of cocoa made with 1 oz. of ground nibs
would contain the following proportions of nutritious matters:--

  +-------------------------------+--------------+
  | Nitrogenous matters           |  96.2 grains |
  | Patty matter                  | 218.8  "     |
  | Gum, sugar, and extractive    |  65.6  "     |
  | Mineral matters               |  17.5  "     |
  +-------------------------------+--------------+
  | Total extracted               | 398.1        |
  +-------------------------------+--------------+

_Adult._ Much of the cheap stuff sold as genuine cocoa is shamefully
adulterated. Out of 68 samples of cocoa and chocolate examined by the
'Lancet' commission, 39 contained coloured earthy substances, as reddle,
Venetian red, umber, &c. To some, chalk or plaster of Paris had been
added, for the purpose of increasing the weight. Many of the samples
consisted of sugar and starch, with only sufficient cocoa to impart a
flavour. Cocoas containing a moderate amount of arrow-root or other starch
must not be considered adulterated articles, for it is impossible to
render cocoa soluble, or rather emulsive, without the addition of some
diffusible substance.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

By an examination of the ash the presence of any mineral adulterant may be
detected. Mr Blyth says the amounts of ash in genuine cocoa should never
exceed 5 per cent. The seed of the cocoa consists of husk and seed proper.
Under the microscope the husk exhibits on its surface a number of tubular
fibres, filled with granular matter and minute corpuscles. It consists of
three membranes; the first being a single layer of elongated cells; the
second (forming the chief portion of the husk) of angular cells, enclosing
mucilage, and also containing a few spiral vessels and woody fibres. The
third membrane is very thin and delicate, and is made up of small angular
cells containing minute globules of fat. The seed is composed of minute
cells containing starch. The starch corpuscles are very small, with a
trace of inulin. (See cuts on previous page.)

=Cocoa, Flake.= This is formed by grinding the nibs in a mill, consisting
of two cones, working one inside the other. Pure flake cocoa is not a
diluted or amalgamated article; in other words, it contains no sugar, and
but a trace of starch.

=Cocoa Nibs.= The bruised, roasted seeds, freed from husk and membrane.
They ought to be of a dull-red or greyish colour, but are frequently given
a bright-red colour by a coating of Venetian red.

=Cocoa, Sol'uble.= From cocoa nibs and substances which are readily
soluble or diffusible in water, ground together. Sugar and sago or
arrow-root are the diluents used by respectable makers, but all kinds of
starches, coloured with Venetian red, are used for the trashy articles
which are sold to the poor. No form of cocoa is really soluble, but by the
addition of easily diffusible substances an article is produced which is
capable of forming an emulsion with boiling water. The following are the
principal varieties of the so-called soluble cocoa:--

1. COCOA, GRANULATED. From cocoa nibs and sufficient sugar and arrow-root
to keep the fatty particles from forming a pasty mass. As it is impossible
to granulate the nibs without the admixture of some other substance, those
makers who declare that their granulated cocoas are perfectly pure do not
act honestly towards their customers.

2. COCOA, HOM[OE]OPATHIC. A kind of soluble cocoa prepared with
arrow-root, but without sugar.

3. COCOA, ICELAND-MOSS. From cocoa and Iceland moss, freed from its bitter
principle, cetrarine. This form of cocoa was introduced by Messrs Dunn and
Hewett, and is said to form a very valuable article of diet for invalids.

4. COCOA, MARAVILLA. This is stated to be "the perfection of prepared
cocoa." It consists of cocoa, sugar, and sago flour, the last two being in
great excess.

5. COCOA, CARACCAS. This is similar to the last, being a mixture of cocoa,
sugar, and sago flour. The cocoa used in its manufacture is said to be
imported from the Caraccas, on the north coast of South America, and to
possess a peculiarly delicious flavour.

The amount of flour or starch in these so-called soluble cocoas frequently
exceeds 40 per cent., and the amount of sugar 20 per cent. They have been
not inaptly called "soups."

Within the past year or two a new variety of soluble cocoa has been
brought into the market. It is sold under various names, thus,
'Theobromine, or Concentrated Cocoa,' 'Cocoa Essence,' 'Cocoatina,' &c. We
have examined many of these varieties, and find them to consist of pure
cocoa deprived of about two thirds of its fat. It appears very suitable
for people of weak digestion.

_Obs._ No warm drink that we take approaches cocoa in its nutritive
character, because, while performing to a certain extent the exhilarating
work of coffee or tea, it presents to the stomach a very considerable
quantity of nitrogenous and carbonaceous matter; this advantage is partly
due to the fact that cocoa is taken in the form of an emulsion, instead of
an infusion or decoction.

COCOA FOR THE TABLE is readily prepared from the soluble varieties by
simply pouring boiling water upon the powder. From cocoa nibs, or flaked
cocoa, the beverage is prepared by first pouring boiling water upon them,
and then allowing the mass to simmer from 4 to 6 hours. The cocoa must on
no account be allowed to boil, for in that case a coagulum will be formed,
which cannot be dissolved in water.

=COCOA-NUT OIL.= A species of vegetable butter obtained from the common
cocoa nut--the fruit of _Cocos nucifera_, the cocoa palm. It is separated
from the dried kernel by hydraulic pressure. It contains olein, and a
solid fat often used as a candle material. Large plantations of the cocoa
palm, connected with Price's candle company, exist in Ceylon. Cocoa-nut
oil is often confounded with cocoa- or cacao-butter, which is the produce
of a very different plant, namely, _Theobroma cacao_. See COCINIC ACID,
COCOA, STEARIC ACID, &c.

=COC'CULUS IND'ICUS.= _Syn._ INDIAN BERRIES, INDIAN COCKLES, LEVANT NUT,
LOUSE GRAINS; BAC'CA ORIENTA'LIS, COCOULUS PISCATOR'IUS, &c., L. The fruit
of the _Anamirta paniculata_, a shrub which abounds on the sandy shores of
Malabar, and several other islands in the Indian Ocean. The kernels should
fill at least two thirds of the fruit.

It is a dark, tough, hard, wrinkled berry, about the size of a cherry, and
possesses an intensely bitter taste. The berry consists of two parts, the
husk and the kernel, the former being hard and difficult to bruise, and
the latter soft and containing a large proportion of fatty matter.

_Uses, &c._ Cocculus indicus is poisonous to all animals, and to most
vegetables. It is never employed internally in medicine, but an ointment,
formed by mixing the powder with lard, has been used to destroy pediculi
and in porrigo. Its active principle is picrotoxin, a peculiar
needle-shaped, crystalline substance, possessing all the poisonous
properties of the berry in an exalted degree, and of which it contains
about 2 per cent. Its effects on the system are, to produce giddiness,
convulsions, and insensibility, frequently ending in death. A small
portion of the cocculus indicus imported is used by poachers, and a still
smaller quantity to destroy vermin, the remaining, and by far the greater
part, being employed to adulterate beer and even wine. "In our own
analytical experience we have seldom found this substance in beer
purchased from a respectable house. We have detected it, however, in beers
purchased in the lowest localities in London and elsewhere, but have every
reason to suspect that the adulterants had been added by the publican
himself, in the form of an extract known in the trade by the name of 'B.
E,' or black extract." (Harkness.)

Chemists and druggists are liable to severe penalties if they are found
supplying cocculus indicus, or any extract of the same, to brewers or
publicans. See BEER, PORTER, &c.

=COCH'INEAL.= _Syn._ COC'CUS (B. P.), L. GRANA FINA, Span. The _Coccus
Cacti_ (Linn.), an insect found upon the cactuses of Mexico. It is of
great value as a dye stuff. The female insects, when matured, are brushed
off the plants and dried by artificial heat. The entire insect is used.
There are two varieties known in commerce--silver cochineal, which has a
purplish-grey or silver-grey colour; and black cochineal, which is
smaller, and of a reddish or purplish-black colour. The former is that
commonly met with.

_Adult._ Genuine cochineal has the sp. gr. 1.25. It is commonly increased
in weight by slightly moistening it with gum-water, and then rouncing it
in a bag, first with sulphate of baryta, and then with finely powdered
bone-black. In this way its sp. gr. is raised to 1.35, in consequence of
being loaded by about 12% of useless foreign matter.

Herr Durwell, a German chemist, states that he found a sample of cochineal
adulterated with sulphate of zinc. He thinks the sophistication was
probably effected by immersing the cochineal in sulphate of zinc, and then
in an alkali, whereby the white pulverulent aspect of the genuine article
was imparted, and the weight increased.

The following is a method which has been given for estimating the value of
samples of cochineal:--Grind the samples to be tested to a fine powder,
weigh out 2 or 2-1/2 grammes, and boil this amount in a capacious
narrow-necked flask, with 750 c. c. of water for 1 hour; filter
immediately through dry paper filters, and allow it to cool. To test it 50
c. c. are measured in a flask of that capacity, and poured into another
flask of about 200 c. c., and the measuring vessel rinsed with a definite
quantity of water, say 10 to 15 c. c. A weak solution of permanganate is
then run in from a burette with a glass cock, the flask being shaken after
the addition of every 10 c. c. So much permanganate solution is then added
that the cochineal extract shall be charged from its original colour to a
pink of the faintest shade--almost yellow, in fact, but never reaching a
full yellow. This pink shade should be persistent, that is, it should not
turn yellow after standing fifteen minutes; and after a little practice it
will be found very easy to obtain the tinge, which shows that the
colouring matter is almost but not quite destroyed.

When a number of samples are to be compared, arrange an equal number of
200 c. c. flasks and test-tubes on the table, a tube standing in its rack
in front of each flask. Then the same number of c. c. of the permanganate
solution (which should be, at least, so weak that bulk for bulk of this
and the cochineal solution will be required) is run into each flask,
taking care to use too little to completely destroy the colouring matter
in _all_.

The flasks are well shaken and allowed to stand for ten minutes. Part of
the contents of each is then poured into the corresponding test-tube, and
a glance of the tubes as they stand side by side will show which is the
least affected by the bleaching liquid. This sample having been selected
to serve as a standard, the contents of the test-tube are returned to the
flask, and more permanganate solution is cautiously added, until a very
faint pink tinge, which a fraction of a c. c. will turn to a full yellow,
is obtained. The number of c. c. used having been noted, a fresh trial is
made, in which the c. c. required, minus one, are used, the flask
agitated, and the last c. c. or part of it, as the whole may not be
necessary added.

If the two results agree, the next sample is treated in the same way, and
so until all are tested.

A final trial may be made by measuring 50 c. c. of each solution into its
flask, running in the permanganate in the ascertained amount into each as
quickly as possible, letting the flasks stand ten minutes, and then making
a comparison of all in the test-tubes. If the shades are not exactly
alike, a pretty good guess can generally be made of the fractions of c. c.
required, which should be added, the contents of the tubes being joined to
that in the flasks, and a second or third comparison thus made.

This is a rather long description of what is in practice a very simple and
good process, the three principal points to be borne in mind being--

1st. To use a weak solution of permanganate.

2nd. To have a very faint pink colour as a standard of comparison.

3rd. To let the liquids remain after agitation together ten or fifteen
minutes before comparing them.

_Uses, &c._ Cochineal is principally used to prepare lake and carmine, and
in dyeing. Its colouring principle is freely soluble in water. It imparts
every variety of scarlet and crimson to textile fabrics previously
prepared with alum, tin, and other mordants. It is also used to colour
liqueurs, tinctures, and confectionery. It has been recommended as an
antispasmodic and anodyne, in hooping-cough and neuralgia.--_Dose_, 10 to
60 gr., in powder, confection, or tincture. See CARMINE and CARMINIC ACID.

=COCIN'IC ACID.= _Syn._ COCOSTEAR'IC ACID. A crystalline, fatty acid,
obtained by the saponification of COCOA-NUT OIL. See STEARIC ACID.

=COCK-METAL.= _Syn._ POT METAL. Copper, 20 lbs.; lead, 8 lbs.; litharge, 1
oz.; antimony, 3 oz. Another variety consists of copper, lead, and
sometimes a little zinc.

=COCKROACH.= See BLATTA.

=COD.= _Syn._ GA'DUS MOR'RHUA (Ph. L.), MOR'RHUA VULGARIS (Linn.),
ASEL'LUS (Pliny), L. A fish common in the seas of the northern hemisphere,
from about 40 deg. to 75 deg. of latitude. The flesh forms a most wholesome and
excellent article of food. The best fish are very thick about the neck;
and, when fresh, are marked by the redness of the gills, freshness of the
eyes, and the whiteness and firmness of the flesh. The fish so largely
imported from Newfoundland (NEWFOUNDLAND FISH) are cod beheaded, split
open, gutted, and salted. They are caught by millions on the 'Grand Bank.'
COD-SOUNDS are pickled in brine and also made into isinglass. The spawn is
made into CAVIARE, and the liver is both pressed and boiled for its oil
(see _below_).

COD IS GENERALLY COOKED by boiling it, but is sometimes baked, or cut into
slices and broiled or fried. Cod's head and shoulders with oyster sauce is
a favorite dish. Shrimp and anchovy sauce are also good additions.

=COD-LIV'ER OIL.= _Syn._ MOR'RHUAE O'LEUM, B. P.; O'LEUM JECOR'IS ASEL'LI,
L.; HUILE DE MORUE, Fr. The oil obtained from the liver of the common cod
(_oleum e jecore comparatum_).

_Prep._ 1. The livers, being removed from the fish, are piled on layers of
fir-twigs placed in tubs perforated at the bottom, and are allowed to
remain for a considerable time exposed to the sun and air. As the livers
putrefy, the oil runs out and flows through the holes in the tubs into
vessels placed to receive it.

2. The partially decomposed livers, cut into pieces, are heated in iron
pots without water, and the oil is poured off and set aside to deposit
impurities.

3. (Savory.) The livers taken from the fresh fish are carefully washed.
The large veins are then divided through their whole length, and any blood
in them is carefully rinsed away. The livers are now cut into pieces,
again washed and drained, and afterwards placed with a small quantity of
water in vessels gently heated by steam. As the heat increases, the oil
separates and rises to the surface, from which it is skimmed off; and
after well cooling, to allow the deposit of some of the margarin, it is
repeatedly filtered through flannel bags and finally through paper. This
process gives a fine, clear, straw-coloured oil, having but a slight smell
and taste.

4. (Donovan.) The perfectly fresh livers are placed in a metallic vessel
and heated with constant stirring to 180 deg. Fahr., by which treatment they
break down into a uniform pulpy, liquid mass. This mass is immediately
transferred to calico bags, whence the oil drains out; after filtration,
while still warm, this oil is sufficiently pure for use.

_Obs._ Three kinds of cod-liver oil are usually distinguished--the pale
yellow, pale brown, and dark brown. The latter is the most impure; its
odour and taste are extremely disagreeable. The most conflicting opinions
have been expressed by medical men as to the relative value of the light
brown and yellow varieties. Ozonised cod-liver oil is said to be prepared
by passing oxygen into the oil, and then exposing it to sunlight. Dr
Letheby applied the most delicate tests to this much-vaunted remedy, but
was not able to detect the slightest trace of ozone.

_Prop. and Uses._ Cod-liver oil has acquired much reputation for its
remedial powers in pulmonary consumption, scrofulous and other glandular
affections, chronic gout and rheumatism, certain skin diseases, and
several other ailments. It is generally supposed that the iodine and
bromine, which are present in minute quantities in this fish, are the
substances to which it owes its efficacy. "Dr De Jongh refers its virtues
to the presence of both iodine and the elements of the bile. Our own
researches lead us to infer that one of its most active constituents is
free phosphorus. Good cod-liver oil contains fully .02 of this substance,
as well as about .09 of phosphoric acid. Now, the marked action of minute
doses of phosphorus on the nervous, vascular, and secreting organs, is
well known to every experienced surgeon. The difficulty, however, of
bringing it into a form adapted for administration has hitherto prevented
phosphorus being extensively employed as a therapeutic agent. This
obstacle is removed by the employment of cod-liver oil. Nature has here
provided a simple remedy, which the ingenuity of man has failed to produce
artificially. This opinion is borne out by the facts, that cod-liver oil
cures those forms of scrofula and other diseases which do not yield to
iodine, and that those varieties of the oil are the most active which
contain the most free phosphorus. We, therefore, think it reasonable to
conclude, that the efficacy of cod-liver oil depends on the joint action
of the minute quantities of iodine, phosphorus, and the elements of the
bile which it contains, and not on any one separately; and that no
substance, at present known, can be used as a substitute for it."
(Cooley.)--_Dose_, 1 to 8 dr., in water, syrup, or orange juice; or made
into an emulsion with 1 fl. oz. of peppermint water.

M. Duquesnel states that cod-liver oil flavoured with essence of
eucalyptol, in the proportion of one part of the essence to a thousand,
has neither the taste nor the odour of cod-liver oil. It is taken with
facility, only leaving at the back of the mouth and on the tongue the
taste of the essence. M. Duquesnel adds that the offensive eructations
arising from cod-liver oil are completely corrected.

=Cod-liver Oil Jelly.= Take of cod-liver oil, 85 parts; isinglass, 3
parts; sugar, 8 parts; water, 4 parts. It forms a semi-transparent jelly
of a yellowish-green colour, having a strong odour, but less strong taste
of the oil. The advantages of this preparation are--its easy
administration, complete retention, and assimilation by the weakest
stomach. A teaspoonful is said to be equal to a tablespoonful of the
ordinary oil. A lemon flavour may be imparted to it with advantage if
desired.

=Cod-liver Oil and Lacto-Phosphate of Lime.= (Shinn.) Cod-liver oil, 1
pint; oil of bitter almonds, peppermint, and winter green, of each 10
drops; powder of gum Arabic 4 oz.; sugar, 6 oz.; solution of
lacto-phosphate of lime (60 gr. to 1 fl. oz.), 6-1/2 fl. oz.; lime water,
6-1/2 fl. oz. Mix the gum and sugar in a capacious mortar, and make a
smooth mucilage with the lime water and 3 oz. of the solution of
lacto-phosphate of lime. Add the volatile oils to the cod-liver oil, and
gradually triturate them with the mucilage, until a perfect emulsion is
formed. Finally, add the rest of the solution of the lacto-phosphate of
lime, and mix thoroughly. The solution of lacto-phosphate of lime is made
by saturating a solution of lactic acid with freshly precipitated
phosphate of lime.

=Cod-liver Oil with Iodide of Iron.= Triturate iodide of iron, with
cod-liver oil, 4 gr. to the ounce, until dissolved. HORSLEY'S patent is as
follows:--Dissolve 22 scruples of iodine in a gallon of cod-liver oil, at
a temperature of 140 deg. Fahr., in a water-bath. Add to the solution 8
scruples of iron (reduced by hydrogen), and heat to 180 deg. Fahr., until the
combination is complete.--_Dose_, 1 dr. to 1/2 oz.

=Cod-liver Oil, Phosphorated.= (Lancet.) Pure unoxidised phosphorus, 2
gr.; almond oil, 2 oz. Put into a bottle, stoppered, and immerse the same
in a water-bath; apply heat until the temperature of the oil is about 180 deg.
Fahr., as directed by the B. P., in the preparation of _oleum
phosphoratum_; shake up occasionally, and again put the bottle into the
water if necessary, until a perfect solution is obtained; then add about
10 oz. of cod-liver oil, and again immerse in the water-bath; finally,
make up the measure with cod-liver oil to 25 oz. One drachm so prepared
will contain over the 1/100th of a grain of pure phosphorus.

=Cod-liver Oil, Emulsion of.= Cod-liver oil, 8 fl. oz.; tragacanth, 1 dr.;
powdered white sugar, 4 dr.; oil of gaultheria, 9 drops; oil sassafras, 1
drop; oil bitter almonds, 10 drops, water, 8 oz. Dissolve the tragacanth
and sugar in water, and strain. Add to this first the essential oils, and
then incorporate the cod-liver oil.

=Cod-liver Oil and Hypophosphites, Emulsion of.= (Canadian 'Pharmaceutical
Journal'). Powder of gum tragacanth, 1/2 oz.; glycerin, 3 oz.; water, 9
oz. Rub the tragacanth with the glycerin, and add the water gradually. To
this mucilage add the following solution:--Hypophosphite of lime, 4-1/2
dr.; hypophosphite of soda, 2-1/4 dr.; hypophosphite of potash, 2-1/4 dr.;
sugar, 3/4 lb.; boiling water, 12 oz. Make the admixture gradually with
brisk trituration. To this medicated mucilage add the following:--Otto of
almonds, bitter, 10 drops; otto of cinnamon, 5 drops; otto of canella, 5
drops; alcohol, 6 oz. The whole will now form a semi-transparent
mucilaginous liquid of about 37 fl. oz. in bulk. To this add gradually an
equal measure of cod-liver oil, and mix thoroughly. In practice it is
advisable to work on small quantities, say half a pint of each in a No. 8
mortar. If care is taken the product will be very satisfactory.

=CODE'IA.= C_{18}H_{21}O_{3}. Aq. _Syn._ CODE'INE. An alkaloid discovered
by Robiquet associated with morphia.

_Prep._ Dissolve commercial hydrochlorate of morphia in water, and
precipitate the morphia with ammonia. Codeia is left in solution, and is
obtained in octahedral crystals by spontaneous evaporation. It may be
further purified by solution in ether. By the addition of a little water
to the ethereal solution and spontaneous evaporation it may be obtained
quite pure and in a crystalline state.

_Obs._ The morphia may be recovered by digesting the precipitate in weak
solution of potassa.

_Prop., &c._ Freely soluble in alcohol and ether; soluble in 80 parts of
cold and 17 parts of boiling water. Its solution in the latter, by slow
evaporation, yields large, transparent octahedra. With the acids it forms
crystallisable salts. These possess the singular property of producing a
general and violent itching of the surface of the body when administered
internally. The same symptoms frequently follow the exhibition of opium
and hydrochlorate of morphia, and are referred to the presence of codeia.
The commercial muriate of morphia frequently contains 3% to 4% of codeia.

_Tests._ It is distinguished from morphia by not becoming blue on the
addition of perchloride of iron, nor turning red with nitric acid; and by
not being precipitated by ammonia, when dissolved in hydrochloric acid and
mixed with a large quantity of water. Unlike morphia, it is insoluble in
weak solution of potash, and is soluble in ether. The salts of codeia are
known by tincture of galls throwing down a copious precipitate from their
solutions; this does not occur with the salts of morphia. It is
distinguished from meconia by its aqueous solution showing an alkaline
reaction with test-paper.

=COFFEE.= The seeds or berries of the _Coffea arabica_ (Linn.) or coffee
plant; a shrub of the natural order Cinchonaceae, sub-order Coffeae,
indigenous in the low mountainous districts of Arabia Felix, and largely
cultivated in various other parts of the world. About 40 millions of
pounds of coffee are annually consumed in this country, and the
consumption for the whole world has been estimated at about 600 millions
of pounds. The seeds are roasted and ground, and used in the form of a
decoction or infusion. The term coffee is applied to the prepared beverage
as well as to the seeds. The valuable properties of coffee are mainly due
to the presence of the alkaloid CAFFEIA or CAFFEINE.

Payen gives the following as the composition of the coffee-berry:--

  Water                                  12.000
  Woody tissue                           34.000
  Fixed fatty matters              10 to 13.000
  Gum, sugar, and vegetable acids        15.500
  Nitrogenous matter allied to
      legumin (vegetable casein)         13.000
  Free caffein                            0.800
  Compound of caffein with potash  3.5 to 5.000
  Solid fatty essence                     0.002
  Aromatic essential oil                  0.001
  Saline matters                          6.697

                                        100.000

_Prep., &c._ The finest kind of coffee is that called mocha, from Aden,
but that in common use is principally supplied from the British
plantations in the West Indies. The selection being made, the berries are
carefully roasted in revolving cylinders by a gradually applied heat,
until the aroma is well developed and the toughness destroyed. Too much
heat is avoided, as the volatile and aromatic properties of the coffee,
and, consequently, the flavour, are thereby injured; whilst, on the other
hand, if the berries are roasted too little, they produce a beverage with
a raw, green taste, very liable to induce sickness and vomiting. When
properly roasted, coffee has a lively chocolate-brown colour, and should
not have lost more than 18% of its weight by the process. If the loss
exceeds 20%, the flavour suffers in proportion. The roasted coffee should
be placed in a very dry situation, and excluded from the air as soon as
possible. It loses flavour by keeping, and also powerfully absorbs
moisture from the atmosphere by reason of its hygrometric power.

_Qual., &c._ Coffee promotes digestion, and exhilarates the spirits, and
when strong, generally occasions watchfulness, but in some phlegmatic
constitutions induces sleep. Drunk in moderation, especially if combined
with sugar and milk, it is perhaps the most wholesome beverage known. The
various qualities that have been ascribed to it by some persons such as
dispelling or causing flatulency, removing dizziness of the head,
attenuating the blood, causing biliousness, &c., appear to be wholly
imaginary. In a medical point of view it has been regarded as a cerebral
stimulant and anti-soporific, and as a corrector of opium. As a medicine
it should be strong, and is best taken only lukewarm.

_Adult., &c._ The principal substances used for the purposes of
adulteration are caramel, roasted chicory, roasted locust beans, roasted
corn, &c. Chicory being now charged with the same amount of duty as
coffee, is not considered in a revenue point of view an adulteration;
nevertheless, when we contrast coffee with chicory, we at once see the
vast superiority of the former over the latter, thus:--

Coffee is the fruit of a tree, whilst chicory is the root of an herbaceous
plant, and it is well known that more virtues exist in fruits and seeds
than in roots.

Coffee contains three active principles, viz. an essential oil, caffeia,
and tannic acid, and these exercise a powerful influence on the system,
retarding the waste of the tissues of the body, exciting the brain to
increased activity, and exhilarating without intoxicating. Chicory
contains none of these constituents.

Coffee exerts on the system highly beneficial physiological effects;
chicory possesses medicinal properties, which are not desirable in an
article of food.

Chicory, therefore, is very objectionable, and when a dealer sells a
mixture of coffee and chicory for pure coffee, as is almost invariably the
case, he is guilty of selling an adulterated article, and ought to be
punished accordingly.

The adulteration with caramel or chicory may readily be detected as
follows:--

1. A spoonful of pure coffee placed gently on the surface of a glass of
cold water will float for some time, and scarcely colour the liquid; if it
contains caramel or chicory, it will rapidly absorb the water, and,
sinking to the bottom of the glass, communicate a reddish-brown tint as it
falls. Another method of applying this test is by expertly shaking a
spoonful of the suspected coffee with a wine-glassful of cold water, and
then placing the glass upon the table. If it is pure, it will rise to the
surface, and scarcely colour the liquid; but if caramel or chicory is
present, it will sink to the bottom, and the water will be tinged of a
deep red as before.

2. The brown colour of decoction or infusion of roasted coffee becomes
greenish when treated with a per-salt of iron; and a brownish-green,
flocculent precipitate is formed. The colour of chicory is only deepened,
but not otherwise altered, and no precipitate is formed, under the same
treatment. A mixture of chicory and coffee retains a brownish-yellow
colour after the precipitate has subsided, and the liquid appears brownish
yellow by refracted light. The addition of a little weak ammonia water
aids the subsidence of the precipitate.

[Illustration]

3. Under the microscope (see _Chicory_) the presence of chicory may be
readily detected by the size, form, and ready separation of the cells of
the cellular tissue, and by the presence and abundance of the pitted
tissue or dotted ducts, which are absent from coffee, and by the size of
the spiral vessels, which are very small in coffee. The most
characteristic structure, however, and that by which chicory can be easily
identified, is the lactiferous tissue. Roasted corn, and other amylaceous
substances, may also be detected, in the same way, by the peculiar size
and character of their starch grains.

Under the microscope the berry is seen to consist of a hard, tough tissue,
that resists even long soaking. The testa covering the berry is made of
lengthened cells with oblique markings resting on a thin membrane, almost
structureless. These oblique markings of the cells are so characteristic
as to render the cells distinguishable from every other tissue. The
substance of the berry consists of angular cells, each one of which
contains minute drops of oil. This oil is in some measure driven off
during the process of roasting, which, however, leaves the structure
unimpaired where it is not charred.

[Illustration]

Roasted corn, beans, &c., may be detected by the cold decoction striking a
blue colour with tincture of iodine. Pure coffee is merely deepened a
little in colour by this substance.

4. (A. H. Allen.) The amount of ash in genuine coffee does not exceed 4.5
per cent.; chicory yields 5 per cent. The silica in coffee ash never
exceeds 1 per cent., while in chicory it varies from 10-36 per cent. The
average soluble ash in coffee is 3.24, while in chicory it is 1.74 per
cent. By determining the soluble ash S, the per-centage of pure coffee C
may be calculated thus:--

         (100 S - 174)
  C = 2 ---------------
               3

The density of coffee-infusion is determined by heating the powder with 10
times its weight of cold water, raising the liquid to the boiling point,
filtering, and taking the gravity at 15.5 deg. C. Taking the density of pure
coffee-infusion at 1008.6, and that of chicory at 1020.6, the per-centage
of pure coffee C in the sample may be calculated from the equation

      100(1020 - D)
  C = ------------
           12

where D represents the density of the infused sample. The relative
tinctorial power of an infusion of a sample of coffee is determined by
boiling a given weight with 20 c. c. of water for a few minutes,
filtering, and again boiling the residue until thoroughly exhausted. An
equal weight of a standard mixture of equal weights of pure coffee and
chicory is treated in a precisely similar manner. The standard solution
is made up to 200 c. c., that of the sample to 100 c. c.; 10 c. c. of the
latter are put into a narrow burette, and some of the standard into a test
tube of exactly equal bore. If the tints are exactly the same, the sample
consisted of pure coffee; if chicory is present, water must be added to
the sample until the tints are the same. Each c. c. of water represents 5
per cent. of chicory. The presence of leguminous seeds or cereals may be
detected by boiling the sample with animal charcoal and water, filtering,
and testing for starch in the cold liquid with iodine. Neither coffee nor
chicory contains starch.

_Obs._ A few years ago the attention of the scientific world was drawn to
the value of roasted coffee leaves, as furnishing materials for a beverage
unexcelled in excellence by the coffee berry itself. It appears that the
leaves, prepared for use, may be purchased for 1-1/2d. per lb., or packed
ready for export at 2d. per lb. "That this preparation contains a
considerable amount of the nutritious principles of coffee is evident from
the analysis; but as the leaves can only be collected in a good state at
the expense of the coffee-bush, it is doubtful whether the coffees
produced by the berries be not, after all, the cheapest, as it certainly
is the best." (Jury Report, Exhibition, 1851.) Coffee for the table is
best prepared with the aid of a French cafetiere, or coffee biggin,
furnished with a percolator or strainer, which will permit a moderately
rapid filtration. To produce this beverage in perfection, it is necessary
to employ the best materials in its preparation--fresh roasted and fresh
ground. "At least 1 oz. of coffee should be used to make 3 common-sized
coffee-cupfuls, with 1 teaspoonful of freshly roasted and ground chicory.
If desired strong, the quantity of both should be doubled." (Cooley.) Many
habitual coffee drinkers cannot tolerate the use of chicory, which is a
doubtful improver of coffee. The prevailing fault of the coffee made in
England is its want of strength and flavour. The coffee-pot should be
heated previously to putting in the coffee, which may be done by means of
a little boiling water. The common practice of boiling coffee is quite
unnecessary, for all its flavour and aroma is readily extracted by boiling
hot water. Indeed, all the "useful and agreeable matter in coffee is very
soluble, it comes off with the first waters of infusion, and needs no
boiling." (Ure.) Should prejudice, however, induce the housewife or cook
to boil her coffee, it should be only just simmered for a minute, as long
or violent boiling injures it considerably.

When coffee is prepared in a common pot, the latter being first made hot,
the boiling water should be poured over the powder, and not, as is
commonly the plan, put in first. It should then be kept stirred for 4 or 5
minutes, when a cup should be poured out and returned again, and this
operation repeated 3 or 4 times, after which, if allowed to repose for a
few minutes, it will generally become fine of itself. In all cases, where
a percolator is not used, the liquor should be well stirred up several
times before finally covering it up to settle for use.

Amongst the various descriptions of coffee pots in use we may mention
those of French make, consisting of two cylindrical vessels, the upper
having a metal strainer, on which the ground coffee is placed, and through
which the clear infusion runs into the lower one; Loysell's--an apparatus
making very good coffee, and as one of the latest, an ingenious and
inexpensive coffee pot, known as the "Kaffee Kanne," devised by Mr Ash, of
Oxford Street. Ash's "Kaffee Kanne" consists of an ordinary biggin,
surrounded by a jacket containing boiling water. The coffee is made by
percolation in the inner vessel, and being kept at the point of ebullition
by the surrounding boiling water, yields a beverage of excellent flavour
and aroma.

Coffee is sometimes clarified by adding a shred of isinglass, a small
piece of clean eel- or sole-skin, or a spoonful of white of egg. An
excellent plan, common in France, is to place the vessel containing the
made coffee upon the hearth, and to sprinkle over its surface half a
cupful of cold water, which from its greater gravity descends, and carries
the 'foulness' with it. Another plan sometimes adopted is to wrap a cloth,
previously dipped into cold water, round the coffee-pot. This method is
commonly practised by the Arabians in the neighbourhood of Yemen and Moka,
and rapidly clarifies the liquor, unless a very large quantity of chicory
is present. It should be recollected that the use of isinglass, white of
egg, and all like artificial finings, remove much of the astringency and
vivacity of the liquor.

The French, who are remarkable for the superior quality of their coffee,
generally allow an ounce to each large coffee-cupful of water, and they
use the coffee both newly ground and freshly roasted. A shred of saffron,
or a little vanilla, is frequently added, whilst the percolating
coffee-pot is generally employed. When the Parisian uses a common
coffee-pot he generally divides the water into 2 parts. The first portion
he pours on boiling hot, and allows it to infuse for 4 or 5 minutes; he
then pours this off as clear as possible, and boils the grounds for 2 or 3
minutes with the remaining half of the water. As soon as this has
deposited the sediment it is decanted, and mixed with the infusion. The
object of this process is to obtain the whole of the strength as well as
the flavour. The infusion is thought to contain the latter, and the
decoction the former; a plausible, but erroneous idea, since both of them
were carried off by the first water.

A much better method, and one we can recommend from experience, is to
divide the coffee into 2 parts. Boil the first portion in the coffee-pot
for 4 or 5 minutes, then add the other portion, and allow it to infuse
slowly for about 10 minutes, the coffee-pot lid being kept well closed.
This gives a coffee possessing a flavour which even the French cannot
excel.

=Coffee, Essence of.= A highly concentrated infusion of coffee, prepared
by percolation with boiling water, gently and quickly evaporated to about
1/3rd or 1/4th of its bulk, and mixed with a thick aqueous extract of
chicory and syrup of burnt sugar, so as to give the whole the consistence
of treacle. The proportions of the dry ingredients should be--coffee, 4
parts; chicory, 2 parts; burnt sugar (caramel) 1 part. It should be kept
in well-corked bottles in a cool place. This preparation is very
convenient for making extemporaneous coffee; but the beverage so made,
though superior to much of that sold at coffee-houses, is inferior in
flavour, aroma, and piquancy, to that we are accustomed to drink at home.
Much of the so-called 'Essence of Coffee' is simply treacle and burnt
sugar, flavoured with coffee.

=Coffee, Searle's Patent.= This is prepared by mixing condensed milk with
a very concentrated essence of coffee and evaporating at a low temperature
(_in vacuo_, if possible), until the mixture acquires the consistence of a
syrup (coffee syrup), paste (coffee paste), or candy (coffee candy). The
last may be powdered (coffee powder, dry essence of coffee).

=Coffee, Substitutes for.= These are numerous, but are now seldom
employed, owing to the cheapness of the genuine article, and the
stringency of the revenue laws. Among the principal are the following:--

1. COFFEE, ACORN. From acorns deprived of their shells, husked, dried, and
roasted.

2. COFFEE, BEAN. Horse-beans roasted along with a little honey or sugar.

3. COFFEE, BEET-ROOT. From the yellow beet-root, sliced, dried in a kiln
or oven, and ground with a little coffee.

4. COFFEE, DANDELION. From dandelion roots, sliced, dried, roasted, and
ground with a little caramel.

5. COFFEE, GERMAN. _Syn._ SUCCORY C., CHICORY C. From chicory or succory.
Used both for foreign coffee, and to adulterate it.

_Obs._ All the above are roasted, before grinding them, with a little fat
or lard. Those which are larger than coffee-berries are cut into small
slices before being roasted. They possess none of the exhilarating
properties or medicinal virtues of foreign coffee.

COINS. See MEDALS and ELECTROTYPE.

=COKE.= Charred or carbonised coal. The principle of its manufacture is
similar to that of charcoal. There are three varieties of coke:--

1. KILN-MADE COKE; STIFLED COKE. Made by burning pit-coal in a pile, kiln,
or stove. It has a dull-black colour, and produces an intense heat when
used as fuel. By condensing the bituminous vapours which are given off
during the process, about 3% of tar may be obtained from common coal, and
from some strong coal, by careful treatment fully 10% of its weight. The
screenings of dust coal, separated from the better kinds of bituminous
coal, is the sort commonly used for making coke in ovens.

2. GAS COKE; DISTILLED COKE. The cinder left in the gas retorts. Grey;
produces a weak heat, insufficient to smelt iron.

3. SHALE COKE; MINERAL CARBON. From bituminous shale, burnt in covered
iron pots, in a similar way to that adopted for making bone-black; or in
piles. Black and friable. Used to clarify liquids, but is vastly inferior
to bone-black, and does not abstract the lime from syrups. See FUEL,
PIT-COAL, &c.

=COLCHICIN'A.= _Syn._ COL'CHICINE. COLCHICIA. A peculiar principle
discovered by Gieger and Hesse in the seeds of the _Colchicum autumnale_
or common meadow saffron. It also exists in the corms or bulbs.

_Prep._ Macerate the bruised seeds in boiling alcohol, add magnesia, to
throw down the alkaloid, digest the precipitate in boiling alcohol, and
filter. By cautious evaporation colchicine will be deposited, and maybe
purified by re-solution and crystallisation in alcohol.

_Prop., &c._ Odourless; bitter; soluble in water and alcohol; form salts
with the acids. It is very poisonous. 1/10th of a grain, dissolved in
spirit, killed a cat in 12 hours. It differs from veratria in being
soluble in water and crystalline, and in the non-production of sneezing
when cautiously applied to the nose. Strong oil of vitriol turns this
alkaloid of a yellowish-brown; nitric acid turns it of a deep violet,
passing into indigo-blue, green and yellow. It is not used in medicine.

=COL'CHICUM.= _Syn._ MEA'DOW SAF'FRON; COLCHICUM AUTUMNALE (Linn.), L. The
recent and dried corms or bulbs (_colchici cormus_), as well as the seeds
(_colchici semina_), are official in the British Pharmacop[oe]ia. The
corms are ordered to be dug up in the month of July, or before the
autumnal bud has projected. The dry coatings having been torn off, cut the
corms transversely in thin slices, and dry, at first with a gentle heat,
but afterwards slowly increased to 150 deg. Fahr.

_Dose_ (of the corms), 2 to 8 or 9 gr.; (of the seeds), 2 to 7 gr., made
into a pill or bolus with syrup or conserve; chiefly, as a specific in
gout, to alleviate or check the paroxysm. This drug forms the base of
almost all the advertised gout nostrums. It is, however, an active poison,
and its administration requires care. "After all that has been said
respecting colchicum in gout, and admitting that it rarely fails to allay
pain and check a paroxysm, I would record my opinion that he who would
wish to arrive at a good old age should eschew it as an _ordinary_ remedy,
and consider that he is drawing on his constitution for a temporary
relief, with a certainty of becoming prematurely bankrupt in his vital
energies." (Collier.)

_Antidotes._ An emetic consisting of one scruple of sulphate of zinc
dissolved in water, followed by a brisk dose of castor oil, then
stimulants, and also charcoal.

=COL'COTHAR.= See OXIDES OF IRON.

=COLD.= _Syn._ FRI'GUS, L. The privation of heat. The term is also applied
to the sensation and effects which this privation produces.

When the body of an animal is immersed in an atmosphere at a temperature
below the healthy standard, a sensation of coldness is experienced,
produced by the passage of the caloric or heat of the body into the colder
medium. If this extraction of caloric exceeds the quantity produced by the
vital system, the temperature of the body decreases, until it sinks below
the point at which the functions of life can be performed. This
declination of the heat of the body is gradual; the extreme sensation of
coldness changes into a disinclination for voluntary motion; next comes on
drowsiness, followed by numbness and insensibility. At this point if the
sufferer is not rescued, and remedial measures had recourse to, death
inevitably and rapidly ensues.

The prevention of the effects of cold consists in the use of ample food
and clothing proportioned to the inclemency of the weather, the exposure
to be endured, and the habits of the wearer. The circulation of the blood
should be promoted by active exercise, and any disposition to sleep shaken
off by increased bodily exertion. The principal endeavour should be to
keep the extremities and chest warm, as, if this can be accomplished, no
danger need be feared.

In cases of asphyxia produced by intense cold, the patient should be laid
in a room remote from the fire, and bathed with cold salt-and-water, or
water to which some brandy or vinegar has been added; after which the body
should be wiped dry, and friction assiduously applied by the hands of the
attendants (warmed); as many operating at once as can conveniently do so.
Gentle stimulants should be administered by the mouth, and the bowels
excited by some mild, stimulating clyster. The lungs should also be
inflated, and an effort made to re-establish the respiration. As soon as
symptoms of returning animation are evinced, and the breathing and
circulation restored, the patient should be laid in a bed between
blankets, and a little wine-and-water administered, and perspiration
promoted by heaping an ample quantity of clothing on the bed. Should the
patient have suffered from hunger as well as cold, the appetite may be
appeased by the administration of a limited quantity of light food, taking
especial care to avoid excess, or anything indigestible or exciting, &c.
See ASPHYXIA, BRONCHITIS, CATARRH, &c.

=COLD CREAM.= A snow-white, bland ointment, about the consistence of good
lard, and an admirable substitute for that excipient where expense is no
object, especially for applications about the face. It is commonly sold as
a lip-salve and as a healing application to abraded and chapped surfaces
generally. The ordinary receipts are given under the head of COSMETIC
CERATE (which _see_). The following produces a superior article.

_Prep._ (Dr L. Turnbull.) From white wax, 1 oz.; oil of almonds, 4 oz.;
rose-water, 2 oz.; borax, 1/2 dr.; oil of roses, 5 drops. Melt, and
dissolve the wax in the oil of almonds by a gentle heat; dissolve the
borax in the rose-water, which is then to be warmed a little and added to
the heated oil; lastly, add the oil of roses, stirred.

=COL'IC.= _Syn._ COL'ICA, L. The belly-ache or gripes. The name is
popularly given to all severe griping abdominal pains, without reference
to the cause. There are several varieties of this disease, as noticed
below.

=Colic, Accident'al.= Produced by improper food, and poisons. The
treatment may be similar to that recommended for bilious or flatulent
colic.

=Colic, Bil'ious.= In this variety the pain is intermittent and transient,
accompanied by constipation, nausea, and vomiting. The faeces, if any, are
bilious, dark-coloured, and offensive. The common remedies are, a full
dose of blue pill, calomel, colocynth, or aloes, followed by a sufficient
quantity of Epsom salts or Glauber's salts. Warm fomentations are also
serviceable.

=Colic, Flat'ulent.= Marked by constipation, and the irregular distension
of the bowels by gas, accompanied by a rumbling noise, &c. It is commonly
produced by the use of indigestible vegetables and slops. The remedies
are, a full dose of tincture of rhubarb combined with a few drops of
essence of peppermint. If this does not afford relief, an Abernethy pill
may be taken, washed down with a glass of any cordial water, as
peppermint, cinnamon, or caraway. When the pain is extreme, warm
fomentations to the belly, or a carminative clyster, will generally give
relief. The Editor has found castor oil and Collis Browne's chlorodyne of
great benefit in this complaint.

=Colic, Paint'er's.= _Syn._ PLUMB'ER'S COLIC, DEVONSHIRE C., LEAD C.;
COL'ICA PICTO'NUM, L. The dry belly-ache. It is marked by obstinate
costiveness, acrid bilious vomitings, violent pains about the region of
the navel, convulsive spasms in the intestines, and a tendency to
paralysis in the extremities. It is most prevalent in the cider counties,
and amongst persons exposed to the fumes of lead. The remedies are the
same as for the spasmodic variety. Should these fail, after the bowels
have been thoroughly evacuated, small doses of camphor and opium may be
administered, and sulphuric beer or sweetened water very slightly
acidulated with sulphuric acid, had recourse to as a beverage. Mr Benson,
the managing director of the British White-lead Works at Birmingham,
says:--"Although during several weeks after the addition of the sulphuric
acid to the treacle beer, drank at the works, little advantage seemed to
be derived, yet the cases of lead colic became gradually less frequent,
and since October of that year, or during a period of fifteen months, not
a single case of lead colic has occurred amongst the people." ('Lancet.')
See BEER, SULPHURIC ACID, and SULPHURIC ACID.

=Colic, Spasmod'ic.= Marked by a fluctuating pain about the navel, which
goes away and returns by starts, often leaving the patient for some time.
The belly is usually soft, and the intestines may often be felt in lumps,
which move about under the hand, or are wholly absent for a time. It is
unaccompanied by flatulency. The remedies are warm fomentations, warm
clysters, and carminatives, accompanied by small doses of camphor and
opium.

=Colic, Stercora'ceous.= Marked by severe griping pains and constipation
of the bowels. The remedies are powerful cathartics, as full doses of
calomel, aloes, colocynth, jalap, &c., followed by purgative salts, as
sulphate of magnesia, or sulphate of soda.

=Colic in Horses.= First give the horse a sharp trot, and apply friction
over the belly, and follow this up with a drench of warm gruel to which
has been added a glass or two of whisky or gin. Should these fail to give
relief, let 4 dr. of aloes be rubbed down in a pint of hot water, and when
the mixture becomes cool enough, add from thirty to sixty drops of strong
solution of ammonia. Where the spasms and distress continue severe, and
with little intermission, the physic may be followed in an hour with 2 dr.
of tincture of aconite, given with an ounce of spirit of chloroform, in a
little water, and repeated every hour; soap and water clysters should be
administered every half hour, and friction and hot fomentations applied to
the abdomen.

=COLLO'DION.= _Syn._ COLLO'DIUM, L., B. P. A viscid fluid formed by
dissolving pyroxylin (Schoenbein's gun-cotton) in a mixture of ether and
alcohol. In _surgery_ it is used in its natural state, and combined with
certain elastic and medicinal substances. In _photography_ it is used in
combination with agents that render it sensitive to the action of light.

=Collodion.= _Syn._ PLAIN COLLODION. The following are the best methods of
preparing plain collodion for surgical purposes:--

_Prep._ 1. (Ph. U. S.) Nitrate of potassa, in powder, 10 oz.; sulphuric
acid, 8-1/2 fl. oz.; triturate together in a wedgwood mortar until
uniformly mixed; then add of fine carded cotton (free from impurities),
1/2 oz.; and by means of the pestle or a glass rod, saturate it thoroughly
with the liquor for a period of about 3 or 4 minutes; next transfer the
cotton to a vessel containing water, and wash it in successive portions of
pure water, with agitation and pressure, until the washings cease to
affect litmus paper or a solution of chloride of barium; it is then to be
spread out and dried by a very gentle heat, and dissolved by agitation in
a stoppered bottle with rectified sulphuric ether, 1 quart, to which
rectified spirit (alcohol), 1 fl. oz., has been previously added.

2. (Mialhe.) Nitrate of potassa, 40 parts; concentrated sulphuric acid, 60
parts; carded cotton, 2 parts; proceed as last until the dry cotton is
obtained, then take of the prepared cotton, 8 parts; rectified sulphuric
ether, 125 parts; mix in a well-stoppered bottle, and agitate it for some
minutes; then add gradually, rectified alcohol, 1 part; and continue to
shake until the whole of the liquid acquires a syrupy consistency. It may
be now passed through a cloth; but a better way to prevent loss is to let
it repose for a few days, and then decant the clear portion.

3. (Lauras.) This process only differs from No. 2 in the following
particulars:--The cotton is immersed for 12 minutes, then rinsed 2 or 3
times in cold water, and afterwards immersed in a solution of carbonate of
potassa, 4 parts, and water, 200 parts. Lastly, it is plunged again into
simple water, and dried at a temperature of 77 deg. to 86 deg. Fahr.

4. (B. P.) Pyroxylin, 1 part; rectified spirit, 12 parts; ether, 36 parts;
mix the ether and spirit, and add the pyroxylin. Keep in a well-corked
bottle.

5. (Parrish.) Thoroughly saturate clean carded cotton, 1/2 oz., with
fuming nitric acid and sulphuric acid, of each 4 fl. oz., previously mixed
and allowed to become cool; macerate for 12 hours; wash the cotton in a
large quantity of water; then free it from the water by successive
washings in alcohol, and dissolve in ether, 3 pints.

_Obs._ For success in the manufacture of collodion it is absolutely
necessary to avoid the presence of water. The ordinary commercial oil of
vitriol, sp. gr. 1.84, may be used. Professor Procter, of Philadelphia,
gives preference to the process with the mixed acids (No. 5), and directs
that the cotton should be allowed to macerate for four days. In drying the
cotton great care should be taken to prevent an explosion.

_Uses, &c._ In _surgery_ plain collodion is employed as a dressing for
wounds, and as a protection to abraded surfaces. On drying, it unites the
former closely, and preserves the latter from the action of the air. It is
impervious to water, and being transparent, it admits of the progress of
the wound being inspected when necessary. Such is its adhesive power, that
a piece of cloth cemented with it to the dry palm of the hand will support
a weight of 25 to 30 lbs. The parts to which it is applied should be freed
from moisture. See COLLODIONS, COLOURED, ELASTIC, MEDICATED and VESICATING
(_below_).

=Collodion, Blis'tering.= See VESICATING COLLODION.

=Collodion, Col'oured.= _Syn._ COLLODIUM TINCTUM, L. _Prep._ (Cutan.
Hosp.) Collodion, 2 oz.; palm oil, 1 dr.; alkanet root, q. s. to colour
(say 15 gr.); digest and decant the clear. Colour bears a greater
resemblance to the skin than that of common collodion, whilst it is more
flexible; but it is weaker than the latter.

=Collodion, Elas'tic.= _Prep._ 1. (Lauras.) Heat together Venice
turpentine, 2 parts; castor oil, 2 parts; and white wax, 2 parts; add
sulphuric ether, 6 parts; and mix all with the product of No. 3 (_above_),
that is, to the collodion formed with 8 parts of prepared cotton, 125
ether, and 8 alcohol.

2. (C. S. Rand.) Dissolve prepared cotton (No. 5, _above_), 2 dr., in
sulphuric ether, 5 fl. oz.; then add, Venice turpentine, 2 dr., and
complete the solution by slight agitation.

_Obs._ The collodion made by either of the above processes, when applied
to the skin, forms a transparent pellicle, more pliable and more difficult
to remove than that of ordinary collodion.

=Collodion, Flexible.= COLLODION FLEXILE. (B. P.) Mix collodion (B. P.), 6
fl. oz., with Canada balsam, 120 gr.; and castor oil, 1 fl. dr., and keep
in a well-corked bottle.

=Collodion, Hemostatic.= Collodion, 10 parts; carbolic acid, 1 part;
tannic acid, 1/2 part; benzoic acid, 1/2 part; all by weight. To be
applied with a pencil brush.

=Collodion, Iodised.= This may be made at one operation; it should be kept
two days before being used, but is less reliable if kept for any length of
time than the sensitised collodion described below. It is made as
follows:--Place 16 grains of gun-cotton in a bottle, add 18 grains of
iodide of cadmium in powder, 6 grains of bromide of cadmium in powder, and
1-1/2 oz. of spirits of wine (sp. gr. 0.805). Shake the bottle until the
iodide and bromide are dissolved, then add 3 oz. of ether, sp. gr. 0.720,
and shake until the cotton is dissolved. After settling for twenty-four
hours, decant the clear portion into small well-stoppered bottles.

=Collodion, Med'icated.= It has been proposed to medicate collodion in
several ways, but the practice has not found much favour with the medical
profession. The following preparations have been described:--

COLLODION, ACONITE. From aconite root, by a similar formula to that of
BELLADONNA C. (_below_).

COLLODION, BELLADONNA. _Prep._ Macerate select belladonna leaves,
powdered, 8 oz., in ether, 12 fl. oz., with alcohol (95%), 4 fl. oz., for
six hours. Pack in a percolator, and pour en alcohol till a pint of
tincture is obtained; in this dissolve pyroxylin (gun-cotton), 1 dr., and
Canada balsam, 1/2 oz. Used as a substitute for BELLADONNA PLASTER.

COLLODION, CANTHARIDIN. See COLLODION, VESICATING.

COLLODION, IODINE. _Prep._ Dissolve iodine and Canada balsam, of each 1/2
oz., in collodion, 1 pint. Used as a substitute for IODINE OINTMENT.

=Collodion, Morphia.= (L'Union Medicale.) Dissolve 1 part of hydrochlorate
of morphia in 30 parts of flexible collodion, and apply with a camel-hair
brush.

=Collodion, Photograph'ic.= 1. There are so many methods adopted for
preparing photographic collodion, that a large volume might be filled with
notices of them. We have retained Mr Hardwich's forms, which were formerly
much esteemed by practical photographers, and appended to them modern
formulae which are now, we believe, in much greater demand, and for which
we are indebted to Mr Ernest Spon's valuable book 'Workshop Receipts.'

2. Pyroxylin, and iodide of cadmium, or ammonium, of each 15 gr.; ether,
3-1/2 oz.; alcohol, 1-1/2 oz. Place the two first in a dry bottle, then
pour on the spirits of wine, shake the mixture well, then add the ether,
shake again and let it stand for 12 hours. Decant the clear portion into a
wide-mouthed bottle, keep well stoppered, and in the dark. Avoid shaking
the bottle when about to use the collodion, and never quite use all the
bottle contains, as the sediment which will accumulate at the bottom would
spoil the picture. The preparation of a sensitive collodion, whether
positive or negative, includes three distinct operations, namely, the
formation of the pyroxylin or gun-cotton, the conversion of this into
plain collodion, and the final process of iodising the collodion.

=Collodion, Plain.= Mix in a bottle gun-cotton, 450 gr.; ether, 25 oz.;
spirits of wine, 7 oz. Shake these well together, and leave to settle
several days. Keep well corked.

=Collodion, Pos'itive.= (Hardwich.) To form the PYROXYLIN:--Take sulphuric
acid, sp. gr. 1.845, at 60 deg. Fahr., 12 fl. oz.; nitric acid, sp. gr. 1.45,
at 60 deg., 12 fl. oz.; water, 3-1/2 fl. oz.; mix, and allow the temperature
to fall to 140 deg.; then immerse cotton, 300 grains. (If the cotton is found
to gelatinise or dissolve in the acid mixture, the quantity of water is
too great, and may be reduced to 3 fl. oz.) The cotton should be well
pulled out in pieces, weighing about 30 grains each; and should be left in
the acid for about 8 minutes, the vessel being covered over. It is taken
out with a glass spatula, squeezed to remove acid, washed for at least 24
hours by a stream of water, then squeezed in a cloth, and pulled out to
dry. To form the PLAIN COLLODION:--Shake up the dry pyroxylin, 48 grains,
with alcohol, sp. gr. .805, 1-1/2 fl. oz., and then add ether, sp. gr.
.725, 4-1/2 fl. oz. The solution should be allowed to rest for a week or
ten days, when the clear fluid should be decanted from the sediment. To
prepare the IODISING SOLUTION:--Take of iodide of ammonium, 1-1/2 dr.;
iodide of cadmium, 1-1/2 dr.; bromide of ammonium, 40 grains; powder, and
dissolve in alcohol, sp. gr. .805 to .816, 10 fl. oz. The collodion is
iodised by adding the solution to it in the proportion of 1 part solution
to 3 parts collodion. The iodised collodion should be kept for at least
six weeks before using. If required for immediate use, add a few drops of
an alcoholic solution of iodine, formed by dissolving 5 grains of iodine
in 1 fl. oz. of alcohol.

_Obs._ Mr Hardwich recommends that the cotton, before being converted into
pyroxylin, should be cleansed by boiling for two hours in a solution of
caustic potassa (2 oz. to the gallon), and by being afterwards repeatedly
washed and dried. The purest nitric acid, sp. gr. 1.45, should be
employed, but the ordinary commercial sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) is
sufficiently pure for use. To purify the ETHER and to get rid of a certain
ozonised principle which would decompose the iodising solution, Mr
Hardwich recommends the following process:--Take the best washed ether of
commerce and agitate it thoroughly with a small portion of dilute
sulphuric acid, and then introduce it into a retort, and distil over one
third. The alcohol used is of the strength of that sold for absolute
alcohol; it should be pure.

=Collodion, Neg'ative.= (Hardwich.) To form the PYROXYLIN:--Take of
sulphuric acid, sp. gr. 1.845, at 60 deg., 18 fl. oz.; nitric acid, sp. gr.
1.475, at 60 deg., 6 fl. oz.; water, 5-1/4 fl. oz.; cotton, 300 grains. Mix,
and allow the temperature to fall to 150 deg. Fahr. The weight of the
pyroxylin ought to be 375 grains. To form the PLAIN COLLODION:--Take
alcohol, sp. gr. .806, 1/2 gallon; ether, sp. gr. .725, 1 gall.;
pyroxylin, 1900 grains. Saturate the pyroxylin with the alcohol, then pour
in half a gallon of the ether, agitate for 3 or 4 minutes, and repeat the
process in adding the remainder. Decant the clear liquid from the sediment
after a week or ten days' rest. The following forms for IODISING SOLUTIONS
are recommended:--_a._ (Potassium Iodiser.) Iodide of potassium, 135
grains; alcohol, sp. gr. .816, 10 fl. oz. Powder and dissolve in the
alcohol, previously heated to 140 deg..--_b._ (Cadmium Iodiser.) Iodide of
cadmium, 170 grains; alcohol, sp. gr. .816, 10 fl. oz. Dissolve in the
cold, and filter.--_c._ (Bromo-iodiser.) Bromide of ammonium, 40 grains;
iodide of ammonium, 90 grains; iodide of cadmium, 90 grains; alcohol, sp.
gr. .816, 10 fl. oz. Pulverise and dissolve in the cold. To sensitise the
collodion, add to three parts one part of either _a_, _b_, or _c_.

_Obs._ Most of the practical directions given under the head of POSITIVE
COLLODION apply equally to NEGATIVE COLLODION. Nothing but patient and
intelligent practice will ever lead to success in preparing collodion for
photographic purposes. Although formulae of undoubted excellence may be
used, it continually happens that the results are entirely nugatory from
some trifling cause. See PHOTOGRAPHY.

=Collodion, Sensitised.= Add to 1 oz. of the plain collodion 6 drams of
spirits of wine; 1-3/4 oz. of ether; and 3 drams of iodide and bromide
solution (see _below_). Shake the bottle well; the mixture is then ready,
but is improved by being kept four or five hours before using. In hot
weather a little more alcohol and less ether; in very cold weather more
ether and less alcohol must be used. As sensitised collodion does not keep
well, it is better not to mix the plain collodion and the iodide and
bromide solution until shortly before required for use.

=Iodide and Bromide Solution.= Iodide of cadmium 154 grains; bromide of
cadmium 54 grains; spirits of wine, 3-1/2 ounces. Pound the iodide and
bromide very fine in a mortar, adding the spirit gradually; when the
iodide and bromide are dissolved, pass the solution through a filter paper
into a bottle. Must be kept in a closely-stoppered bottle.

=Collodion, Styptic.= _Syn._ STYPTIC COLLOID. (Dr Richardson.) To a
saturated solution of tannic acid in alcohol and ether, in equal parts,
add as much pyroxylin as the liquid will dissolve.

=Collodion, Ves'icating.= _Syn._ BLIS'TERING COLLODION, CANTHAR'IDIN C.;
COLLO'DIUM VES'ICANS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Tichborne.) Coarsely powdered
cantharides, 6 oz., are placed loosely in a displacement apparatus
(provided with a tap to regulate the flow), and treated with ether from
methylated spirit, 13 fl. oz., and glacial acetic acid, 2 fl. oz.,
previously mixed together. After the fluid has passed through, it will be
found that the _debris_ has retained by absorption 7 fl. oz., which must
be displaced by the gradual addition of methylated spirits of wine, 7 fl.
oz. If properly managed, there is not the least danger of the admixture of
the spirits with the percolated menstruum, as the animal substance of the
flies swells considerably under the prolonged influence of the spirits of
wine, so that the same bulk will be insufficient to quite displace the
ether. The ethereal solution should be made to measure exactly 15 fl. oz.
with a little spirit, and may then be converted into a collodion by the
addition of pyroxylin, 1/2 oz.

_Obs._ The glacial acid plays a double part in this preparation. It
dissolves the cantharidin, and at the same time gives to the collodion
film the essential property of porosity. Ordinary collodion is useless as
an excipient, for it produces a tough and contractile film, which really
screens the skin from the action of the greater part of the blistering
material.

2. (Ilisch.) Cantharidin, 15 gr.; pyroxylin, 20 gr.; rectified ether,
1-1/2 oz.; acetic ether, 1/2 oz.; dissolve.

3. ([OE]ttinger.) Ether of cantharides and collodion, equal parts.

_Use._ Vesicating collodion is used as an irritant. No. 1 was introduced
in 1862, and has many advantages over the other two. Mr Tichborne thus
described the most effectual method of using it in the 'Pharm.
Journ,':--"The part upon which the blister is to be raised should be
painted with the vesicant to the desired extent, bearing in mind that the
blister produced always extends to about one tenth of an inch beyond the
margin of the space covered. Care should be taken to give a coating of
considerable thickness, and to ensure this result the brush should be
passed over and over again, until about 1/2 dr. has been used to the
square inch, or less when operating upon a tender epidermis. It is
desirable to place over the intended blister a piece of oil silk, or, what
is still better, a piece of sheet gutta percha, somewhat larger than the
surface painted, as this will stop the exhalations of the skin, and so
render it moist and permeable. In ten minutes, or a quarter of an hour if
the cuticle is hard, the collodion should be wiped off with a little
cotton-wool moistened with ether, when the blister will almost instantly
rise."

=COL'LOID.= See DIALYSIS.

=COLLYR'IUM.= [L.] In _medicine_ and _pharmacy_, a topical remedy for
diseases of the eye. Formerly the term collyrium was applied to any
medicament employed to restrain defluxions.

=Collyr'ium, Dry.= _Syn._ EYE POWDER; COLLYR'IUM SIC'CUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Dupuytren.) White sugar, 1 dr.; red oxide of mercury, 10 gr.; oxide of
zinc, 20 gr.; mix.

2. (Lagneau.) Sugar candy, 2 parts; nitrate of potassa, 1 part.

3. (Falconer.) Chloride of barium, 1 gr.; sugar candy, 1 dr.

4. (Radius.) Calomel and white sugar, of each 1/2 dr.; opium, 10 gr.

5. (Recamier.) Oxide of zinc and sugar candy, equal parts.

6. (Velpeau.) Trisnitrate of bismuth and sugar candy, equal parts.

7. (Wiseman.) Acetate of soda, 10 gr.; powdered opium, 1 gr.; sugar candy,
1/2 dr.

_Obs._ It is absolutely necessary that the ingredients in the above
preparations should be reduced to an impalpable powder by careful
trituration in a wedgwood mortar. For use, a small pinch is placed in a
quill or straw, and blown into the eye previously opened with the fingers.
On the whole, they may be regarded as unnecessary preparations, and are
unsafe, except in skilful hands.

=Collyrium, Liq'uid.= See WATERS (Eye).

=Collyrium, Unct'uous.= See OINTMENTS (Eye).

=COL'OCYNTH= (s[)i]nth). _Syn._ COLOCYNTH PULP., COLOCYNTHIDIS PULPA, B.
P. BIT'TER AP'PLE, BITTER GOURD, BITTER CU'CUMBER, PEELED COLOCYNTH;
COLOQUINT'IDA, COLOCYNTH'IS (B. P.), L. The decorticated fruit or pulp of
the _Citrellus Colocynthis_ (Schrad.--Ph. L.), or _Cucumis Colocynthis_
(Linn.--Ph. E. & D.). It is an acrid, drastic purge and hydragogue, and
cannot be given alone with safety; but, in combination with other
substances, it forms some of our most useful cathartic medicines.

=COLOCYNTH'IN.= _Syn._ COLOCYNTH'IUM, L. The bitter, purgative principle
of colocynth.

=COL'OPHENE.= Formed by distilling oil of turpentine with concentrated
sulphuric acid. A colourless, viscid, oily liquid; with a high
boiling-point; and exhibiting a bluish tint by reflected light.

=COL'OPHONY.= See RESIN.

=COLORADO BEETLE.= _Syn._ _Doryphera decemlineata._ The Colorado potato
beetle belongs to the family _Chrysomelidae_, and is a native of the
eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains. It measures nearly half an inch in
length, and has a tawny or yellowish cream-coloured body, darkly spotted;
with wing cases which are marked with ten black longitudinal stripes. It
has been gradually migrating eastward toward the more cultivated lands of
the Northern states, until it has reached the Atlantic coast. It is now
found over all the central and northern parts of the United States east of
the Rocky Mountains, as well as throughout Canada, on the potato crops of
all of which regions it has committed incalculable ravages. The leaves and
stalks are the parts of the potato plant principally attacked; the
depredators being, for the most part, the larvae, of which three broods are
said to be produced annually.

In America, we believe, the only means of destroying these insects as well
as their eggs and larvae consists in the application to the plant of the
highly poisonous and dangerous pigment, Scheele's green, a hydrated
arsenite of copper. M. Girard recommends in preference to the arsenical
salt a liberal use of sulpho-carbonate of potash.

=COLOUR BLINDNESS.= _Syn._ DAL'TONISM. A curious defect of vision, from
which the eye is incapable of distinguishing colours. It is of three
kinds:--1. An inability to distinguish any colour properly so called, the
person being only able to distinguish white and black, light and shade. 2.
An inability to distinguish between the primary colours, red, blue, and
yellow, or between these and the secondary or tertiary hues, such as
green, purple, orange, and brown. 3. An inability to distinguish nicer
shades and hues, as greys and neutral tints. The first form is rare; the
second and third are common. Dr George Wilson found that of 1154 persons
examined by him in Edinburgh, 65, or 1 in 177, were colour blind; of
these, 21 confounded red with green, 19 brown with green, and 25 blue with
green.

=COL'OURING.= _Syn._ BRANDY COLOURING, BREWER'S C., SPIRIT C. CAR'AMEL;
ESSEN'TIA BI'NA, L. _Prep._ Brown sugar is melted in an iron vessel over
the fire until it grows black and bitter, stirring it well all the time,
after which water is added, and it is boiled to a syrup. In the making of
brandy colouring white sugar is more frequently used.

_Obs._ Some persons use lime-water to dissolve the burnt sugar. Care must
be taken not to overburn it, as a greater quantity is thereby rendered
insoluble. The heat should not exceed 430 deg., nor be less than about 400 deg.
Fahr. The process, for nice experiments, is best conducted in a bath of
melted tin, to which a little bismuth has been added to reduce its
melting-point to about 435 deg.; a little powdered resin or charcoal or a
little oil being put upon the surface of the metal, to prevent the
oxidisement of the alloy. See CARAMEL.

=COL'OURS.= White light from the sun is of a compound nature, and may be
decomposed into rays of different colours. Newton distinguished seven
PRIMITIVE COLOURS, namely, violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange,
and red. Sir D. Brewster is disposed to think that four of these colours
are really compound, and that three, namely, blue, yellow, and red, alone
deserve the name of primitive. The colours of natural objects are supposed
to result from the power possessed by their surfaces of absorbing some of
the coloured rays of light, while they reflect or transmit, as the case
may be, the remainder of the rays. Thus, an object appears red because it
absorbs or causes to disappear the yellow and blue rays composing the
white light by which it is illuminated. Black and white are not colours,
strictly speaking.

A body is said to be black when it absorbs or quenches a large proportion
of all the rays of white light falling upon it. A body is said to be white
when it receives the white light, and reflects all the rays with moderate
strength. Grey may be regarded as a luminous black or dark white. The
names given to colours are far from being satisfactory, for although many
thousand shades may be distinguished by a practised eye, it is a question
whether there are fifty names which would convey the same idea of shade to
any ten colourists in the world. The names taken from natural coloured
objects, as indigo, violet, orange, lilac, amber, emerald, &c., are the
least objectionable. M. Chevreul has devised an ingenious system of naming
and classifying colours. He employs only 6 fundamental names, which are
those of the three elementary colours, red, yellow, and blue; and of the
three secondary colours, orange, green, and violet. By the direct union of
the elementary and secondary colours, 6 tertiary colours are formed. He
arranges the twelve colours in a circle, like the spokes of a wheel,
commencing with the red, and going to the right, thus:--Red, red-orange,
orange, yellow-orange, yellow, yellow-green, green, blue-green, blue,
blue-violet, violet, red-violet. The chromatic circle is completed by
placing 5 shades between the red and red-orange, 5 between the red-orange
and orange; and so on between each of the other couples. This chromatic
circle of 72 colours is not imaginary, but actually exists, composed of
dyed wools. The shades are distinguished by numbers; thus there are red, 1
red, 2 red, 3 red, 4 red, and 5 red, &c. Each of the 72 shades has,
moreover, 20 different degrees of depth, from the lightest that can be
discerned from pure white to the most intense depth, approaching to brown
and black. These degrees of depth are called tones or tints. The addition
of these tones to the chromatic circle brings up the number of tints to
1440. To indicate any one of these tints we have merely to write the
number of the shade, and after it the number of the tone, as, for example,
3 blue-violet, 13 tone. By mixing each of the 1440 tints with grey or
black, so as to darken it in different degrees, a total of 14,440 colours
may be defined. This part of the system is generally regarded as
unnecessary. Mr O'Neill, in his valuable 'Dictionary of Calico Printing
and Dyeing' (to which work we refer the reader for a full account of
Chevreul's classification), gives a long list of colours and coloured
bodies, which are pretty well defined in common language with the names of
the colours, according to this ingenious system. We select from this list
the following examples:--

  Amber in mass = 2 orange, 12 tone.
  Amethyst = 5 blue-violet, from 3 to 16 tone.
  Blood, ox = 1 red, 13 and 14 tones.
  Butter = yellow-orange, 2 to 3 tone.
  Carrot = orange, 7 tone.
  Chocolate in cake = 5 orange, 18 tone.
  Emerald = 2 green, 11 tone.
  Green, apple = 4 yellow-green, 8 tone.
  Isabelle = 1 yellow-orange.
  Mauve = 3 violet, 8 tone.
  Red-lead = yellow-orange, 20 tone.
  Ruby = red, 11 tone.
  Yellow, canary = 1 yellow, 6 tone.

For notices of DYES, PIGMENTS, &c., refer to the principal colours.

=Colours, Cake.= _Syn._ ARTISTS' COLOURS. These are made by grinding by
means of a glass muller and a slab, the respective pigments previously
reduced to powder, into a smooth paste with equal parts of isinglass size,
and thin gum water. The paste is then compressed into squares as tightly
as possible, and dried with a very gentle heat. Old crumbling cake colours
should be powdered very finely in a biscuit-ware mortar, sifted through
fine muslin, and ground up as above, the gum water being omitted. The
powders rubbed up with honey to the consistence of cream constitute moist
colours.

=Colours, Complement'ary.= _Syn._ ACCIDENT'AL COLOURS. Colours are said to
be complementary to each other which, by blending together, produce the
perception of whiteness. According to Mayer, all colours are produced by
the admixture of red, yellow, and blue light, in certain proportions; and
by intercepting either one or more of these coloured rays in a beam of
light, those which meet the eye will consist of the remaining coloured
rays of the spectrum. Thus, by intercepting the red rays in a beam of
white light, the remaining yellow and blue rays will produce a green
colour; by intercepting the blue rays, the remaining yellow and red will
give an orange; and so on of other cases; so that red and green, blue and
orange, are COMPLEMENTARY COLOURS. If we look for some time, with one eye,
on a bright-coloured object, as a wafer, placed on a piece of paper, and
subsequently turn the same eye to another part of the paper, a similarly
shaped spot or mark will be seen, but the colour will vary, though it will
be always the same under like circumstances. Thus, if the original spot or
wafer be of a red colour, the imaginary one will be green; if black, it
will be white; the imaginary colour being always complementary of that
first gazed upon. The colour so perceived is often called an ACCIDENTAL
COLOUR, to distinguish it from the real colour. It is a general maxim in
design that "colours look brightest when near their complementary
colours."

=Colours, Drug'gists' Show.= See SHOW BOTTLES.

=Colours, Flame.= See FIRES (Coloured).

=COLTS'FOOT.= This popular herb is the _Tussilago farfara_ of Linnaeus. It
is a demulcent bitter, and is slightly stomachic and tonic. It is much
esteemed by the lower classes in coughs, shortness of breath, and other
affections of the chest. The leaves form the basis of most of the British
herb tobaccos, and have been recommended to be smoked in asthma and
difficulty of breathing.--_Dose._ One or two wine-glassfuls of the tea or
decoction (1 oz. to the pint) _ad libitum_.

=COLUM'BIC ACID.= See TANTALIC ACID.

=COLUM'BIUM.= See TANTALUM.

=COMA.= A deep, heavy sleep, from which the patient cannot be aroused. See
APOPLEXY.

=COMACHROME FOR DYEING THE HAIR BLACK.= Nitrate of silver solution, with
pyrogallic acid. (Reveil).

=COMBINA'TION.= In _chemistry_, the union of dissimilar substances. The
great general laws which regulate all chemical combinations admit of being
laid down in a manner at once simple and concise. The laws of COMBINATION
BY WEIGHT are as follows:

"1. All chemical compounds are definite in their nature, the ratio of
their elements being constant.

"2. When any body is capable of uniting with a second in several
proportions, these proportions bear a simple relation to each other.

"3. If a body, A, unite with other bodies, B, C, D, the quantities of B,
C, D, which unite with A, represent the relations in which they unite
among themselves, in the event of union taking place.

"4. The combining quantity of a compound is the sum of the combining
quantities of its components." (Fownes.)

There is a remarkable relation between the specific gravity of a body in
the gaseous state and its chemical equivalent or combining proportion--a
relation of such a kind that quantities by weight of the various gases,
expressed by their equivalents, or, in other words, quantities by weight
which combine occupy, under similar circumstances of pressure and
temperature, either equal volumes or volumes bearing a simple proportion
to each other. This relation accounts for the law of COMBINATION BY VOLUME
discovered by Gay-Lussac, and thus expressed:--

When gases combine, chemical union invariably takes place, either between
equal volumes or between volumes which bear a simple relation to each
other.

Gerhardt assumes that equal volumes of the elementary gases and vapours,
when compared under similar conditions of pressure and temperature,
contain the same number of atoms. Consult the chemical works of Fownes,
Roscoe, Watts, &c. See AFFINITY, ATOMIC THEORY, EQUIVALENTS, &c.

=COMPOUND CHINESE TABLET OF ALABASTER= (John Irvine). A cosmetic powder
for the skin. It consists of chalk, free from injurious metals.
(Chandler).

=Compound Chinese Tablet of Alabaster= (Shand). Identical in use and
composition with the last-mentioned powder.

=COMPOUND SUGAR-COATED MAY-APPLE PILLS= (Dr Scott). Recommended as
"antibilious, cathartic, chemical family pills." Sugar-coated pills,
consisting of bitter extract, powdered podophyllum root, rhubarb, jalap,
and pepper. (Hager).

=COMPRESSES DESINFECTANTES DE LE PERDRIEL.= Charcoal powder incorporated
with paper.

=CONCENTRATED CASTOR OIL in Capsules of Gelatin= (Taylor). 24 gelatin
capsules filled with castor oil, containing .5 per cent. of croton oil.
(Hager).

=CONCENTRA'TION.= The volatilisation of part of a liquid in order to
increase the strength of the remainder. The operation can only be
performed on solutions of substances of greater fixity than the menstrua
in which they are dissolved. Many of the liquid acids, solutions of the
alkalies, &c., are concentrated by distilling off their water.

In _pharmacy_, the term CONCENTRATED is commonly applied to any liquid
preparation possessing more than the usual strength. Thus, we have
concentrated infusions, decoctions, liquors, solutions, tinctures, and
essences, most of which are made of 8 times the common strength. This is
generally effected by using 8 times the usual quantity of the ingredients,
with a given portion of the menstruum, and operating by digestion and
percolation; the latter being generally adopted when the articles are
bulky. When the menstruum is water, a little spirit is added, to make the
product keep. See DECOCTION, INFUSION, &c.

=CON'CRETE.= A compact mass or cement, composed of pebbles, lime, and
sand, employed in the foundations of buildings. The best proportions have
been said to be--60 parts of coarse pebbles, 25 of rough sand, and 15 of
lime; but Semple recommends 80 parts of pebbles, 40 parts of river sand,
and only 10 parts of lime. The pebbles for concrete should not exceed
about 1/2 lb. each in weight.

=CON'DIMENTS.= Substances taken with the food, to season or improve its
flavour, or to render it more wholesome or digestible. The principal
condiments are COMMON SALT, VINEGAR, LEMON-JUICE, SPICES, AROMATIC HERBS,
OIL, BUTTER, SUGAR, HONEY, and SAUCES. Most of these, in moderation,
promote the appetite and digestion, but their excessive use tends to
vitiate the gastric juice, and injure the stomach.

=CONDY'S FLUID= (from England). A weak solution of permanganate of soda.
(Wittstein.)

=CONFEC'TION.= _Syn._ CONFECTIO, L. Anything prepared with sugar; a
sweetmeat, or candy. In _medicine_ the name is commonly applied to
substances, usually pulverulent, mixed up to the consistence of a soft
electuary, with powdered sugar, syrup, or honey. In the 'London
Pharmacop[oe]ia' (1836 and 1851) both CONSERVES and ELECTUARIES are
included under this head, though there appears to be some little
distinction between them.

In the preparation of confections all the dry ingredients should be
reduced to very fine powder, and passed through a sieve, not coarser than
80 holes to the inch; and the pulps and syrups used to mix them up should
be perfectly homogeneous, and of a proper consistence. The mixture should
be intimate and complete, in order that the characteristic constituents
may be equally distributed throughout the mass. The consistence of the
newly made confection should be sufficiently solid to prevent a separation
of the ingredients, and yet soft enough to allow of it being easily
swallowed without previous mastication.

Confections should be preserved in stone jars covered with writing paper,
and placed in a cool and not too dry a situation. Without this precaution
they are apt to mould on the top. If at any time the mass ferments and
swells up, the fermentative process may be arrested by placing the jar in
a bath of boiling water, for an hour or two, or until the whole becomes
pretty hot; when it should be removed from the heat, and stirred
occasionally until cold. Should the sugar crystallise out of the
confection, or 'candy,' as it is called, the same method may be followed.
Or, the mass may be well rubbed in a mortar until the hard lumps of sugar
are broken down and a uniform consistence again produced. On the large
scale it may be passed through the mill.

As remedial agents, the officinal confections possess little value, and
are chiefly used as vehicles for the administration of more active
medicines. See CONSERVES and ELECTUARIES.

=Confection of Acorns.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO SEM'INUM QUER'CUS, L. _Prep._
(Bories.) Powdered acorns, 3 oz.; red coral and catechu, of each 1-1/2
oz.; confection of dog-rose, 10 oz.; syrup of red roses, q. s. to make a
confection.--_Dose_, 1 dr., every 4 hours; in chronic diarrh[oe]a, &c.

=Confection of Almonds.= _Syn._ ALMOND PASTE, CONSERVE OF ALMONDS;
CONFEC'TIO AMYG'DALAE (Ph. L.), CONSER'VA AMYGDALA'RUM (Ph. E.), CONFEC'TIO
AMYGDALA''RUM (Ph. D. 1826), L. _Prep._ (Ph. L.) Sweet almonds, 8 oz.;
white sugar, 4 oz.; powdered gum Arabic, 1 oz.; macerate the almonds in
cold water, then remove the skins, and beat them with the other
ingredients until reduced to a smooth confection. The Ph. E. form is
similar. See POWDERS, COMPOUND POWDER OF ALMOND.

_Uses, &c._ To prepare EMULSION of MILK OF ALMONDS. A little of this paste
or powder, triturated with a sufficient portion of water and strained
through a piece of calico, forms emulsion of almonds. "This confection
will keep longer sound if the almonds, first decorticated (blanched),
dried, and rubbed into the finest powder, be mixed with the acacia and
sugar, separately powdered, and the mixed ingredients be kept in a
well-stoppered bottle." (Ph. L.) The same effect may be arrived at by
simply well drying the blanched almonds before mixing them with the gum
and sugar. The addition of even a small quantity of water or syrup causes
the confection "to become soon mouldy, or rancid, or both." (Brande.)

=Confection of Al'um.= _Syn._ CONFECTIO ALU'MINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (St. B.
H.) Alum (in fine powder), 1 dr.; conserve of roses, 6 dr.

2. (Foy.) Alum, 1 dr.; conserve of roses, 1 oz.--_Dose_, 1 dr., 2 or 3
times a day; in lead colic, and as an astringent in diarrh[oe]a and other
affections.

=Confection, Aromat'ic.= _Syn._ AROMATIC ELEC'TUARY; CONFEC'TIO AROMAT'ICA
(Ph. L. & D.), ELECTUA''RIUM AROMAT'ICUM (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Nutmegs, cinnamon, and hay saffron, of each 2 oz.; cloves, 1 oz.;
cardamoms, 1/2 oz.; prepared chalk, 16 oz.; white sugar, 2 lbs.; reduce
the whole to a very fine powder, and keep it in a closed vessel. When
wanted for use, mix it with water to the consistence of a confection.

2. (Ph. E.) Aromatic powder (Ph. E.), 1 part; syrup of orange peel, 2
parts; mix.

3. (Ph. D.) Aromatic powder and simple syrup, of each 5 oz.; clarified
honey, 2 oz.; powdered saffron, 1/2 oz.; mix, and add, oil of cloves, 30
drops.

4. (Commercial.)--_a._ Hay-saffron, cassia, and turmeric, of each 4 oz.;
cardamoms, 1 oz.; starch, 8 oz.; precipitated chalk, 2 lbs.; white sugar,
4 lbs.; oil of nutmeg, 2 dr.; oil of cloves, 3 dr.; reduce the dry
ingredients to fine powder, and pass it through a sieve (80 holes); then
add the oils, and after well mixing them in, pass the whole through a
coarse sieve (about 40 holes to the inch), to ensure perfect admixture.

_b._ Hay-saffron, 4 oz.; turmeric, 3 oz.; powdered starch, 8 oz.;
precipitated chalk, 2 lbs.; white sugar, 4 lbs; oil of cloves and cassia,
of each 3 dr.; oil of nutmeg, 2 dr.; essence of cardamoms, 1 oz.; boil the
saffron and turmeric in 1 gallon of water, placed in a bright copper pan,
for 10 minutes, then, without straining, add the chalk, starch, and sugar;
mix well, and continue stirring until the mixture becomes quite stiff,
then break it up, dry it thoroughly by the heat of a steam or water bath;
next reduce it to fine powder, which must be passed through a fine sieve,
as before; the oils and tincture are now to be added, and after being well
mixed, and passed through a coarse sieve, it should be placed in a jar or
bottle, and bunged up close. Very bright coloured.

_Obs._ In the wholesale trade this article is kept under two forms--one,
in powder, as ordered by the College, and commonly called for distinction
sake PULV'IS CONFECTIO'NIS AROMAT'ICAE; the other, mixed up ready for use.
In preparing the latter, it is a common plan to make a strong infusion or
decoction of the saffron, and to use it to mix up the other ingredients,
adding the aromatics last. (See 4, _b._) When the price of precipitated
chalk is an objection to its use, prepared chalk may be used instead.
There is much anxiety evinced by the wholesale druggists to prepare this
confection of a rich colour, without an undue expenditure of saffron,
which is generally economised on account of its costliness. This
confection is cordial, stimulant, antacid, and carminative.--_Dose_, 10 to
60 gr., either as a bolus or stirred up with a glass of water; in
diarrh[oe]a, acidity of stomach, heartburn, and any like affection, if
accompanied by looseness of the bowels. In diarrh[oe]a, English cholera,
and flatulent colic, 1/4 gr. of powdered opium may be added to each dose.
See POWDERS, POWDER OF CHALK, COMPOUND.

=Confection of Bark.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO CINCHO'NAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Yellow
bark and white sugar, of each 1 oz.; capsicum, 1 dr.; simple syrup, 4 oz.

2. (St. B. Hosp.) Yellow bark, 6 dr.; ginger, 1/2 dr.; treacle, 3-1/2
oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 6 dr., where the use of bark is indicated.

=Confection of Cas'sia.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO CAS'SIAE (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._
(Ph. L.) Prepared cassia, 1/2 lb.; manna, 2 oz.; prepared tamarinds, 1
oz.; syrup of roses, 8 fl. oz.; mix with heat, and evaporate to a proper
consistence.--_Dose_, 2 dr. to 6 dr.; or more, as a laxative.

=Confection of Cat'echu.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO CAT'ECHU COMPOS'ITA (Ph. D.),
L. _Prep._ (Ph. D.) Compound powder of catechu, 5 oz.; simple syrup, 5 fl.
oz.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 20 gr.; as an astringent, in diarrh[oe]a, &c.;
either alone or combined with chalk.

=Confection of Copai'ba.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO COPAI'BAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Berton.) Copaiba and powdered cubebs, of each 2 oz.; alum, 1 oz.; opium,
5 gr.; mix well.

2. (Swediaur.) Turpentine, 1 oz.; copaiba, 1/2 oz.; mix; add mucilage of
gum Arabic, 1 oz.; triturate to an emulsion, and further add, conserve of
roses, 4 oz.

3. (Traill.) Copaiba, 2 oz.; oatmeal, q. s. to form an electuary; then
add, conserve of roses, 1 oz.

4. (Voght.) Copaiba and powdered cubebs, of each 4-1/2 dr.; yolk of 1 egg;
conserve of roses, 1/2 oz. All the above are excellent medicines in
gonorrh[oe]a.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 dr., three or four times a day, made into
boluses, and covered with the fresh emptied skin of a prune before being
swallowed; in gonorrh[oe]a, gleet, &c.

=Confection of Cream of Tar'tar.= _Syn._ CONFECTION OF BITAR'TRATE OF
POTAS'SA; CONFEC'TIO POTAS'SAE BITARTRA'TIS, L. _Prep._ 1. Cream of tartar
and powdered sugar, of each 1 oz.; simple syrup, 2 oz.; 1 nutmeg,
grated.--_Dose_, 2 dr. to 6 dr.

2. (St. B. Hosp.) Bitartrate of potassa and simple syrup, of each 3 oz.;
ginger, 1 dr.--_Dose_, 1-1/2 dr. to 5 dr. Both are laxatives well adapted
for women and children.

=Confection of Hem'lock.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO CO'NII, L. _Prep._ (Marshall
Hall.) Fresh hemlock leaves beaten up with an equal weight of
sugar.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr. as a bolus, 2 or 3 times daily, where the use
of hemlock is indicated. The confection of other narcotic plants may be
made in the same way.

=Confection of Hips.= _Syn._ CON'SERVE OF HIPS, CONFECTION OF DOG-ROSE,
CONSERVE OF D.-R.; CONFEC'TIO RO'SAE; CANI'NAE (Ph. L.), CONSER'VA ROS'AE
FRUC'TUS (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Hips, 1 part; refined sugar, 2
parts; beat the hips in a stone mortar, rub the pulp through a sieve, add
the sugar, and mix thoroughly.--_Dose_, 60 grains or more.

2. (Ph. L.) Fruit of the dog-rose, without the seeds (carpels), 1 lb.;
pound it to a pulp, add, gradually, powdered white sugar, 20 oz.; and beat
them together until thoroughly incorporated.

3. (Ph. E.) Pulp of hips, 1 part; white sugar, 3 parts; as No. 1.

4. (Wholesale.) Pulped hips, 2 cwt.; fine white sugar, 3 cwt.; incorporate
them without applying heat.

_Obs._ Both this and the confection of red roses have a brighter colour,
if made without heat, or touching metallic vessels. On the small scale it
is generally made by beating the ingredients together in a marble mortar,
but in large quantities by grinding in a mill. Great care must be taken to
remove the seeds (carpels) with the hair surrounding them, before pulping
the fruit, as they are apt, like the hairs of cowhage, when swallowed, to
produce vomiting, itching about the anus, &c. This conserve is slightly
laxative, and is principally used for forming pills. It is very apt to
candy by keeping.

=Confection of Ipecacuan'ha.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO IPECACUAN'HAE, L. _Prep._
(Bories.) Ipecacuanha, 12 gr.; sulphur, 20 gr.; orris root, 1 dr.; syrup
of mallows and manna, of each 2 oz.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, 2 or 3 times
daily; in hooping-cough, dyspepsia, &c.

=Confection of Iron, Subcarbonate.= (St. B. Hosp.) Subcarbonate (peroxide
of iron), 1/2 oz.; treacle, a sufficient quantity.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr.

=Confection of Jal'ap.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO JAL'APAE, C. J. COMPOS'ITA, L.
_Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.) Jalap, 4 dr.; ginger, 1 dr.; bitartrate of potassa,
3 oz.; treacle, 5 oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 dr. as a purgative.

=Confection of Kermes.= (L. P. 1745.) Strained juice of kermes, 3 lbs.;
rose water, 6 fl. oz.; white sugar, 1 lb.; oil cinnamon, 10 gr.

=Confection of Mer'cury.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO HYRAR'GYRI, C. MERCURIA'LIS,
L. _Prep._ 1. Stronger mercurial ointment (Ph. L.), 1 part; conserve of
roses, 3 parts.

2. (Dr D. Davis.) Mercury and manna, equal parts; treacle, q. s.;
triturate until the globules of mercury disappear.

_Dose, &c._ The same as those of mercurial pill.

=Confection of Ni'tre.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO POTAS'SAE NITRA'TIS, L. _Prep._
1. Nitre, 1 part; confection of roses, 6 parts; oil of juniper, a few
drops.

2. (St. B. Hosp.) As the last, without the juniper. Both are used in
gonorrh[oe]a.

=Confection of O'pium.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO O'PII (B. P.), ELECTUA''RIUM
O'PII (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Compound powder of opium, 192 gr.;
syrup, 1 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Powdered opium, 6 dr.; long pepper, 1 oz.; ginger, 2 oz.;
caraways, 3 oz.; tragacanth, 2 dr.; reduce to fine powder, and keep it in
a closed vessel; for use, add to it by degrees hot syrup, 16 fl. oz.
(_i.e._ 3-1/2 dr. of the powder to each fl. oz. of syrup). It contains 1
gr. of opium in every 36 gr.

3. (Ph. E.) Aromatic powder, 6 oz.; senega, 3 oz.; opium, diffused in a
little sherry, 1/2 oz.; syrup of ginger, 1 lb. Contains 1 gr. of opium in
every 43 gr.

_Uses, &c._ This confection is intended as a substitute for the once
celebrated Mithridate, philonium, and theriaca of the old
Pharmacop[oe]ias. It is stimulant, anodyne, and narcotic.--_Dose_, 5 to 30
gr.; in flatulent colic and diarrh[oe]a unaccompanied by fever.

=Confection of Or'ange Flowers.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO FLOR'UM AURAN'TII, L.
_Prep._ 1. Orange flowers, 1 part; white sugar, 2 parts; beat together to
a confection.

2. (Tadei.) Orange flowers, 1 part; simple syrup, 3 parts; evaporate to a
proper consistence. Both are used as agreeable adjuncts or vehicles for
other medicines. The first is the best article.

=Confection of Or'ange Peel.= _Syn._ CONFECTION OF ORANGE, CONSERVE OF
ORANGE PEEL; CONFEC'TIO AURAN'TII (Ph. L.), CONSER'VA AURAN''TII (Ph. E.),
CONSER'VA AURANTIO''RUM (Ph. L. 1824), L. _Prep._ (Ph. L. and E.) External
rind of the fresh orange, separated by rasping, 1 lb.; beat it in a stone
mortar with a wooden pestle to a pulp, then add white sugar, 3 lbs.; and
beat them together until incorporated.

_Uses, &c._ This confection is an agreeable tonic and stomachic; it is
much used as an adjunct to bitter and purgative powders, and as a vehicle
for the sesquioxide of iron.

=Confection of Pep'per.= _Syn._ CONFECTION OF BLACK PEPPER, CONSERVE OF B.
P.; WARD'S PASTE; CONFEC'TIO PIPERIS (B. P.), C. P. NI'GRI (Ph. D. & Ph.
L. 1836), ELECTUA''RIUM PIP'ERIS (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Black
pepper, in fine powder, 2 parts; caraway, in fine powder, 3 parts;
clarified honey, 15 parts; triturate.--_Dose_, 60 to 120 gr.

2. (Ph. L.) Black pepper and elecampane, of each 1 lb.; fennel, 3 lbs.;
white sugar, 2 lbs.; reduce to a very fine powder, and keep it in a
covered vessel; for use, add it, gradually, to honey, 2 lbs.; and beat the
whole to a paste (_i. e._, 2 oz. of honey to each 7 oz. of powder).

3. (Ph. E.) As the last, but using liquorice powder instead of elecampane,
and at once making a confection.

4. (Ph. D.) Black pepper and liquorice root, of each 1/2 oz.; refined
sugar, 1 oz.; oil of fennel, 1/2 fl. oz.; honey, 2 oz.; mix.--_Dose_, of
each of the above, 1 to 3 dr., two or three times daily, for 3 or 4
months; in piles, fistula, &c., unaccompanied with inflammatory symptoms.
Or, it may be used as a suppository. It is intended as a substitute for
the once celebrated nostrum, 'Ward's Paste for the Piles.'

=Confection of Pep'permint.= _Syn._ CONFECTIO MEN'THAE PIPERI'TAE, L. Green
peppermint, 4 oz.; white sugar, 12 oz. Anti-emetic and anti-flatulent; in
colic, diarrh[oe]a, &c.; in the form of a bolus, or made into a mixture.

=Confection of Res'in.= _Syn._ CONFECTIO RESIN'AE, L. _Prep._ (Dr Watson.)
Powdered resin, 1 oz.; balsam of copaiba, 1/2 oz.; honey, 5 oz.--_Dose_, 1
to 3 dr.; in piles and gleet. It is best combined with a little confection
of orange peel, which effectually covers the taste of the copaiba.

=Confection of Ro'ses.= _Syn._ CONFECTION OF RED ROSES; CONFEC'TIO RO'SAE
(Ph. L. & D.), CONSER'VA RO'SAE (Ph. E.), CONFECTIO RO'SAE GAL'LICAE (B. P.),
CONSERVA R. G. (Ph. L. 1824), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Fresh red-rose petals,
1 lb.; white sugar, 3 lbs.; mix as confection of hips.

2. (Ph. E.) Fresh petals, 1 part; sugar, 2 parts.

3. (Ph. D.) _a._ Fresh petals, 3 oz.; sugar, 8 oz. Or--

_b._ Dried petals, 1 oz.; water, 2 fl. oz.; macerate for 2 hours; then add
refined sugar, 8 oz.; and beat to a mass as before.

_Obs._ It is astringent and tonic, but is principally used as an elegant
vehicle for more active medicines. It keeps well, and does not candy like
confection of hips.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 drs., eaten off a spoon, either alone
or combined with chalk; in slight cases of diarrh[oe]a, vomiting in
pregnancy, &c. See CONSERVE.

=Confection of Rue.= _Syn._ CONPECTIO RU'TAE (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. L.)
Fresh rue (bruised), caraways, and laurel berries, of each 1-1/2 oz.;
prepared sagapenum, 1/2 oz.; black pepper, 2 dr.; honey, 16 oz.; water, q.
s.; rub the dry ingredients to a flue powder, then add, gradually, the
sagapenum, previously dissolved in the water and honey over a slow fire,
and mix well. In the Ph. L. 1836 dried rue was ordered. Carminative and
antispasmodic. In flatulent colic, and in the convulsions of children,
when there is no inflammation.--_Dose_, 15 to 60 gr.; either by the mouth,
or made into an enema with gruel.

=Confection of Scam'mony.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO SCAMMO'NII (B. P.),
ELECTUA''RUM SCAMMO''NII (Ph. D.). _Prep._ (B. P.) Scammony, in fine
powder, 24 parts; ginger, in fine powder, 12 parts; oil of caraway, 1
part; oil of cloves, 1/2 part; syrup, 24 parts; clarified honey, 12 parts;
rub the powders with the syrup and the honey into a uniform mass, then add
the oils and mix.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 30 gr.; as a warm cathartic, and in
worms, &c.

=Confection of Scurvy Grass.= (P. Codex.) Fresh leaves of scurvy grass, 1
oz.; sugar, 3 oz. Beat to a pulp and pass through a hair sieve.

=Confection of Sen'na.= _Syn._ LEN'ITIVE ELEC'TUARY, ELEC'TUARY OF SENNA;
CONFEC'TIO SEN'NAE (Ph. L. & D.), ELECTUA''RIUM SEN'NAE (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._
1. Senna, 8 oz.; corianders, 4 oz.; rub them together, and by a sieve
separate 10 oz. of the mixed powder; also boil figs, 1 lb., and fresh
liquorice, bruised, 3 oz., in water, 3 pints, until reduced to one half;
press, strain, and evaporate the strained liquor in a water bath to 24 fl.
oz.; then add sugar, 2-1/2 lbs.; dissolve, and further add, prepared
tamarinds, cassia, and prunes, of each 1/2 lb.; remove from the heat, and
when the whole has considerably cooled, add the sifted powder, by degrees,
and stir until the whole is thoroughly incorporated.

2. (Ph. E.) Senna, 8 oz.; corianders, 4 oz.; liquorice root, 3 oz.; figs
and pulp of prunes, of each, 1 lb.; white sugar, 2-1/2 lbs.; water, 3-1/4
pints.

3. (Ph. D.) Senna leaves, in fine powder, 2 oz.; corianders (in fine
powder), 1 oz.; oil of caraway, 1/2 dr.; mix, and add them to pulp of
prunes, 5 oz.; pulp of tamarinds, 2 oz.; brown sugar, 8 oz.; water 2 fl.
oz.; previously brought to a smooth paste by the heat of a water bath.

4. (Ph. B.) Boil figs, 12 oz., and prunes, 6 oz., gently in distilled
water, 24 oz., in a covered vessel for hours, then, having added more
distilled water to make up the quantity to 24 fluid ounces, add tamarinds,
9 oz., and cassia pulp, 9 oz.; macerate for two hours, and press the pulp
through a hair sieve, rejecting the seeds, &c. Dissolve refined sugar, 30
oz., and extract of liquorice, 3/4 oz., in the mixture with a gentle heat;
and while it is still warm, add to it gradually senna in fine powder, 7
oz., and coriander in fine powder, 3 oz., and stir diligently until all
the ingredients are thoroughly combined. The resulting confection should
weigh 75 oz.

_Uses, &c._ Confection of senna is a gentle and pleasant purgative, and
well adapted for persons suffering from piles, and as a laxative during
pregnancy. The dose is 1 dr. to 1/2 oz., taken at bedtime or early in the
morning.

_Obs._ There is no one pharmacop[oe]ial preparation which it is more
difficult to obtain of good quality than confection of senna. The absolute
cost of an article prepared according to the directions of the Colleges is
greater than the price at which many wholesale houses are vending the
drug. Dr Paris very truly remarks, that "the directions of the
Pharmacop[oe]ia are very rarely followed." Considerable quantities are
manufactured, into which unsound and spoilt apples enter as a principal
ingredient; whilst the substitution of jalap for the whole, or a portion
of the senna, is a very common practice. We have seen the following forms
employed in the trade.

5. Powdered senna' pulp of tamarinds, cassia, and prunes, of each 1-1/2
lb.; powdered corianders, 3/4 lb.; Spanish juice, 1/2 lb.; simple syrup,
12 lbs.

6. As the above, but omitting the cassia pulp, and adding 2 lbs. more
tamarind pulp. Both these articles are labelled "P. L." and sent out as
genuine, and that when no competition as to price exists. The cheaper
article is made as follows:--

7. Common prunes and tamarinds, of each 16 lbs.; treacle, 3/4 cwt.;
species (a compound of senna dust and small senna, mixed with 3 lbs. of
coriander seeds, and strengthened with jalap; all ground to a fine
powder), 18-1/4 lbs. To this is frequently added, of rotten or inferior
apples, 1/4 cwt., which are pulped with the prunes and tamarinds. This
article is commonly labelled "CONF. SENNAE VER." by its manufacturer.

=Confection of Sponge.= _Syn._ ELEC'TUARY OF BURNT SPONGE; CONFEC'TIO
SPONGII, C. S. US'TAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Burnt sponge, 3 parts; confection of
orange peel and hips, of each 1 part; simple syrup, q. s.

2. (St. B. Hosp.) Burnt sponge, made into a confection with
syrup of orange peel. The first form produces the most agreeable
confection.--_Dose_, of either, 1/2 dr. to 2 dr., twice or thrice daily;
in scrofula, &c.

=Confection of Steel.= _Prep._ 1. CONFEC'TIO FER'RI SESQUIOX'IDI, L.--_a._
From confection of orange and sesquioxide of iron (Ph. L.), of each 2 oz.;
white sugar, 3 oz.; syrup, 1-1/2 oz.; mix.--_Dose_, 1 dr. to 3 dr.

_b._ (St. B. Hosp.) Sesquioxide of iron, 1 oz.; treacle, q. s.--_Dose_,
1/2 dr. to 1 dr. Both are given in the usual cases wherein iron is
indicated; especially in anaemia, chlorosis, and amenorrh[oe]a.

2. (CONFEC'TIO FER'RI TARTARIZA'TI.--St B. Hosp.) Cream of tartar, 1-1/2
oz.; tartrate of iron, 2 dr.; ginger, 1 dr.; treacle, 2-1/2 oz., or q.
s.--_Dose_, 1 dr. to 2 dr., 2 or 3 times daily.

=Confection of Sul'phur.= _Syn._ BRIMSTONE AND TREACLE; CONFEC'TIO
SULPHU'RIS, L. _Prep._ 1. Sublimed sulphur, 2 oz.; treacle, 4 oz.--_Dose._
A spoonful night and morning for a week or longer, as an alterative or
purifier of the blood; in skin diseases, &c.

2. (St. B. Hosp.) Precipitated sulphur, 1 oz.; cream of tartar, 2 dr.;
honey or treacle, 2 oz. As the last.

3. (B. P.) Sublimed sulphur, 4 oz.; cream of tartar, 1 oz.; syrup of
orange peel, 4 fl. oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dr.; as a laxative, in piles,
gonorrh[oe]a, &c.

=Confection of Tin.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO STAN'NI, L. _Prep._ (Hosp. Form.)
Powdered tin, 1 oz.; confection of roses, 2 oz.; mix.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 dr.,
every morning; in worms.

=Confection of Turpentine.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO TEREBINTH'INAE, L. _Prep._
(B. P.) Oil of turpentine, 1 fl. oz.; liquorice powder, 1 oz.; triturate
together, then add clarified honey, 2 oz.--_Dose_ and _use_, as the last.

=Confection of Worm-seed.= _Syn._ CONFEC'TIO CIN'AE, C. S. CINAE. L. _Prep._
1. (Ph. Slesvico-Holsat. 1831, and Ph. Suec. 1845.) Worm-seed, 2 oz.; heat
it in a pan over a gentle fire, add white sugar, boiled to a low candy
height, 4 oz.; and stir together until they become dry; then pick out
those seeds which are covered with sugar, and repeat the process with the
others.

2. Powdered worm-seed and syrup of orange peel, equal parts.--_Dose_, 1 to
2 dr., night and morning, followed by a brisk purge; in worms.

=CONFEC'TIONERY.= See CANDIES, DROPS, LOZENGES, SUGAR, &c.

=CONGELA'TION.= The conversion of a substance from the fluid to the solid
state by the abstraction of heat. See ICE and REFRIGERATION.

=CONGESTION.= "A common condition of disease in an undue flow of blood
into any part, or accumulation within it. The vessels seem to lose the
power of emptying themselves, which they possess in health. Congestion,
although an effect of both visitation and inflammation, may exist
irrespective of either. Two forms of it are distinguished, active and
passive. The first is when some excitement causes the blood to pass more
rapidly into a part than its vessels can transmit out of it; the second
when from some inherent debility the vessels cannot get rid of the fluid
ordinarily thrown into them. Congestion of organs disturb their functions,
and through them the general health."

=CONGLU'TINUM (Bracy Clarke's).= Sulphate of zinc (white vitriol), 4 oz.;
dissolved in water, 1 pint. Used as an astringent lotion in veterinary
practice, and much diluted with water (a dessert-spoonful to 1/4 pint or
more of water), as a collyrium in chronic inflammation of the eyes.

=CO'NIA.= C_{8}H_{15}O. _Syn._ CO'NINE, CON'ICINE. An alkaloid, discovered
by Gieseke in hemlock. It exists in every part of the plant, but is
present in the largest quantity in the seed.

_Prep._ (Gieger.) The seeds of hemlock, or their alcoholic extracts, is
distilled with water and potassa. The conia passes over into the receiver,
and floats on the top of the water, which also contains a little conine in
solution. It is purified in the way directed for the volatile bases. (See
ALKALOID.) When the alcoholic extract is employed, about half its weight
of potassa should be used.

_Prop., &c._ Pure conia is an oily-looking liquid, smelling intensely of
hemlock, or rather of a combination of the odours of tobacco and mice;
volatile at common temperatures; reddens turmeric; boils at about 340 deg.
Fahr., but readily distils over with water at 212 deg.; sp. gr. .89; with the
acids it forms salts, some of which are crystallisable. Six lbs. of fresh
and 9 lbs. of dried seeds yielded 1 oz. of conia. (Gieger.) Forty lbs. of
the ripe but green seeds yielded 2-1/2 oz. of hydrated conia.
(Christison.)

Conia is remarkably poisonous. 1 drop, placed in the eye of a rabbit,
killed it in 9 minutes; 5 drops, poured into the throat of a dog, killed
it in less than a minute. It has been employed in some convulsive and
spasmodic diseases, but is now seldom used medicinally. "The patient
cries, the contortions, and the rigidity of the limbs, which have always
preceded death (caused by conia), leave no doubt as to the cruel pains
which this kind of poisoning brings on." (Boutron-Chalard and Henry.) The
treatment may be that recommended under ACONITE and HEMLOCK.

=CONSERVATEUR FUR HAARBLEINDE.= A preventive of hair diseases (Edm.
Buehligen, Leipzig). Consists of 10 grammes tinct. arnica, 5 grammes
glycerine, 10 grammes spirit, and 60 grammes water. (Schaedler.)

=CON'SERVE.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA, L. Recent vegetable matter, as flowers,
herbs, roots, fruit, and seed, beaten with powdered sugar to the
consistence of a stiff paste, so as to preserve them as nearly as possible
in their natural freshness. Conserves are made both by the confectioner
and the druggist; by the first as SWEETMEATS; by the other chiefly as
vehicles for more active medicines. The London College of Physicians now
includes both conserves and electuaries under the general head of
CONFECTIONS. The term appears, however, in some cases, scarcely
appropriate. The word confection has a more general application, and
implies any sweetmeat or composition in which sugar is the principal
ingredient. See CONFECTION and ELECTUARY.

=Conserve of Ac'etate of Potas'sa.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA POTAS'SAE ACETA'TIS,
L. _Prep._ (Bories.) Acetate of potassa, 1/2 oz.; sulphate of soda, 1 dr.;
juices of scurvy grass, fumitory, and dandelion, of each 2 oz. (reduced to
one half by gentle evaporation?; sugar, q. s. to make a conserve. A
teaspoonful 2 or 3 times daily, as a diuretic aperient; in obstruction of
the bowels, &c.

=Conserve of Al'monds.= See CONFECTIONS.

=Conserve of Angel'ica.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA ANGEL'ICAE, L. _Prep._
(Giordano.) Fresh angelica root, 2 parts; water, 16 parts; macerate for a
few hours, clarify the liquor, add sugar, 3 parts; cook the root in the
syrup, and preserve it in this state (confection), or dry it (to a candy).
Used as an agreeable tonic, stomachic, and carminative.

=Conserve, Antiscorbu'tic.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA ANTISCORBU'TICA, L. _Prep._
(Selle.) Horse-radish, water-cress, and water-trefoil, orange-juice, and
radish-juice, equal parts; powdered white sugar, q. s. to make a conserve.
In scurvy, &c.

=Conserve of A''rum.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA A''RI, C. A. MACULA'TI, L. _Prep._
From fresh arum tubers (cuckow-pint or wake-robin), 1/2 lb.; sugar, 2-1/2
lbs. As a diuretic and attenuant in dropsy, or as an expectorant in
chronic coughs.--_Dose_, 1/2 teaspoonful, gradually increased.

=Conserve of Broom.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA SCOPA''RII, L. _Prep._ (Van Mons.)
Broom flowers, 1 part; sugar, 2 parts.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 teaspoonfuls, 2
or 3 times a day; in dropsy, gout, rheumatism, &c.

=Conserve of Hips.= See CONFECTION.

=Conserve of Lavender.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA LAVENDU'LAE, L. Lavender flowers,
1 part; powdered lump sugar, 3 parts; beaten together to a smooth paste.
Used to sweeten the breath. In a similar way conserves are made from
various other leaves and flowers; but mostly with only twice their weight
of sugar, when they are not very odorous or active.

=Conserve of Lem'on Peel.= _Syn._ CONSERVA LIMO'NIS, C. L. CORT'ICIS, L.
As CONFECTION OF ORANGE PEEL.

=Conserve of Mal'lows.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA MAL'VAE, L. From the flowers, as
CONSERVE OF LAVENDER.

=Conserve of Or'ange Peel.= See CONFECTION.

=Conserve of Pep'permint.= See CONFECTION.

=Conserve of Rose'mary.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA ROSMARI'NI, L. As CONSERVE OF
LAVENDER.

=Conserve of Roses.= 1. See CONFECTION.

2. (ACIDULA'TED CONSERVE OF ROSES CONSER'VA RO'SAE AC'IDA, L.) _Prep._
(Hosp. F.) Confection of roses and powdered gum, of each 1 oz.; sulphuric
acid, 1 dr. to 1-1/2 dr.; (diluted with) water, 2 dr. An excellent
substitute for tamarinds.

=Conserve of Sav'in.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA SABI'NAE, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Han.)
Fresh savin, 1 part; sugar, 2 parts. As an emmenagogue, in amenorrh[oe]a,
&c. Three parts of sugar make a better conserve.

=Conserve of Scurvy Grass.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA COCHLEA''RIAE, C. C.
HORTEN'SIS, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Aust. 1836.) Fresh scurvy grass, 1 lb.; sugar,
3 lbs. Stimulant and antiscorbutic.

=Conserve of Sea Worm'wood.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA ABSINTH'II MARITI'MI, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. L. 1788.) From sea wormwood, as the last. As a stomachic
bitter and vermifuge; in dyspepsia, &c.

=Conserve of Sloes.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA PRU'NI SYLVES'TRI, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
L. 1788.) From the pulp of the fruit, 1 part; sugar, 3 parts. Astringent.
Useful in simple diarrh[oe]a, &c.; either alone or combined with chalk.

=Conserve of Squills.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA SCIL'LAE, L. _Prep._ (Ph. L. 1788.)
Fresh squills, 1 oz.; sugar, 5 oz. Diuretic, attenuant, and expectorant;
in dropsy, chronic coughs, &c.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr.

=Conserve of Tam'arinds.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA TAMARIND'ORUM, L. _Prep._ (P.
Cod.) Tamarind pulp, 2 oz.; white sugar, 3 oz.; evaporate by the heat of a
water bath to the consistence of honey.

=Conserve of Vi'olets.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA VIO'LAE, C. V. ODORA'TAE, L.
_Prep._ (Soubeiran.) Flowers, 1 part; sugar, 3 parts; beat to a paste.
Demulcent and laxative; used as a purge for infants, and by ladies to
perfume the breath.

=Conserve of Wa'ter-cress.= _Syn._ CONSER'VA NASTUR''TII, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
Graeca, 1837.) From fresh water-cresses, as the last. In scurvy; taken _ad
libitum_.

=Conserve of Worm'wood.= See CONSERVE OF SEA WORMWOOD.

=CONSTIPA'TION.= _Syn._ CONSTIPA'TIO, OBSTIPA'TIO, L. Surgeons distinguish
between costiveness and constipation. The first applies to that condition
of the body in which the bowels act tardily, and in which the faeces are
abnormally and inconveniently indurated; the last implies the absence of
the proper alvine evacuations. The one rapidly undermines the health; the
other destroys life in a period varying from a few days to three or four
weeks. In popular language, however, the words are frequently used
synonymously. The use of bread containing alum, and water containing much
lime (very hard water), and especially the want of sufficient exercise,
are common causes of constipation.

_Treatment._ When the affection is merely accidental or occasional, a dose
of some aperient or cathartic is the only treatment necessary; but when it
is habitual it calls for further attention. Great benefit may generally be
secured by adopting a diet free from astringents, and consisting of a
large portion of green vegetables and ripe fruit; particularly avoiding
the use of over-cooked, salted, or dried animal food. Brown bread may be
eaten, as it acts as a gentle laxative, from the bran it contains. The
occasional use of aperient and emollient enemata may be had recourse to;
but their habitual administration, as well as that of purgative medicines
generally, by the mouth, is not to be recommended. The bowels, accustomed
to the continual use of stimulants, act but languidly or scarcely at all
without their application. In females, especially of the higher classes,
the want of proper exercise is commonly the chief cause of this affection.
With such persons a short walk, two or three times daily, will often do
wonders, particularly if a little ripe fruit, a few raisins or tamarinds,
or, still better, 2 or 3 drum figs, be occasionally eaten. In some cases
of obstinate constipation a cold-water dressing, placed over the pit of
the stomach or the abdomen, will cause the bowels to act in the course of
an hour or two. When the inactivity of the bowels arises from a deficiency
of bile (one of the most common causes), no remedy is more natural, or
more effective, than inspissated ox-gall. In cases complicated with
nervous, hypochondriacal, or hysterical affections, in chlorosis,
dyspepsia, depraved appetite, and numerous other ailments, this remedy
frequently succeeds, after the most active articles of the materia medica
have been tried in vain.

In the treatment of the constipation of infants, castor-oil (1/2
teaspoonful occasionally), or manna 1/4 to 1/2 oz., sucked at will, may be
given. The introduction (very gently) of a little slip of writing paper,
parsley stalk, or suet, is a method sometimes adopted successfully by
nurses. Friction on the stomach and bowels with the warm hand, or a piece
of soft flannel, should also be employed. See GALL, PURGATIVE, &c.

_Treatment for Animals._ Mr Finlay Dun prescribes laxative clysters,
aloes, or oils. Calomel for horses; croton and gamboge for cattle. Salts,
calomel and jalap, castor oil, linseed oil, and emetics for carnivora. Oil
of turpentine by mouth or rectum; clysters of tobacco, nux vomica,
electricity.

_Treatment for Horses._ When the animal is constipated administer 4 dr. of
aloes and 1 dr. of calomel, rubbed down with gruel; inject soap and water
every hour, taking care to let the horse have walking exercise, and to
apply friction to the belly. If, after twelve hours, no effect is
produced, let the aloes and calomel be repeated, with the addition of
three or four drops of croton oil and a wine-glassful of spirit of nitre,
ether, gin, or whisky.

=CONSTITUTION BALLS=, Vegetable (A. H. Boldt). Two parallelopiped hard
brown balls, each of which weighs 58 grammes, and is made by melting
together 2 parts of aloes and 1 part coarsely powdered gentian. (Hager).

=CONSUMP'TION.= See PHTHISIS.

=CONTA'GION.= By 'contagion' is usually meant the communication of disease
by means either of actual contact or through a medium, such as the air. By
some a contagious disease is regarded as one arising from direct contact
only, in contradistinction to an infectious one, which is believed to act
at a distance. See DISINFECTANT.

=CONTU'SION.= A hurt, or injury to the flesh, such as might be caused by a
blunt instrument or by a fall, without breach or apparent wound. For
treatment, see BRUISE.

=CONVALESCENCE.= Convalescence may be described as the period between the
cessation of an attack of serious illness and the restoration, if not to a
perfect, to an accustomed state of health. Convalescent patients should
particularly guard against excess in eating or drinking, or unnecessary
and imprudent exposure to cold or damp weather, during this interval, as
well as against premature exertion of the limbs or voice; such and all of
which are acts of imprudence that may give rise to a return of the
disease. In order to avoid this latter risk, as well as to aid in complete
recovery, repose both of body and mind are generally needed, more
particularly in the earlier stages of convalescence.

It should be borne in mind that convalescents from many infectious
diseases, such as measles, scarlet fever, smallpox, typhus, &c., are much
more likely to propagate these diseases than when they are labouring under
them in the acute form. During the period of their recovery the skin and
other organs are throwing off the poison in large quantities, and thus
exposing those in contact with, or in the near neighbourhood of the
convalescent, to the great and imminent risk of contagion. Even if not
contagious himself, the convalescent's clothes, if they be the same as
those worn by him during his illness, may also convey the disease.

=CONVULSIONS.= Spasmodic contractions of the muscles producing motions of
the limbs, generally accompanied with unconsciousness. Convulsions occur
at all periods of life, but in adults they are only symptoms of other
diseases. In children they are very common. They are of frequent
occurrence in teething; and a swollen and inflamed state of the gums is
said to excite them. Dr Gardner, in his very useful work, 'Household
Medicine,' says they may be brought on by "improper food, _e.g._ the milk
of a nurse suffering from some violent emotion. At the siege of Berlin
nearly all the suckling children died of convulsions." They may also be
induced by feverish attacks, hooping-cough, strong purgatives, or
suppressed eruptions. In the case of a dangerous attack of convulsion no
time should be lost in sending for a medical practitioner. Pending his
arrival, the patient should be placed as promptly as possible in a
hot-water bath. A better plan is to loosen all the dress, to place the
child across the arms, and sway it up and down gently, and to allow cool
air to play on the face and chest; give an enema of soap and water, and
apply mustard plasters for a few seconds only to the pit of the stomach.
If these fail to give relief, apply leeches (number according to the age)
to the temples, and cold to the head. Lance the gums if inflamed. When the
fit is over keep the head cool. If there have been white stools, give a
grain or two of calomel, and repeat it every three or four hours for three
or four times until the stools become green or dark. Keep the bowels open
by castor oil, and let the patient be put on a milk diet. The latter part
of the above treatment is inserted for the benefit of the emigrant or
other individual having no means of obtaining proper medical aid.

=COPAHINE.= Copaiba balsam made into a mass with wax and powdered cubebs,
divided into hard egg-shaped pills weighing 5 decigrammes each and sugar
coated.

=COPAHINE MEGE DE JOZEAU.= A fixed quantity of copaiba balsam is mixed
with concentrated nitric acid, and constantly stirred as long as
effervescence continues. The oxidised balsam is then washed, first with
warm then with cold water, till the washings cease to have an acid
reaction. From one part of this balsamum copaivae acido nitrico correctum
with 1/10 part powdered cubebs, 1/10 part bicarbonate of soda, 1/16 part
calcined magnesia, with some mucilage, a mass is prepared and divided into
oval pills, which are afterwards coated with sugar, mixed with gum and
carmine.

=COPAI'BA.= _Syn._ COPAI'VA, COPAIVA BALSAM, CAPIV'I, BALSAM OF CAPIV'I;
COPAI'BA (Ph. L. E. & D.), L.; BAUME DE COPAHU, Fr.; COBAIVA BALSAM, Ger.
"The oleo-resin, of a brown colour, obtained by incision from the trunk of
Copaifera multijuga." (B. P.) Most of the balsam of commerce is obtained
from Para and Maranhao. It is packed in casks containing from 1 to 1-1/2
cwt. each, or in large bottles, or in cylindrical tin boxes.

_Prop., Purific., &c._ Copaiba, though usually called a 'balsam,' is not
correctly so named, as it contains no benzoic or cinnamic acid. It is
correctly described in the B. P. as an 'oleo-resin.' Considerable
variation exists in the colour, odour, consistence, and transparency, as
well as in the proportion of oil and resin yielded by different samples,
scarcely any two of which exactly agree. The sp. gr. varies from .950 to
.996. Brazilian copaiba is thin, clear, and pale; whilst the West Indian
variety is thick, golden yellow, less transparent, and has a less
agreeable and somewhat terebinthinate smell. Some varieties are opaque,
and continue so unless filtered. This is often a most troublesome
operation. The opacity generally arises from the presence of water, which
it retains with great tenacity. The following is the plan we have found to
answer on the large scale:--Place the casks upon their ends in a warm
situation, and leave them so for 10 days or a fortnight, or longer, if
convenient. They may then be tapped a little above the bottom, when the
contents of some of them will generally be found quite transparent, and
may be drawn off and vatted, care being taken to avoid shaking up the
bottom. The copaiva that remains foul must be filtered through one or more
long Canton flannel bags, sunk in the bottom of a tin cistern, placed over
a suitable receiver, in a similar way to that adopted for oils; a few
pounds of coarsely powdered charcoal being mixed up with the first 5 or 6
gallons thrown in. This will rapidly fill up the pores of the bag, and
make the balsam soon flow clear and pale. The "bottoms" of the casks,
containing the water and impurities, may be poured into a large can or
jar, and allowed to settle for a few days, when the copaiba may be poured
off the top and filtered. A sudden change of temperature will frequently
turn a transparent sample of this article opaque or milky; it is not,
therefore, deemed fit to send out by the wholesale trade, unless it stands
this test. To ascertain this point a common practice is to fill a small
bottle with the copaiba, and to leave it out of doors all night in an
exposed situation.

_Pur., Tests, &c._ This substance is frequently adulterated; indeed, fully
one half that sold for copaiba does not contain 10% of the genuine balsam.
This is particularly the case with that sold in capsules, at low prices,
in the shops. Pure balsam of copaiba may be recognised by the following
characters:--

1. (Ph. E.) It is transparent; free of turpentine odour when heated;
soluble in 2 parts of alcohol; and dissolves one fourth of its weight of
carbonate of magnesia with the aid of a gentle heat, and continues
translucent.

2. (Chevallier.) A drop of the balsam, placed on a piece of unsized paper,
and heated until all the essential oil is expelled, forms a
semi-transparent, well-defined spot; but if the balsam has been
adulterated with a fatty oil, it is surrounded by an oily areola.

3. (Planche.) 2-1/2 parts of balsam shaken with 1 part of solution of
ammonia, sp. gr. .965, forms a mixture which becomes clear and transparent
in a few moments, and may be heated to 212 deg. Fahr. without becoming opaque.

4. (Vigne.) Boiled with 50 times its weight of water for 1 hour, it should
lose at least half its weight.

5. (Adder.) By agitating the suspected sample with a lye of caustic soda,
and setting the mixture aside to repose, the balsam after a time rises to
the surface, and the fatty oil present (if any) forms a soapy, thick mass
below.

6. ('Journ. de Pharm.,' 1842.) Pure copaiba may be adulterated with 50 per
cent. of a fat oil (nut, almond, or castor oil), without it ceasing to
give a clear solution with 2 parts of alcohol; but it combines badly with
magnesia and ammonia. Excess of alcohol, however, separates the oil in all
cases. It was formerly considered that the best test for detecting the fat
oils was pure alcohol, to which some caustic potash had been added.

7. (Dr Hager.) Copaiba which is adulterated with Gurgun balsam is not
quite clear, and frequently exhibits prisms of gurginic acid under the
microscope. The author states that the adulteration may be easily detected
by mixing the suspected sample with four volumes of petroleum ether; the
mixture at once becomes turbid, and gradually deposits a sediment, which,
after half an hour's settling, occupies the same volume as the copaiba
operated upon. A mixture of pure copaiba with petroleum ether is clear at
first, and either remains clear upon standing or it deposits after several
hours a very slight sediment, which merely covers the bottom of the test
tube like a thin film. Benzol may be used in place of petroleum ether.

8. (Muter.) Three to four grams of the sample are weighed into a clean,
dry flask, and saponified on the water bath with 50 c. c. of alcohol, and
a lump of caustic soda weighing not less than 5 grams. When all is
dissolved water is added, and the whole washed into a half-pint basin, so
as to nearly fill it, and evaporated to 100 c. c. over a low gas flame.
Dilute sulphuric acid is then added till the whole just becomes
permanently turbid, and then solution of caustic soda is dropped in till
it just clears again. By this means a solution is obtained with the least
possible excess of alkali, and with a good amount of sodium sulphate. The
whole is now to be evaporated to _perfect dryness_ on the water bath,
stirring towards the end, so that the sulphate may mix with the soaps, and
produce an easy pulverulent residue. The residue is moved from the basin
into a small, wide-mouthed, stoppered bottle, treated with 70 c. c. of
ether-alcohol, and well shaken up. As soon as it is fairly settled the
fluid is filtered off through a _quick_ filter, and this is repeated with
two successive quantities of 70 c. c., making 210 c. c. in all of the
solvent used. The residue in the bottle and in the filter now consists of
sodium oleate and sulphate if the balsam be impure, and of the latter only
if pure, with a little trace of the insoluble resin soap already referred
to. The contents of the bottle and filter are then dissolved in warm
water, and after heating until all smell of ether is gone the whole is
boiled freely acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and set to cool.

If, when cold, nothing but a few specks of brown resin should rise to the
surface, the balsam is pure; but if an oily layer be formed it is
adulterated, and the smell of the separated oleic acid will at once
determine whether it is actually castor oil or not.

In the case of the presence of oil, 2 grams of pure and dry white wax are
added, and the whole heated till the wax melts with the oleic acid. On
cooling, a solid cake is formed, which is detached from the side of the
beaker, and the fluid below passed through a filter. The cake is once more
melted in boiling water, cooled, detached, dried by gentle pressure
between blotting paper, dried in a water-oven in a weighed platinum dish,
and then weighed, and the weight of the wax used deducted. The beaker,
filter, rod, &c., used are, if at all dirty, dried, extracted with ether,
and the residue left, after evaporation, weighed and added to the total.

The calculation is then performed as follows:--

(1.) To the weight in grams found add .20 for loss of oleic acid in
solvent, and then say as 95 : 100 :: total oleic acid.

(2.) Calculate the per-centage from the quantity taken, and from this
deduct 6 per cent. for possible altered resin in the balsam. The error,
owing to the correction, of course, increases with the amount of oil
present; but it is stated to be always an error in the direction of
under-estimation, which is the great point for public analysts. When
working on 3 to 4 grains with an admixture of not over 25 per cent. the
errors due to loss of oleic acid and insoluble resin soap are said to so
nearly balance each other, that any correction is unnecessary, and the
actual amount of oleic acid found may be taken as correct within a per
cent.

9. (B. P.) According to the British Pharmacop[oe]ia, copaiba should be
soluble in an equal bulk of benzol.

10. (The evaporation test.) Mr Siebold says: "This is an excellent and
exceedingly simple test, but is clumsily applied by many. Instead of
boiling the balsam with water for many hours, a small quantity (about 1 to
1.5 gram) of the sample should be carefully heated in a watch-glass until
all the oil is driven off, which is the case as soon as the residue has
assumed a rich brown colour. A few minutes suffice for the experiment.

"If the remaining resin is perfectly brittle and pulverisable there is no
fatty matter present, for 1 per cent. of oil would diminish the
brittleness of the resin, so that it cannot be reduced to a fine powder.
One per cent. of oil is thus readily detected, and with larger quantities
of the adulterant (3 to 5 per cent.) the resin feels quite sticky.

"On heating the resin castor oil and linseed oil may be distinguished by
the odour. By mixing the adulterated balsam with ten, twenty, forty, and
fifty volumes of pure maranham balsam respectively, and testing each
dilution in this manner, it is easy to find in which the oil has been
reduced to below 1 per cent., and thus to ascertain whether the adulterant
amounted to more than 10, 20, 30, 40, or 50 per cent., and this, I think,
would be sufficiently near the mark for the purpose of public analysts."

_Uses, &c._ Balsam of copaiba is considered detersive vulnerary, diuretic,
and astringent; and appears to possess a sort of specific power over
diseases of the mucous membranes of the urino-genital organs. It is hence
a favourite remedy in gonorrh[oe]a, as soon as the first inflammatory
symptoms have subsided, antiphlogistic and soothing measures being
previously adopted. _Dose_, 20 to 60 drops on sugar, floating on water, or
made into an emulsion with yolk of egg or gum arabic, 3 or 4 times daily,
if the stomach will bear it. The addition of a few drops of sweet spirits
of nitre and laudanum have been recommended, to allay the nausea. By
adding 1 dr. of oil of orange (ol. aurantii) to each oz. of the balsam,
its flavour becomes far from disagreeable, and it sits well upon the
stomach. Copaiba is also given in capsules and pills. See CAPSULES,
EMULSION, OIL, PILLS, &c.

_Obs._ Numerous preparations of this article are sold under such names as
'soluble copaiba,' 'specific solution,' 'salt of copaiba,' &c.; none of
these appear to possess equal activity and certainty of operation to the
natural balsam. As the whole virtue of copaiba as a medicine depends on
the essential oil it contains, the value of any of these preparations may
be estimated by the quantity of that article which is found in them. In
the case of the first two articles above named the quantity is very small
indeed, and in the last it is wholly deficient.

The following forms are current in the trade for the reduction
(adulteration) of balsam of capivi:--

1. Balsam of copaiba, 4 lbs.; castor oil, 3 lbs.; mix well.

2. Balsam, 7 lbs.; castor oil, 4 lbs; yellow resin, 2 lbs.

3. Equal parts of balsam of copaiba and Canada balsam.

4. To the last add Venice turpentine, 1 lb.

5. Balsams of Canada and copaiba and nut or castor oil, equal parts.

6. Copaiba, 7 lbs.; nut oil, 3 lbs.; yellow resin, 2 lbs.; Canada balsam,
1 lb. Used to fill the cheap capsules; and to sell in the lower parts of
London and in the manufacturing districts. See also COPAIBA, FACTITIOUS
(_below_).

=Copaiba, Facti''tious.= _Syn._ COBAI'BA FACTI''TIA, BAL'SAMUM COPAI'BAE
FACTI''TIUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Castor oil (warm), 7 quarts; copaiba bottoms, 1
quart; mix, and filter through flannel.

2. Castor, oil, 1 gal.; yellow resin, 3 lbs.; Canada balsam, 2 lbs.; oil
of juniper, 2 oz.; oil of savin, 1 oz.; essences of orange and lemon, of
each 1/2 oz.; powdered benzoin, 1 oz.; melt the resin with the castor oil
and benzoin, and when nearly cold add the essences.

3. Canada balsam, 9 lbs.; castor oil, 7 lbs.; yellow resin, 1 lb.; Venice
turpentine, 2 lbs.; oils of rosemary, juniper, and savin, of each 1 dr.;
essential oil of almonds, 20 drops.

4. Canada balsam, 3 lb.; Venice turpentine, 1 lb.; oils of fennel,
juniper, and savin, of each q. s.

Used chiefly to fill capsules. It is readily distinguished from balsam of
copaiba by the proper tests. (See _above_.) Train oil or nut oil is
frequently substituted for the castor oil.

=Copaiba and Ka'li.= _Syn._ COPAIBA CUM POTASSA, L. _Prep._ Carbonate of
potassa and water, of each, equal parts; dissolve, and add gradually,
transparent balsam of copaiba, until the fluid, at first milky, turns
quite clear. Resembles miscible copaiba (see _below_).

=Copaiba, Miscible.= _Prep._ From balsam of copaiba (pure and
transparent), mixed with half its volume of solution of potassa made of
double the strength ordered in the B. P.

_Obs._ As different samples of copaiba often require slightly different
quantities of the solution of potassa, it is best to mix the two gradually
and cautiously together. Should the mixture be opaque, a little more of
one or other of the ingredients, as the case may be, will render it clear.
No heat must be used. This article is miscible with water, with which it
forms a kind of milk; and from containing all the volatile oil of the
copaiba, is a very valuable preparation. Its activity is considered equal
to that of the balsam itself, and it is given in similar doses.

=Copaiba, Sol'uble.= _Syn._ COPAI'BA SOLUBIL'IS, L. _Prep._ 1. Heat
miscible copaiba in an earthen, glass, or bright-tinned copper vessel, to
nearly the boiling-point, pour it while still hot in a separator, cover it
up, and allow it to cool very slowly. After a few days, draw off the clear
portion from a cock or hole placed at or near the bottom of the vessel,
observing to reject the first few drops which pass through, and to stop
the stream before any of the floating oil (_oleum copaibae_) reaches the
orifice. A very little concentrated liquor of potassa, added before
applying the heat, renders it more soluble. Thick, transparent, soluble in
pure water, and resembles the natural balsam in appearance.

2. Balsam of copaiba and solution of potassa (B. P.), equal parts, by
volume; mix, boil for a few minutes, and then proceed as before. Thinner
than the last.

_Prop._ Less powerful than miscible copaiba, but it sits better on the
stomach, and is about four times as strong as specific solution of
copaiba. See SOLUTION.

=Copaiba, Res'in of.= _Syn._ COPAI'BAE RESI'NA, L. The residuum of the
process of distilling the oil of copaiba from the balsam. It consists
principally of copaibic acid. It has been recommended for gonorrh[oe]a,
but is nearly inert, even in 1/2 oz. or 3/4 oz. doses. See OIL.

=Copaiba, Salt of.= _Syn._ SAL COPAI'BAE, L. There are two preparations
sold under this name; the one, crude copaibic acid; the other, copaibate
of an alkali. Neither of them possesses the valuable properties of
copaiba, which reside almost entirely in its essential oil, "We have taken
the 'sal copaibae,' and have watched its action on others, but have not
been able to perceive any good effects to result from its administration."
(Cooley.)

=COPAI'BIC ACID.= _Syn._ CAPIV'IC ACID. YELLOW RESIN OF COPAIBA. An
amber-coloured, brittle, semi-crystalline, resinous substance, obtained
from resin of copaiba, soluble in alcohol, rectified spirit, ether, and
oils, reddens litmus paper, and forms salts with the bases, called
copaibates.

=CO'PAL.= _Syn._ COPAL', GUM COPAL. A resinous substance, which exudes
spontaneously from various trees belonging to the genera _Hymenaea_,
_Guibourtia_, and _Trachylobium_. The varieties commonly met with in
commerce are East Indian copal, or anine, which is the produce of _Hymenaea
Courbaril_, and West Indian copal, obtained from numerous species.

_Prop._ When of good quality it is too hard to be scratched by the nail,
has a conchoidal fracture, and a sp. gr. ranging from 1.059 to 1.072.
Unlike other resins, it is dissolved with difficulty by alcohol and
essential oils; and this property, combined with its extreme hardness,
renders it very valuable for making varnishes. See VARNISH.

=COP'PER.= Cu. _Syn._ CU''PRUM, L.; CUIVRE, Fr.; KUPFER, Ger.

_Sources._ Metallic copper (native copper) is found in many parts of the
globe, diffused in isolated particles in the form of thin laminae, in loose
grains intermixed with quartz (copper sand, copper barilla), in dendritic
pieces, and in solid blocks, occasionally of many tons weight. The richest
deposits of native copper are those of Lake Superior, in North America.
More frequently and more abundantly it occurs as an ore, _e.g._ red oxide,
black oxide, green carbonate of copper or mal'achite, blue carbonate of
copper, vitreous sulphide of copper, purple copper, copper pyrites, or
yellow copper ore, with sulphur, antimony, or arsenic, and other metals
(true grey copper ore or fah'lerz), as an impure hydrated silicate
(chrys'ocolla), and as an impure hydrated oxychloride (atac'amite). The
most abundant and important ore is copper pyrites. It is principally
obtained from the mines of Cornwall, Devonshire, and Cuba. The carbonates
of copper are now largely imported from Australia; the metal produced by
smelting them is generally of the best quality.

_Prep._ We will not attempt to give a minute description of the various
complex processes by which the reduction of copper from its ores is
effected, but will merely give an outline of the common or Welsh process.
This process includes six distinct operations, as follows:--1. The ore
(copper and iron pyrites), containing from 8 to 10% of copper, is roasted
in a reverberatory furnace, called a 'calciner,' by which much of the
sulphide of iron is converted into oxide. 2. The calcined ore is melted
with 'metal slag' (a product of a subsequent operation--No. 3), in a
melting furnace called the 'ore furnace.' The products are a regulus,
termed 'coarse metal,' containing about 35% of copper, and 'ore-furnace
slag,' which is thrown away. Much of the iron, and the whole of the
so-called earthy matter of the ore, are thus separated as slag. 3. The
coarse metal, having been granulated by causing it to flow from the
furnace into water, is calcined with free access of air in a calciner, and
a considerable amount of sulphur is expelled. 4. The calcined granulated,
coarse metal is melted with the addition of matters rich in oxides of
copper, namely, 'roaster' and 'refinery slags' (from the two remaining
operations, Nos. 5 and 6, respectively), and native carbonates of copper,
or ores containing oxide of copper. The products are a regulus, termed
'metal,' which contains about 75% of copper, and metal slag (see No. 2).
The metal should be in the state of 'white metal,' compact and brittle,
with a feeble metallic lustre and a dark, bluish-grey colour. It is tapped
off into sand moulds. 5. The pigs of regulus obtained by the last
operation are roasted in a furnace through which air passes. The
temperature is so regulated that the regulus may be melted in from 6 to 8
hours. The slag is skimmed off, and after a time the heat is lowered, to
allow the regulus to solidify. It is again melted and tapped into sand
moulds, the product being called 'blister copper.' 6. This, the last
operation, is termed 'refining.' From 6 to 8 tons of blister copper, in
pigs, are melted in a furnace, and kept exposed for about 15 hours to the
oxidising influence of the air. The slag is skimmed off through the end
opening. When the oxidation has been sufficiently prolonged, anthracite or
free-burning coal, as pure as possible, is thrown upon the surface of the
metal, and after a short time the thick end of a long birch or oak pole is
plunged into the molten mass. This part of the operation is termed
'poling.' The wood in contact with the copper is rapidly decomposed; much
gas is evolved, which causes the metal to be splashed about, and every
part of it to be exposed to the reducing action of the coal. When the
refiner finds the metal to be at the state of 'tough pitch,' the pole is
taken out, and the coal pushed back from the end opening, through which
the copper is then ladled out as quickly as possible, and cast into
suitable moulds. For full details of this and other processes, the reader
is referred to Dr Percy's work on 'Metallurgy,' and Ure's 'Dictionary of
Arts, Manufactures, and Mines.'

In the laboratory copper is commonly employed under the following
forms:--

1. BEAN-SHOT COPPER. Produced by simply lading the melted copper from the
refining furnace into hot water. In small lumps like peas and beans; hence
its name. Used to make alloys, solutions, &c.

2. ELECTROTYPE COPPER. A very pure form, obtained by decomposing sulphate
of copper in an electrotype apparatus. It does not contain lead, whereas
most varieties of commercial copper do contain that metal.

3. FEATHER-SHOT COPPER, GRANULATED C. Produced by lading the refined
copper from the furnace into cold water. In small pieces, with a feathered
edge. Used to make calamine, brass, solution of copper, &c.

4. COPPER IN PLATES OR FOIL. Those of commerce (best, annealed) are
generally employed.

5. COPPER IN POWDER.--_a._ A solution of sulphate of copper is heated to
the boiling-point, and precipitated with distilled zinc; the precipitated
copper is then separated from the adherent zinc by dilute sulphuric acid,
washed with water, and dried by exposure to a moderate temperature.

6. COPPER PREPARED BY THE HYDROMETALLURGICAL METHOD.--One of the oldest
processes of this kind, is that known as the 'cementation' method, and
consists in precipitating copper from a solution of the sulphate of the
metal, by means of metallic iron. In some mines solutions of the sulphate
are met with occurring naturally, in others they are prepared artificially
by treating poor ores containing oxide of copper, with sulphurous acid or
diluted sulphuric acid, and sometimes by roasting copper pyrites and
afterwards washing them with water to extract the resulting sulphate. The
copper obtained by any of the above processes is called 'cementation
copper.' In the Isle of Anglesea the cementation liquid containing the
dissolved sulphate of copper, is first run into large vessels where the
suspended matters are allowed to subside; from these it is conveyed to
tanks containing old scrap-iron, which serves as the precipitating agent.
The scrap-iron is occasionally stirred up so as to renew the metallic
surface presented to the solution. The muddy liquor which contains
metallic copper as a spongy mass, besides impurities, is run into vessels
where it deposits the copper, which after the removal of the supernatant
fluid, is removed and dried in a furnace.

7. WET PROCESS. (Henderson's process.) The ores (Spanish and Portuguese
pyrites) treated by this method vary very slightly in composition, rarely
containing much more than 3 per cent. of copper, nearly 50 per cent. of
sulphur, from 43 to 44 per cent. of iron, with small quantities of lead,
arsenic, zinc, lime, &c. The ores are first employed by the vitriol
manufacturers, as a source of sulphuric acid. In the process of burning
they lose about 30 per cent. of their sulphur. The copper is extracted
from the residue by subjecting this latter to the following processes,
which are thus described in the 'Encyclopaedia Brittanica.'

I. _Grinding._ The burnt ore, as received from the acid burners, is first
mixed with about 15 per cent. of common salt, and ground to a fine powder
by passing it between a pair of heavy cast-iron rolls. As the amount of
sulphur left in the burnt ore is apt to vary, it is necessary to ascertain
its proportion in each parcel of burnt pyrites. When the sulphur falls
short of the proportion necessary for effecting the decomposition which
follows, a sufficient quantity of 'green' or unburned pyrites is added to
produce a proper balance. If, on the other hand, the sulphur has been
sufficiently extracted, dead roasted ore is added.

II. _Calcination._ This operation is accomplished in several kinds of
furnaces, that used by the Tharsis Sulphur and Copper Company, being a
large muffle or close furnace. By others a patent furnace with a revolving
hearth and mechanical stirring arrangement has been adopted with good
results; and some use open reverbatory furnaces heated by gas from
Siemens's generators. During the roasting the mixture is frequently
stirred, and in the case of hard-worked furnaces, turned with long
rabbles, and the completion of the operation is ascertained by test
assays. When the copper has been brought into a soluble condition, the
charge is raked out of the furnace and permitted to cool under a screen at
its mouth. By the calcination the sulphur in the compound is first
oxidised, sulphate of sodium is formed, and at the same time the chlorine
from the sodium chloride unites with the copper to form cupric chloride. A
small proportion of cuprous chloride is also formed, and special
precautions have to be taken to prevent the extensive formation of this
compound which is dissolved only with difficulty. The hydrochloric acid
and other gaseous products evolved during the calcination are condensed as
'tower liquor' in ordinary condensing towers, and the product is used in
the subsequent process of lixiviation.

III. _Lixiviation._ The calcined ore is conveyed to tightly caulked wooden
tanks, in which it receives repeated washings with hot water, tower
liquor, and dilute hydrochloric acid till all the soluble copper is
thereby extracted. The product of the latter washings is pumped or drawn
up by a modification of Gilford's injector, to serve as a first liquor for
subsequent charges of the lixiviating tanks, and no solution under a
definite strength is permitted to pass on to the next stage in the
process. The insoluble residue in the tanks consist of "purple ore," an
almost pure ferric oxide, largely used in "settling" blast furnaces, and
for smelting purposes; besides which it is available as jewellers' rouge.

IV. _Precipitation._ The precipitation of metallic copper from the
solution of its chloride is accomplished in large tanks by means of
metallic iron in the same way that cementation copper is obtained from
solutions of the sulphate. The solution is run into the tanks in which
there are miscellaneous heaps of old malleable iron; the chlorine combined
with the copper unites with the iron, and metallic copper in the state or
fine division is thrown down. The completion of the precipitation is
ascertained by dipping a bright steel knife into the solution in the tank,
and when no deposit of copper covers the steel, the liquor is run off and
a new charge conveyed into the tank. The tanks are drained periodically
for removing the precipitate, which is first roughly separated from the
small pieces of iron, after which it is more thoroughly freed from iron,
&c., by washing in water in a rocking sieve apparatus. The precipitate so
obtained should contain 80 per cent. of metallic copper, which is either
smelted directly for blister copper, or may be fused with the white metal
of the ordinary smelting process, and subsequently roasted. It has been
found possible to extract in this process with profit the small
proportions of lead, silver and gold, which Spanish pyrites is known to
contain. Two processes are in operation for this purpose--one devised by
Mr P. Claudet, and the other by Mr W. Henderson, the original patentee of
the wet process. The liquors from the first three washings contain
practically, all these metals, and they alone are treated. Mr Claudet
precipitates them from the solution by means of iodide of potassium. Mr
Henderson dilutes his solution from 20 deg. to 25 deg. Twaddell, and adds a very
weak solution of lead salt, such as the acetate by which he obtains a
cream-coloured precipitate containing 5 or 6 per cent. of silver, and 3
oz. of gold to each ton of the precipitate. The importance of the wet
process may be estimated from the fact, that although it originated only
in 1860, already 14,000 tons of copper, are annually produced by it in
Great Britain alone, out of an annual production for the whole world
estimated at from 126,000 to 130,000 tons.

_Prop., &c._ Copper has a brilliant yellowish-red colour, a nauseous,
styptic taste, and emits a disagreeable odour when rubbed; is very
malleable and ductile; unchanged in dry air; in damp air it soon becomes
covered with a greenish rust (carbonate of copper); slightly soluble in
dilute sulphuric and hydrochloric acid; freely soluble in boiling oil of
vitriol (sulphurous anhydride being evolved); dilute nitric acid dissolves
it readily with copious evolution of nitric oxide; heated to redness in
the air, it rapidly becomes covered with a black scale (oxide); it fuses
at a full red heat; its crystals are either octahedra or dodecahedra; sp.
gr. 8.8 to 8.96; it forms numerous compounds (alloys and salts) with other
bodies, all of which are more or less poisonous; its salts are either blue
or green, and most of them (when neutral) are soluble in water.

_Tests._ Metallic copper may be recognised by the above properties; its
oxides, salts, &c., by the following characters and reactions:--The
solutions of copper possess a blue or green colour, which they retain even
when considerably diluted with water:--With caustic potassa they give a
light-blue, bulky precipitate, turning blackish-brown or black on boiling
the liquid:--Ammonia and carbonate of ammonium produce a bluish-white
precipitate, soluble in excess, yielding a rich deep-blue solution:--The
carbonates of potassium give a light precipitate, insoluble in
excess:--Ferrocyanide of potassium gives a reddish-brown
precipitate:--Sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphydrate of ammonium give
blackish-brown or black ones:--A polished rod of iron, on immersion in an
acidulated solution, quickly becomes coated with metallic copper.

_Estim., &c._ Copper is generally WEIGHED under the form of black oxide,
but sometimes as pure metal:--By throwing it down from its solution by
pure potassa, after which it must be carefully collected, washed, dried,
ignited in a platinum crucible, and weighed therein as soon as it is cold.
Every 5 parts of the ignited precipitate (oxide) represents 4 parts of
copper (nearly); or, more accurately, every 39.7 parts are equal to 31.7
of pure metallic copper:--By immersing a piece of polished steel in the
solution, and weighing the resulting precipitate of the copper (see
_above_). Less delicate than the preceding.

Copper can be separated from the other metals by means of the following
processes:--

From lead. By adding sulphuric acid to the nitric solution, and
evaporating to dryness, when water digested on the residuum will dissolve
out the sulphate of copper, but leave the sulphate of lead behind. From
this solution the oxide of the copper may be thrown down as before.

From tin. By digestion with hot nitric acid, which dissolves out the tin.

From zinc. By sulphuretted hydrogen, which throws down the sulphide of
copper from an acid solution.

From silver. By digesting it in the state of filings or powder in a
solution of chloride of zinc, which dissolves the first, but leaves the
last unchanged.

Copper may be separated, in a state of great purity, from ANTIMONY,
ARSENIC, BISMUTH, LEAD, IRON, TIN, ZINC, &c., as it exists in bell-metal,
brass, bronze, gun-metal, mosaic gold, and other commercial alloys, by
fusing it in a crucible for about half an hour, along with copper scales
(black oxide) and ground bottle-glass, or other like flux. The pure metal
is found at the bottom of the crucible, whilst the impurities are either
volatilised or dissolved in the flux. The proportions for refining
commercial copper are, metal, 10 parts; copper scales and bottle-glass, of
each 1 part. The Society of Arts conceived this process to be so
valuable, that they presented one of their gold medals to its inventor, Mr
Lewis Thompson.

_Uses, &c._ The ordinary uses of copper are well known. In _medicine_, 3
or 4 gr. of the filings or powder were formerly given in rheumatism, and
to prevent hydrophobia. Some of its salts are still used as astringents,
emetics, and caustics. Its alloys are of great value. With zinc it forms
BRASS; with tin, BRONZE, BELL-METAL, GUN-METAL, and SPECULUM-METAL. WHITE
COPPER is formed by the addition of metallic arsenic, and GERMAN SILVER is
a mixture of nickel, zinc, and copper.

_Ant._ Copper in the metallic state is almost inert, but all its compounds
are poisonous. The antidotes are--the white of egg, milk, or flour, mixed
with water. The hydrated sulphides of iron, iron filings, and
ferro-cyanide of potassium have also been strongly recommended, and are
exhibited in the same way. Sugar is likewise highly spoken of as an
antidote. In all cases a strong emetic should be first given.

_Obs._ Culinary and pharmaceutical vessels are very commonly made of
copper, but too much caution cannot be exercised in their employment. Acid
syrups, vegetable juices, aqueous extracts, soups, stews, &c., prepared in
copper saucepans, or boilers, receive a metallic contamination
proportional to the length of time they are exposed to the action of the
metal. Such vessels are frequently tinned, for the purpose of protecting
the copper from contact with their contents, but this film of tin is
necessarily very thin, and soon becomes imperfect by constant use. When
copper vessels are allowed to remain wet or dirty, or, more especially,
greasy, a poisonous green rust forms upon the surface, somewhat similar to
verdigris. If articles are prepared in them in this state, serious
consequences may ensue. Cases of poisoning from this cause are frequently
met with, and instances of vomiting following the use of such articles are
almost of daily occurrence, without the reason being suspected. We have
occasionally seen confections and extracts, prepared in copper pans,
deposit a coating of that metal upon the knives used to stir them. The
ashes of the inspissated juices of fresh vegetables, and especially the
pulps of fruit, prepared in vessels of this metal, have exhibited the
presence of copper on the application of chemical tests. Ketchup is
frequently rendered poisonous in this way. The most wholesome material for
culinary utensils is thin sheet iron, or tinned iron plate (TIN), which is
very durable if kept clean and dry when not in use. Copper vessels of
every kind should be cleaned out, immediately before use, even though they
may not appear to require it, and on no account should they be employed
for any fluids that are the least acidulous, or that may have to remain
long in them.

The following enamel is recommended in Dingler's Polytechnic Journal for
coating the inside of the copper vessels, used for cooking fruit or
vegetables:--12 parts of white fluor-spar, 12 parts of unburnt gypsum, and
1 part of borax, are finely powdered, intimately mixed, and fused in a
crucible. The fused mass is then poured out, and after cooling, is rubbed
up to a paste. The copper vessel is then coated inside with this
preparation, which is applied by means of a brush, and the vessel is
placed in a moderately warm place, so that the coating may dry uniformly,
when it is subjected to a gradually increasing heat, till at length the
preparation fuses. On cooling, the vessel is found to be protected
internally by a white opaque enamel, adhering very firmly to the copper,
not chipping off by ordinary knocking and rubbing, and impervious to
vegetable acids.

Copper may be cleaned by applying a small portion of the following paste,
and rubbing it dry by a flannel or leather:--1 oz. oxalic acid, 6 oz.
rotten stone, 1/2 oz. gum arabic, all in powder, 1 oz. of sweet oil, and
sufficient water to make a paste.

=Copper, Neu'tral Acetate of.= Cu(C_{2}H_{3}O_{2})_{2}. _Syn._ NOR'MAL
CUPRIC ACETATE, ACETATE OF COPPER, CRYS'TALLISED VER'DIGRIS. _Prep._
Dissolve common verdigris or cupric hydrate in hot acetic acid, so as to
form a highly concentrated solution; filter and place in a cool situation
to crystallise.

_Prop._ Beautiful dark, bluish-green prisms, which dissolve in 14 parts of
cold and 5 parts of boiling water.

=Copper, Ba'sic Acetates of.= _Syn._ BA'SIC CU'PRIC ACETATES,
SUB-AC'ETATES OF COPPER. Common verdigris is a mixture of several basic
acetates which have a green or blue colour. One of these (SESQUIBASIC
ACETATE) is obtained by digesting powdered verdigris in tepid water,
filtering, and leaving the soluble part to spontaneous evaporation. It may
also be obtained in a state of purity by adding liquor of ammonia in small
portions to a boiling concentrated solution of the neutral acetate till
the precipitate is just redissolved, and leaving the solution to cool. It
forms a blue, crystalline mass, but little soluble in cold water. The
green, insoluble residue of the verdigris, after treatment with tepid
water, contains another acetate (TRIBASIC ACETATE); this may be formed by
digesting neutral acetate of copper with the hydrated oxide. A third salt
(DIBASIC ACETATE, BLUE VERDIGRIS) is prepared on a large scale in France
by exposing copper to the air in contact with fermenting wine-lees.

=Copper, Ammo''nio-sul'phate of.= _Syn._ SULPHATE OF CUPRAMMONIUM.
CU'PRO-SULPHATE OF AMMO''NIA; CU'PRI AMMO''NIO-SULPHAS, L.; CUIVRE
AMMONIACAL, Fr.; KUPFER SALMIAK, Ger. _Prep._ Sulphate of copper, 1 oz.;
sesquicarbonate of ammonium, 1-1/2 oz.; rub together until carbonic acid
ceases to be evolved, then wrap it in bibulous paper, and dry it in the
air.

_Pur._ Pulverulent; dark blue; at an intense heat it is changed into oxide
of copper, at first sesquicarbonate of ammonia, and, afterwards, sulphate
of ammonia, being thrown off. It is soluble in water to a splendid
purple-blue solution, from which the salt is precipitated by alcohol in
blue crystals. This solution has the peculiar property of dissolving
CELLULOSE (cotton, paper, &c.). The cellulose may be precipitated from the
solution in colourless flakes by the addition of acids.

_Uses., &c._ It is occasionally employed in _pyrotechny_. In _medicine_,
it has been given in chorea, epilepsy, hysteria, &c., but is now
principally used as an injection, as a wash for foul ulcers, used as a
collyrium, in opacity of the cornea.--_Dose_, 1/4 gr., gradually increased
to 5 gr., twice a day. Great care must be taken in drying, as it is apt
not only to lose a large portion of its weight, but to become of an
inferior colour. Both the ingredients should be separately reduced to
powder before mixing them.

=Copper, Ar'senite of.= Cu(AsO_{2})_{2}. See GREEN PIGMENTS (Scheele's
Green).

=Copper, Carbonate of.= CuCO_{3}. _Syn._ DIBA'SIC CARBONATE OF COPPER,
DICARBONATE OF C.; CUPRI CARBONAS, L. _Prep._ Add carbonate of soda in
excess to a solution of sulphate of copper, and warm the mixture till the
pale-blue, flocculent precipitate becomes sandy and assumes a green tint.
Used as a pigment. See GREEN PIGMENTS and VERDITER.

_Obs._ As prepared above, the carbonate contains 2 equivalents of water.
The beautiful green mineral, MAL'ACHITE, has a similar composition, but
contains only 1 equiv. of water. Another carbonate (TRIBASIC C., BLUE C.),
occurs as a natural ore in large, transparent crystals, of the most
intense blue; it has not yet been artificially imitated.

=Cuprous Chloride.= CuCl. _Syn._ DICHLORIDE OF COPPER, SUBCHLORIDE OF
COPPER. _Prep._ By exposing the neutral chloride of copper to the action
of heat.

_Prop._ White; fusible; slightly soluble in water; and decomposed by
exposure to the air.

=Copper, Chloride of.= CuCl_{2}. _Syn._ NEUTRAL CHLORIDE OF COPPER.
_Prep._ From copper scales or black oxide of copper dissolved in
hydrochloric acid, and the solution evaporated and crystallised.

_Prop., &c._ Green, acicular crystals; deliquescent; soluble in alcohol,
the flame of which it colours green. When gently heated it loses water,
and assumes the form of a yellowish-brown powder (ANHYDROUS CUPRIC
CHLORIDE, or CHLORIDE OF COPPER); at a high temperature it loses half its
chlorine, and becomes converted into cuprous chloride.

=Cupric Iodide.= CuI_{2}. _Syn._ IODIDE OF COPPER, DINI'ODIDE OF COPPER;
CU'PRI IODI'DUM. L. _Prep._ By adding iodide of potassium to a solution of
sulphate of copper, and washing out with alcohol the free iodine from the
precipitate formed. A greenish-white precipitate.

(Commercial.) To a solution of sulphate of copper, 1 part, and
protosulphate of iron, 3 parts, add a solution of iodide of potassium, and
wash and dry the precipitate. This is the preparation commonly known in
trade by the name of 'iodide of copper.'

=Cupric Nitrate.= Cu(NO_{3})_{2}. _Syn._ NITRATE OF COPPER; CU'PRI
NI'TRAS, L. _Prep._ By dissolving the copper in dilute nitric acid to
saturation; evaporating to dryness; redissolving in distilled water;
filtering, evaporating, and allowing to crystallise; or from black oxide
of copper and nitric acid in the same manner.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ Deep-blue prismatic crystals, very soluble in water and
deliquescent, soluble in alcohol. Generally used in medicine externally,
in injections, or as a caustic, but sometimes given internally, dissolved
in mucilaginous liquids.--_Dose_, 1/8 to 1/4 gr.

=Cuprous Oxide.= Cu_{2}O. _Syn._ RED OXIDE OF COPPER, DINOX'IDE, SUBOXIDE;
CUPRI SUBOX'YDUM, L. _Prep._ Add grape sugar to a solution of sulphate or
acetate of copper, then further add caustic potassa in excess; the blue
solution heated to ebullition deposits the suboxide, which must then be
collected, washed, and dried.

A solution of cane sugar, 27 parts, in water, 60 parts, is poured over
hydrated oxide of copper (weighed in the compressed and still moist
state), 9 parts; a solution of caustic potassa, 18 parts, in water, 60
parts, is then added, and the whole mass well agitated together at the
ordinary temperature, and strained through linen. If the dark-blue
filtrate is next heated (continually stirring), over a water bath,
anhydrous cuprous oxide is disengaged, and the liquor becomes nearly
colourless.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ A superb red powder, with a metallic lustre. It often
occurs in beautiful transparent, ruby-red crystals, associated with other
ores of copper, and can be obtained in this state by artificial means. It
is used as a pigment and a bronze, and as a stain for glass and enamels,
to which it gives a rich red colour. By heat it is converted into the
black oxide. With ammonia it forms a colourless solution, which rapidly
becomes blue from the action of the air.

=Cupric Oxide.= CuO. _Syn._ OX'IDE OF COPPER, BLACK OXIDE, PROTOXIDE;
CU'PRI PROTOX'YDUM. _Prep._ By heating the nitrate or carbonate of copper
to redness. When it ceases to lose weight the conversion is completed, and
the oxide appears as a heavy, black powder.

By heating in the air the hydrated oxide thrown down from solutions of
copper by pure potassa.

By adding caustic potassa, in excess, to a solution of a cupric salt, and
heating the whole to a boiling-point; the precipitate is then collected,
washed, and dried. A heavy, dark-brown powder.

_Uses, &c._ Protoxide of copper is unchanged by heat unless combustible
matter is present, when it readily parts with its oxygen; hence its
general use in ORGANIC ANALYSIS as a source of that element. It
communicates a beautiful green colour to glass and enamels. With the acids
it produces the ordinary salts of copper.

=Cupric Sulphate.= CuSO_{4}.5Aq. _Syn._ SULPHATE OF COPPER, BLUE
COP'PERAS, B. VIT'RIOL; CU'PRI SUL'PHAS, L.; SULFATE DE CUIVRE, Fr.;
KUPFER VITRIOL, Ger.; NEELA TOOTIA, Hind. _Prep._ (Commercial.) The
sulphate of copper of commerce is obtained by the oxidation of native
sulphide of copper (COPPER PYRITES); by the joint action of air, heat, and
moisture, the copper is converted into an oxide, and the sulphur into
sulphuric acid. The resulting salt is washed out, and the solution
evaporated and crystallised. The water found in and issuing from copper
mines often furnishes such a solution ready to the hands of the
manufacturers. A large quantity of sulphate of copper is also obtained as
a secondary product in the refining of silver, and is occasionally
prepared by dissolving in sulphuric acid an oxychloride of copper, made
for the purpose by exposing sheets of copper to the joint action of air
and hydrochloric acid.

(Pure.) By the direct solution of the metal, or preferably, of its oxide
or carbonate in sulphuric acid, or by purifying the commercial salt by
recrystallisation, &c.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ Fine blue crystals, slightly efflorescent, having an
intensely styptic and metallic taste. By heat the blue salt loses its
water of crystallisation, and becomes a white, anhydrous powder. It
dissolves in 4 parts of water at 60 deg. Fahr., and in 2 parts at 212 deg.; is
insoluble in alcohol and ether; and is decomposed at an intense heat into
protoxide of copper, sulphurous acid, and oxygen. It has been used to
prevent the dry rot in timber and in dyeing. It is largely employed as a
source of metallic copper in the ELECTROTYPE. Grain is steeped in a weak
solution of it by the farmer, to prevent the 'smut,' As a medicine, it is
employed chiefly as a styptic (in solution) and caustic (in substance) to
destroy 'proud flesh,' and, less frequently, as an astringent or tonic
(from 1/4 gr. to 2 gr.), and an emetic (3 or 4 gr. to 10 or 12 gr). It is
exceedingly poisonous.

=COP'PERAS.= This is a generic name for the CRUDE METALLIC SULPHATES. When
used without a qualifying adjective, it generally means sulphate of iron.

=Copperas, Blue.= Crude sulphate of copper. See COPPER (_above_).

=Copperas, Calcined'.= From green copperas, heated in an unglazed earthen
pot until it becomes white and dry. Used as an astringent and 'drier,' and
in making ink and dyeing.

=Copperas, Green.= _Syn._ COPPERAS. Crude sulphate of iron. See IRON.

=Copperas, White.= Crude sulphate of zinc. See ZINC.

=COP'PERING.= Iron may be covered with a thin film of copper by merely
immersing it (previously scoured clean) in an acidulated solution of
sulphate of copper, after which it must be rinsed in clean water. This
film soon rubs off, but still it lasts long enough to deceive the
travelling tinker's customers, who imagine that their copper kettles are
properly repaired. Metals may be conveniently coated with compact copper
to any desired thickness by means of voltaic electricity. See ELECTROTYPE.

=COP'ROLITE.= _Syn._ DUNG'STONE, FOSSIL MANURE. This mineral is the
petrified dung of carnivorous reptiles. (Buckland.) Coprolites are found
in all the secondary and tertiary strata. They contain a considerable
proportion of phosphate of lime, for which reason they are largely
employed in the manufacture of artificial manures. They form the bases of
Lawes' SUPERPHOSPHATE OF COPROLITE MANURE. The nodules, after being
washed, are ground to powder in a mill, and mixed with an equal weight of
oil of vitriol.

=COPTIS TEETA.= (Ind. Ph.) _Syn._ COPTIS, or MISHMI TITA. _Hab._ Mishmel
mountains, east of Assam. _Officinal part._ The dried root (_Coptidis
Radix_), imported into Bengal from Assam in small rattan baskets, each
containing from 1 to 2 ounces of the drug. This consists of pieces of a
woody rhizome, of the thickness of a small goose-quill and from 1 to 2
inches in length, often contracted at one extremity into a short woody
stem; the surface is usually rough, irregular, more or less annulated, and
marked with the remains of rootlets in the shape of short spiny point.
Externally, yellowish-brown; internally, much brighter, frequently of a
golden-yellow colour, exhibiting on fracture a radiated structure. Taste,
persistently bitter, and when chewed tinges the saliva yellow. Contains
neither tannic nor gallic acid, but abounds with a yellow, bitter
principle, soluble in water and alcohol.--_Prop._ Pure bitter
tonic.--_Therapeutic uses._ In debility, convalescence after fevers, and
other debilitating diseases, atonic dyspepsia, and in mild forms of
intermittent fevers.--_Dose_, 10 to 15 gr. of the powdered root, thrice
daily.

=Tincture of Coptis= (_Tinctura Coptidis_). Take of coptis root, in coarse
powder, 2-1/2 oz.; proof spirits, 2 pints. Macerate for 7 days in a closed
vessel, with occasional agitation; strain, press, filter, and add
sufficient proof spirit to make 1 pint.--_Dose_. 1/2 to 2 fl. oz.

=Infusion of Coptis= (_Infusum Coptidis_). Take of coptis root, in coarse
powder, 5 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint. Infuse in a covered vessel for 2
hours, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz., thrice daily.

=COR'AL.= _Syn._ CORAL'LIUM, L. The comprehensive term for all calcareous
or stony structures secreted by the marine asteroid polypes, or zoophytes.
The RED CORAL of commerce, which is so largely employed for beads,
earrings, and other ornaments, may be described as the internal skeleton
of _Corallium rubrum_.

=Coral, Red= (=Facti''tious=). _Syn._ CORAL'LIUM RU'BRUM FACTI''TIUM, L.
Prepared chalk, coloured with a little sesquioxide of iron or rose pink,
and passed through a sieve. Sold by the druggists for powdered coral.

=Coral, Prepared' Red.= _Syn._ CORAL'LIUM RU'BRUM PREPARA'TUM. Levigated
coral was formerly used in medicine as an antacid or absorbent, and is
still occasionally employed as a dentifrice. It consists almost entirely
of carbonate of lime, coloured with red oxide of iron, and possesses no
advantage over good chalk. It is prepared in a similar manner as chalk.

=CORAL, to Bleach.= Immerse the coral in a mixture composed of one part of
hydrochloric acid, and thirty parts of water; and keep it in this liquid
until it becomes quite white. It should then be taken out, washed well in
cold water, and allowed to dry.

=COPPER, CYANIDE= (CuCy_{2}). This salt is much used in electro-coppering.
It may be obtained by adding to a solution of a copper salt, a solution of
ferrocyanide of potassium; when a precipitate is obtained, which dried, is
of a brown colour, and is cyanide of copper.

=CORALLINE.= See TAR COLOURS.

=CORD'IALS.= _Syn._ CARDI'ACA, L. Warm, stimulating, restorative
medicines, that tend to raise the spirits and promote the circulation. The
principal cordial medicines are noticed under the heads TINCTURE and
SYRUP. See also PATENT MEDICINES.

=Cordials.= Aromatised and sweetened spirits used as beverages. See
LIQUEUR.

=CORIAN'DER.= _Syn._ (CORIANDER FRUIT, CORIANDRI FRUCTUS, (B. P.);
CORIANDERS, C. SEED; CORIANDRUM (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. "The ripe fruit of
the _Coriandrum sativum_, dried." (B. P.) Coriander is chiefly used by
confectioners and distillers as a flavouring ingredient. In the East it is
much employed as a condiment, being an ingredient in CURRY POWDER. It is
aromatic, carminative, and stimulant; and more effectually covers the
taste of senna than any other substance.--_Dose_, 20 to 60 gr.; chiefly
used as a corrective or adjuvant in compound medicines.

=CORK.= The outer bark of the _Quercus Suber_ or _cork oak_, a tree common
in southern France, Italy, and Spain. The bark obtained from the younger
branches of the same tree is employed for tanning. See ALCORNOCO.

=Cork.= A stopple or plug for a bottle or jar cut from the above
substance. The common practice of employing inferior corks for the purpose
of stopping the mouths of bottles is often productive of considerable
loss, from the air being only partially excluded, and the contents
suffering in consequence. Many a large bin of valuable wine has become,
from this cause, in less than a year, little better than sour 'Cape.'
Chemical preparations often suffer from a similar cause. The best corks
are those called 'velvet corks,' and of these the finest qualities are
imported from France. No pains should be spared to obtain sound and soft
cork for connecting the combustion- and drying-tubes used in organic
analysis.

Ruschhaupt gives the following process for preparing corks for corking
bottles containing alcoholic or caustic liquids:--Paraffin is fused in a
suitable vessel, the dry corks are added, and immersed in the paraffin by
means of a perforated coon or disk. The air is now easily expelled from
the pores of the corks, which after about five minutes, are removed and
cooled; they may now be cut and bored like wax, are easily driven into the
necks of bottles, and readily removed, retain their smoothness and are
gas-tight throughout.

Several attempts have been made to introduce cork-cutting by machinery,
but they have hitherto failed to supersede hand labour.

=Cork-bo''rer.= A thin brass tube, filed to a cutting edge, used for
piercing holes through corks. Several tubes of different sizes, which fit
into each other, are generally sold together. This simple and convenient
instrument was introduced into the laboratory by Dr Mohr.

=CORN.= _Syn._ CLA'VUS, L. A horny induration of the skin, with a central
nucleus, very sensitive at the base. The common cause of corns is
continued pressure over the projection of the bones, from tight or stiff
boots or shoes. They are of two kinds, hard and soft. The first grow on
the exposed portions of the joints; the last, between the toes.

_Preven._ This consists in keeping the feet clean, by frequent ablution
with warm water, and in the use of easy, soft boots and shoes. Without the
latter precaution, corns will generally return, even after they appear to
have been perfectly removed.

_Treatment._ After soaking the feet in warm water for a few minutes, pare
the corns as close as possible with a sharp knife, taking care not to make
them bleed. They may now be touched over with a little lunar caustic, or
nitric acid, or a little concentrated acetic acid or aromatic vinegar. The
last two do not stain the skin. The first is used by merely rubbing it on
the corns, previously slightly moistened with water; the others, by
moistening the corns with them, by means of a small strip of wood, or,
preferably, a rod of glass; due care being taken not to allow the liquid
to touch the neighbouring parts. This treatment, adopted every 3 or 4 days
for 10 days or a fortnight, accompanied by the use of soft, loose shoes,
will generally effect a cure. It has been recommended to remove large
corns by ligatures of silk, applied as close to their base as possible,
and tightened daily until they drop off; but this plan is tedious, and
often inconvenient, and is not always successful. Another mode of
extirpation is, the application of a small blister, which will frequently
raise them with the skin out of their beds. In this case the exposed
surface must be dressed with a little simple ointment. Soft corns may be
removed by applying ivy leaf, previously soaked in strong vinegar changing
the piece every morning; or by placing a dressing of soap cerate, spread
on a bit of lint or old rag, between the toes. One of the simplest and
best remedies for hard corns, and which has received the sanction of high
medical authority, is to wear upon the toe or part affected a small,
circular piece of soft leather, or, still better, a piece of amadou,
spread with diachylon, or some other emollient plaster, and having a hole
cut in the centre, corresponding to the size of the corn. (Sir B. Brodie.)
By this means the pressure of the boot or shoe is equalised and the apex
of the corn protected from injury. The following are among the most useful
of the POPULAR REMEDIES FOR CORNS:--

=Corns, Caus'tic for.= _Prep._ From tincture of iodine and chloride of
antimony, of each, 1 dr.; iodide of iron, 3 grs.; mix. It is applied with
a camel-hair brush, after paring the corn. 2 to 4 applications are said to
effect a cure.

_Obs._ Most of the remedies noticed below really act as caustics.

=Corns, Lo'tion for.= _Prep._ 1. A solution of sal-ammoniac, 1 part; in
proof spirit, 4 parts.

2. A concentrated aqueous solution of sulphate of copper. To be applied
night and morning.

=Corn Plasters.= _Prep._ 1. From white diachylon, 3 parts; yellow resin, 2
parts; verdigris, 1 part; melted together, and spread on leather.

2. From galbanum plaster, 1 oz.; verdigris, 1 dr.; as the last.

3. From resin plaster, 2 oz.; black pitch, 1 oz.; verdigris and
sal-ammoniac, of each 1/2 dr.

4. To the last add powdered opium, 1 dr. Recommended to allay pain, &c.

5. (W. Cooley.) A piece of spread adhesive plaster is placed upon a table,
and a piece of card paper having a round hole cut in it the size of the
central portion of the corn is laid upon it; the exposed part is then
softened by holding a piece of heated iron for a second or two near it;
the card paper is then instantly removed, and nitrate of silver, in fine
powder is sprinkled over the part which has been warmed. As soon as the
whole is cold, the loose powder is shaken off, and the plaster is ready
for use. Very cleanly and convenient. Two or three applications seldom
fail to effect a cure.

6. (MECHANICAL CORN PLASTERS.) From common adhesive plaster spread on
buckskin, amadou, or vulcanised india rubber, cut into pieces, and a
circular hole corresponding to the size of the corn punched in each.

=Corn Sol'vent.= _Prep._ 1. Carbonate of potassa or pearlash, contained in
an open jar or bottle, set in a damp place, until it deliquesces into an
oil-like liquid (oil of tartar). Applied by means of a feather, or a small
piece of rag dipped in it is bound on the corn.

2. Hydrate of potassa, 1 dr.; rectified spirit 1 oz.; dissolve. As No. 1.

3. Carbonate of potassa, with smalts, ochre, or bole, q. s. to give it the
required colour. It must be kept dry, in a well-corked bottle. A pinch is
placed on the corn, and confined by means of adhesive plaster or rag.

4. Carbonate of soda, 1 oz., finely powdered and mixed with lard, 1/2 oz.
Applied on linen rag every night.

5. (Sir H. Davy's.) Carbonate of potassa, 2 parts; salt of sorrel, 1 part;
each in fine powder; mix, and place a small quantity on the corn for four
or five successive nights, binding it on with a rag.

_Obs._ Care must be taken, in all cases, to pare the corn moderately close
before applying the remedy; but in _no case should any of the above be
applied to a raw surface_.

=Corns, Pomade' for.= _Prep._ 1. Powdered verdigris, 1 dr.; savine
ointment, 7 dr.

2. Dried carbonate of soda, 3 dr.; lard, 5 dr.; verdigris or smalts, q. s.
to give a slight tinge of green or blue. Applied on a piece of rag.

_Treatment for Horses._--"Pare out carefully the seat of corn, removing
all reddened and diseased horn; reduce the crust of the quarter slightly,
where it is unduly strong, but leave the bars and frog untouched. They
must be religiously preserved, especially in weak feet, to afford a wide
bearing for the bar shoe that should afterwards be used. To soften the
parts, apply, in bad cases, a poultice for a day or two, and a few drops
of nitric acid, when the horn is dry and scurfy; keep the hoof soft with
soft soap and lard, or any emollient dressing, and pare out the corn every
fortnight. In horses subject to corns, shoe and pare out frequently; and
along with leather pads, use a bar shoe made with a wide heel on the
inside quarter, and nailed only on the outside, or with one nail toward
the inside toe."[250]

[Footnote 250: Finlay Dun.]

=CORRO'SIVE SUBLIMATE.= See MERCURY.

=CORUN'DUM.= See EMERY.

=CORYZA.= Cold in the head. See CATARRH.

=COSMET'ICS.= _Syn._ COSMET'ICA, L.; COSMETIQUES, Fr. External
applications employed for the purpose of preserving or restoring personal
beauty. The term is generally understood to refer to substances applied to
the cuticle, to improve the colour and clearness of the complexion; but
some writers have included under this head every topical application used
with the like intention. Hence cosmetics may be divided into--CUTANEOUS
COSMETICS, or those applied to the skin; HAIR COSMETICS, or such as are
employed to promote the growth and beauty of the hair; and TEETH
COSMETICS, or such as are used to cleanse and beautify the teeth. See
BALDNESS, COSMETIQUE, DENTIFRICES, DEPILATORY, HAIR-DYE, POMADE, TOOTH
POWDER, &c.

=COSMETIC VINEGAR= (Acetum cosmeticum) is a mixture of tinct. benz., 60
parts; bals. Peruv., 10 parts; eau de Cologne and bals. vitae Hoffm. ph.
bor. [=a][=a] 150 parts; aceti puri, 300 parts; allowed to precipitate and
filtered clear.

=COSMETICUM= (Dr Henry's):--For scalp diseases and an application for the
hair. Spirit, 180 parts; oil of lemon, 3 parts; oil of bergamot, oil of
rosemary, and oil of lavender, of each 1 part. (Hager.)

=Cosmeticum= (Siemerling) for skin affections, freckles, &c. Sweet
almonds, 30 grammes; bitter almonds, 15 grammes; blanched and emulsified
with 330 grammes of water; the emulsion strained and mixed with 25 grammes
tinct. benzoin and 15 grammes lemon juice. (Wittstein.)

=COSMETIQUE.= [Fr.] Hard pomatum, formed into a cake or stick for the
toilet. It is sometimes coloured black or brown, the pigments being added
in the state of an impalpable powder.

1. (BLACK--COSMETIQUE NOIR.) From good lard, 5 parts; wax, 2 parts; (or,
hard pomatum, 7 parts;) melt, stir in levigated ivory black, 2 parts; and
pour it into moulds of tinfoil; which are afterwards to be placed in paper
sheaths.

2. (BROWN--COSMETIQUE BRUN.) As the last, but using levigated umber for
'plain brown,' and levigated terra di Sienna for 'auburn' and 'chestnut.'

3. (WHITE, OR PLAIN--COSMETIQUE BLANC.) The same, without colouring
matter.

_Obs._ They are generally scented with musk, ambergris, or cassia.

_Use._ The above are used to colour moustaches, eyebrows, whiskers, &c.,
as well as to keep the hair in its place. The labels on the packets before
us have--"pour fixer et lisser les cheveux." The application must be
renewed daily, as the cosmetique is gradually removed by friction, and
perfectly so by soap-and-water.

=COSMOLINE.= _Syn._ COSMOLIN. Under the names of Cosmoline and Vaseline
some fatty substances melting at 32 deg. to 85 deg. or even 95 deg. C. have lately
appeared in commerce. They are very variable mixtures of solid paraffin
with paraffin oil, neutral oil, lubricating oil, &c., and are the residues
left after the distillation of petroleum slightly purified by means of
charcoal. (Miller.)

Cosmoline has been examined by Mr Naylor, who states his belief that it
consists of a mixture of paraffins. Comparing Mr Naylor's results with
those obtained by Mr Moss, in an analysis made of a body imported from
America, and called "Vaseline," there seems little reason to doubt that if
this latter and "Cosmoline" are not the same substance, they differ from
each other only in a very minute degree, this difference not improbably
being due to the varying temperature employed in producing them. Cosmoline
was found to have the composition:--

  Hydrocarbons (paraffins?)  98.59
  Moisture                    0.69
  Ash                         0.04

                             99.32

It melts at 40 deg.C., and has a sp. gr. of 0.866 at 45 deg.C. The composition of
Vaseline is as follows:--

  Hydrocarbons (paraffins?)  97.54
  Moisture                    0.50
  Ash                         0.05

                             98.09

It melts at 37 deg. C., and has a sp. gr. of 0.840 at 55 deg. C.

Both bodies are pale yellow in colour, translucent, slightly fluorescent,
and semi-solid, and both are alike insoluble in water, slightly soluble in
alcohol, and freely so in ether, whilst they are unaffected by
hydrochloric acid and solution of potash. The processes by which it is
believed cosmoline and vaseline are obtained, consist in separating the
various volatile hydrocarbons from crude petroleum by distillation, the
residuum is then brought into contact with superheated steam, and finally
purified by filtration through animal charcoal. Vaseline has been also
named "petroleum jelly." Professor Otto, of New York, says that vaseline
is very extensively used throughout the United States, as a substitute for
lard in the preparation of ointments, a purpose for which the freedom from
smell, the negative properties and unalterable qualities when exposed to
the air, of both substances, seem highly to commend their superiority to
lard for this purpose. They have also been employed very successfully for
lubricating surgical instruments, and we believe are, when properly
scented, used largely as the basis of hair pomades, whilst their
suitability for the preparation of suppositories and pessaries has been
urged.

This has been demonstrated by the much greater length of time during which
certain ointments made by them remain fresh and undecomposed when compared
with those in which lard was used.

The 'American Journal of Pharmacy' for March, 1877, gives the following
formula as a substitute for cold cream, by E. J. Davidson:--Cosmoline, 24
oz.; white wax, spermaceti, of each 12 oz.; glycerin, 3 fl. oz.; oil of
geranium, 1 fl. dr.

=COSMOS POMADE= (J. Pohlmann, Vienna), 1-1/2 parts white wax, 3 parts
spermaceti, 2 parts castor oil, 8 parts almond oil, 2 parts glycerine, 9
parts extract of mignonette, 1/2 part eau de Cologne. (Hager.)

=COTARN'INE.= A crystallisable substance obtained from the mother-liquors
of opianic acid. It is basic, very soluble, and bitter. Hydrochlorate of
cotarnine is soluble and crystalline.

=COTO BARK.= A bark said to be imported from the interior of Bolivia, and
thought by Dr Wittstein to belong to a lauraceous or a terebinthinaceous
plant. In one specimen examined by Jobst was found a yellowish-white
crystalline substance with the biting taste of the bark, which Jobst
believes to be its active principle, and to which he gives the name
_Cotoin_. Another sample, however, analysed by Jobst in conjunction with
Hesse, failed to yield any cotoin, but gave instead a crystalline mass
which consisted principally of three crystalline bodies, to which these
chemists purpose applying the names _paracotoin_, _oxyleucotin_, and
_leucotin_. Dr Gietel reports that he made trial of the bark
therapeutically with some patients in the general hospital of Munich, and
the results he obtained were such that he regards it as a specific against
diarrh[oe]a in all its varieties. Sometimes he administered it in the form
of powder, and at others in that of tincture, the latter being made in the
proportions of one part of bark to ten of spirit. He gave of the powder
1/2 grain four to six times a day, and of the tincture 10 minims every two
hours. Herr Burkhart, similarly making trial of the _cotoin_ and
_paracotoin_ instead, was equally successful as far as regarded its
anti-diarrh[oe]ic action, _paracotoin_, however, exercising a slighter
effect than the _cotoin_. Herr Burkhart administered paracotoin either in
powder 1/10th of a gram, with 1/6th of a gram of sugar every three hours,
or 1/2 a gram rubbed up as an emulsion.

=COT'TON.= _Syn._ GOSSYPIUM, L. The cotton of which textile fabrics are
made consists of hairs covering the seeds of certain plants belonging to
the natural order _Malvaceae_, or the Mallow family. Our commercial cotton
appears to be derived from four distinct species, viz.--

=Gossypium arboreum.= The tree cotton, an Indian species. Unlike the other
cotton plants, it has the dimensions of a small tree. The cotton-hairs are
remarkably soft and silky, and are woven by the natives into very fine
muslin, used for turbans by the privileged classes only.

=Gossypium Barbadense.= The 'Barbadoes' or 'Bourbon cotton plant.' This is
the species which yields all our best cotton. In the small American
islands which fringe the coast from Charlestown to Savannah, this plant
has produced the celebrated 'sea-island cotton,' which is unrivalled for
the length of its 'staple,' its strength, and silkiness.

=Gossypium herbaceum.= The common cotton plant of India. It produces the
Surat cotton of commerce.

=Gossypium Peruvianum or acuminatum.= A species supposed to be indigenous
to America. It furnishes the South American varieties of cotton, as
Pernambuco, Peruvian, Maranham, and Brazilian.

_Identif._ See LINEN.

_Dyeing._ The fibres of cotton have nearly the same affinity for mordants
and the colouring matter of dyed stuffs as linen, and may be treated in
the same manner. See DYEING, LINEN, &c.

=Cotton Cake.= The cake remaining after the expression of the oil from the
seeds of the cotton plant (_Gossypium_) is used as a cattle food. The
decorticated is preferred to the undecorticated variety, as the latter is
said to occasionally set up dangerous internal irritation amongst the
animals partaking of it.

Composition of cotton-cake (decorticated).

  Moisture                        9.18
  Oil                            16.05
  Albuminous compounds           41.25
  Non-nitrogenous principles     16.45
  Phosphates  and  insoluble
    earthy matters                8.15
  Woody fibre                     8.92

                                100.00

=COTTON, GUN-.= See PYROXYLIN.

=COUGH.= _Syn._ TUS'SIS, L. The sudden and violent expulsion of air from
the lungs. It is generally symptomatic of other affections, but is
sometimes idiopathic, or a primary disease. Many cases of cough depend
upon the extension of catarrh to the trachea and bronchiae, which thus
become loaded with mucus or phlegm, which they endeavour to throw off by
the convulsive effort called coughing. In some cases it is caused by a
vitiation and inspissation of the secretions, arising from the imperfect
action of the absorbents; this is the common cause of the dry cough of old
people. Idiopathic cough is not considered dangerous in itself, or while
running its regular course, but it is often productive of most serious
consequences, by superinducing the inflammation of some organ, or laying
the foundation of phthisis.

Cough is sometimes attended by copious expectoration, and at other times
exists without any; it has hence been distinguished into moist or mucous
cough, and dry cough.

_Treatment._ That of common catarrhal cough consists in allaying the
irritation as much as possible, by demulcents and expectorants, as
mucilaginous drinks and lozenges, which act upon the glottis, and
sympathetically upon the trachea and bronchiae. Among the first may be
mentioned almond milk, barley water, refined Spanish juice, gum Arabic,
and a mixture of the last two made into lozenges; among the second, the
most innocent and convenient is ipecacuanha, in the shape of lozenges, 2
or 3 of which maybe sucked whenever the cough is troublesome. A light diet
should be adopted, the bowels kept slightly relaxed by the use of gentle
aperients, and a mild and equable temperature sought as much as possible.
When this plan does not succeed, recourse may be had to an emetic,
followed by small doses of Dover's powders, and extract or tincture of
henbane or squill pill. When a cough is troublesome at night and
unattended with fever, a small dose of laudanum, or tincture of henbane,
taken on going to rest, will generally procure sleep. In the treatment of
dry cough the more stimulating expectorants are useful, as garlic,
ammoniacum, styrax, and benzoin, combined with narcotics and sedatives, as
henbane, hemlock, and opium. A diaphoretic opiate is also very useful,
especially in the cough of old people. See DRAUGHT, EMULSION, MIXTURE,
PILLS, &c.

=COU'MARIN= (k[=o][=o]). _Syn._ CU'MARIN. The odorous principle of the
fruit or bean of _Dipteryxodorata_ (tonquin bean). It exists in several
other plants, as _Melilotus officinalis_, _Asperula odorata_, and
_Anthoxanthum odoratum_.

_Prep._ From the sliced tonquin beans, by macerating in hot alcohol;
straining through cloth, and distilling off the greater part of the
spirit. The syrupy residue deposits, on standing, crystals of COUMARIN,
which must be purified from fat oil by pressure, and then crystallised
from hot water.

_Prop._ Slender, brilliant, colourless needles; fusible at 122 deg. Fahr., and
distilling at a higher temperature without decomposition. It has a
fragrant odour and burning taste; it is very slightly soluble in cold
water, more freely in hot water, and also in alcohol.

=COUNTER-IR'RITANTS.= In _medicine_ and _pharmacy_, substances applied to
the surface of the body to establish a secondary morbid action, with the
view of relieving one already existing. In painful and spasmodic
affections, as neuralgia, spasms, and cramp; in rheumatism, lumbago,
swelled and painful joints; in headache, sore throat, sprains, languid
glandular tumours, and many other cases, this class of medicine often
proves extremely valuable. The counter-irritants which are best known are
blisters, mustard poultices, hartshorn-and-oil, and liniment of ammonia.

=COURT PLAS'TER.= See PLASTER.

=COW DUNG.= This substance was formerly employed in large quantities by
the calico printers. Recently a mixture of sulphate, carbonate, and
phosphate of lime and soda, with British gum or bran, has been
successfully tested as a substitute for it, and has the advantage of
cleanliness and economy.

=COW'HAGE.= _Syn._ COW'ITCH; MUCUN'A (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. "The hairs of
the fruit _Mucuna pruriens_" (Ph. L.). "The hairs from the pods" (Ph. E.).
"The hairy down" (Ph. D.). It occasions violent itching when it comes in
contact with the skin, which can only be allayed by a solution of green
vitriol, or by oil. It is frequently administered as a vermifuge, made
into a confection, by scraping the hair off a pod into treacle, syrup, or
honey, for a morning dose, which is repeated for 3 or 4 successive days,
followed by a brisk purge. It acts more effectually if its administration
has been preceded by a gentle emetic.

=COW-POX.= [_Variola Vaccina._] A disease affecting the udder in cows. The
treatment consists in fomenting the udder and applying poultices of spent
hops, giving laxative and saline medicines, and in drawing off the milk
with a teat-syphon.

=COWS.= See DAIRY.

=CRAB.= See SHELL-FISH.

=CRACKNELS.= Small, brittle cakes or biscuits, made by first boiling and
then baking paste. _Prep._ To flour, 1 pint, add a little grated nutmeg,
the yolks of 2 eggs, 2 or 3 spoonfuls of rose-water, and cold water, q. s.
to make a paste; then roll in butter, 1/2 lb., and make it into shapes. In
one hour put them into a kettle of boiling water, and boil them until they
swim, then throw them into cold water; take them out; and when dry, bake
them on tins. Those of the shops contain less butter, and the rose-water
is omitted.

=CRACK'NUTS.= Thin and sweet cakes or wafers. _Prep._ 1. Flour, 1 lb.;
sugar, 3/4 lb.; melted butter, 1/2 lb.; 6 or 7 eggs, well beaten; make a
paste with a glassful of raisin wine and a little water; add caraways,
roll it out as thin as paper, cut it into shapes with a tumbler, wash the
pieces with the white of egg, and dust them over with powdered sugar.

2. As the last, but using 1/2 lb. more flour.

=CRAMP.= See SPASMS.

=CRAPE= is cleaned by rinsing it in ox-gall and water, to remove the dirt;
afterwards in pure water, to remove the gall; and lastly, in a little
gum-water, to stiffen and crisp it. It is then clapped between the hands
until dry.

=CRAY-FISH.= See SHELL-FISH.

=CRAY'ONS.= Colouring substances made up into small cylinders or any other
convenient form for use in writing or drawing.

=Crayons, Draw'ing.= _Prep._ 1. Spermaceti, 3 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint;
agitate together till they form a species of emulsion; add bone ash, 1 lb.
(or more, previously reduced to an impalpable powder), and colouring
matter, q. s. to give the proper tint; reduce the whole to a perfectly
homogeneous paste, and form it into crayons.

2. Pipeclay and the finest prepared chalk, equal parts; or pipeclay alone,
q. s.; colouring, a sufficient quantity; make them into a paste with pale
mild ale.

3. White curd or Castile soap, cut into thin shavings, 1 oz.; boiling
water, 1 pint; dissolve, and when cold, add gradually as much rectified
spirit of wine as will render the liquid barely transparent. With this
fluid make equal parts of the finest elutriated clay and chalk into a
stiff paste, adding colouring matter, q. s., as before. For common
qualities, the spirit of wine may be omitted, but the mass will then dry
more slowly.

4. Curd soap, 1-1/2 oz.; gum Arabic, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1-1/4 pint;
dissolve, and use it as the last. General Lomet uses a similar mixture to
work up the softest varieties of hematite, with which he thus forms
superior red crayon.

5. (Process of the Brothers Joel, of Paris.) Shell-lac, 3 parts; spirit of
wine, 4 parts; oil of turpentine, 2 parts; dissolve, add pure clay, 6
parts; colouring matter, q. s.; form the mass into crayons, and dry them
by a stove heat.

6. Pale shell-lac, 5 parts; wood naphtha, 12 parts; dissolve, and with
this fluid mix up the colouring powder, previously stirred up with an
equal weight of fine pale-blue clay; dry by a stove heat, as before. When
this process is well managed, it produces crayons equal to those of the
best Parisian houses.

_Obs._ The composition may be formed into crayons by simply rolling it on
a slab; but to ensure their solidity the manufacturers generally employ a
metallic cylinder of 2 or 3 inches in diameter, with one end open and the
other firmly secured to a perforated plate, having holes of the same size
as the intended crayons. The crayon composition, in the state of a stiff
paste or dough, is introduced into the open end, and is forced down and
through the holes, by means of a small plug or piston, that exactly fits
the inside of the cylinder, and which is driven by the equable motion of a
small screw. The pieces that pass through the holes are then cut into
lengths and dried.

The substances employed as colouring matters for crayons are very
numerous, and their choice offers a wide field for the skill and fancy of
the artist. The pigment having been selected, it may be reduced to any
shade or tint by admixture with other pigments, and by 'dilution' with a
proper quantity of elutriated or prepared chalk. As, however, crayon
colours do not admit of being mixed together at the time of using them,
like liquid colours, it is usual to make 3 to 6 different shades of each
colour, so as to enable the artist at once to produce any effect he
chooses.

CRAYONS, BLACK. From prepared black-lead, ivory-black, lamp-black, &c.
Black chalk and charcoal are frequently made into crayons by simply sawing
them into suitably sized pieces. They may then be put into a pipkin of
melted wax, and allowed to macerate for an hour; after which they should
be taken out, drained, and laid on a piece of blotting paper to dry.
Drawings made with these crayons are very permanent, and if warmed
slightly on the wrong side, the lines will adhere, and become almost as
durable as ink.

CRAYONS, BLUE. From indigo, smalts, Prussian blue, verditer, &c.

CRAYONS, BROWN. From umber (raw and burnt), terra di Sienna (raw and
burnt), Cullen's earth, brown ochre, &c.; and some peculiar shades, from a
mixture of black, carmine, and either of the above colours.

CRAYONS, GREEN. From a mixture of king's yellow, or yellow ochre, with
blues.

CRAYONS, PURPLE. From any of the more brilliant blues, mixed with carmine,
lake, or vermilion.

CRAYONS, RED. From carmine, carminated lakes, vermilion, hematite, and any
of the earthy or mineral colours commonly used as pigments. Crayons of red
chalk may be prepared in the manner pointed out for crayons of black
chalk.

CRAYONS, WHITE. From pure clay and chalk.

CRAYONS, YELLOW. From king's yellow, Naples yellow, orpiment, yellow
ochre, &c.

=Crayons, Lithograph'ic.= _Prep._ 1. Tallow-soap, 7 parts; white wax, 6
parts; melt by a gentle heat, and add lamp-black, 1 part; keep it melted
with constant stirring, for 20 or 30 minutes, then let it cool a little,
and cast it into moulds.

2. White wax, 4 parts; shell-lac and hard tallow-soap, of each 2 parts;
lamp-black, 1 part; as last.

3. Spermaceti, white wax, and hard tallow-soap, of each equal parts;
lamp-black, q. s. to colour.

_Obs._ Some makers melt the soap, wax, and lamp-black in an iron ladle,
over a brisk fire, and allow the mixture to blaze for a few seconds before
adding the shell-lac, which is no sooner thoroughly incorporated than the
heat is increased until the mass again kindles, when it is at once removed
from the fire and stirred until it is cool enough to be poured into the
moulds. This method leads to trouble and loss, without any corresponding
advantage. These crayons are used to draw designs upon lithographic
stones.

=Crayons for Writing on Glass.= _Prep._ 1. From French chalk, cut into
suitable pieces. Marks made with these crayons, when obscured or rubbed
out, may be several times revived by simply breathing on the glass.

2. (Brunquelle.) Spermaceti, 4 parts, tallow, 3 parts, wax, 2 parts, are
melted together in a cup; and red lead, 6 parts, and carbonate of potassa
(in fine powder), 1 part, stirred in; the mass is kept melted and stirred
for about half an hour longer, then poured into glass moulds (tubes) of
the thickness of a common pencil, and cooled as rapidly as possible. The
mass may be screwed up and down in the tube, and cut to a point with a
knife. A crayon is thus obtained which will readily write upon clean, dry
glass.

=CREAM.= _Syn._ CREM'OR, C. LAC'TIS, FLOS LAC'TIS, L. The oleaginous
portion of milk, which collects in a thin stratum upon the surface, when
that fluid is left undisturbed for some time. By violent agitation, as in
the process of churning, the fatty globules unite together, forming
butter; whilst the liquid portion, consisting of caseum, serum, and a
little butter, constituting the residuum, is called butter-milk. This
separation is effected the most readily when the cream has become
partially sour and coagulated by being kept a few days, a change which
occurs in consequence of the conversion of some of the sugar of the serum
into lactic acid, which precipitates the caseous matter contained in the
small portion of the milk with which the cream is mixed. On these simple
facts chiefly depend the successful manufacture of butter. The cream
intended for churning should therefore be kept until it turns slightly
sour, and assumes the condition above referred to, as then the butter will
readily 'come.' If churned while quite sweet the operation will be
tedious, and will frequently fail. When this happens the dairy maids
declare the milk is 'charmed' or 'bewitched,' and reluctantly proceed with
the operation. The addition of a little rennet or vinegar is the proper
remedy in this case, and will cause the almost immediate separation of the
butter.

When cream is suspended in a linen bag, and allowed to drain, it gradually
becomes drier and harder, by the separation of the liquid portion, and
then forms what is known by the name of cream cheese. By the application
of slight pressure the separation of the whey is more completely effected,
and the product is not only better, but will keep longer.

_Qual._ Cream, in a dietetic point of view, may be regarded in the same
light as butter, as it is converted into butter in the process of
digestion. On this account much cream should never be taken at once by
persons of delicate stomachs. In eating cream with fruit persons are
hardly aware of the large quantity they consume, until they find it
disagree with the stomach, when the condiment is blamed for the
indiscretion of those who take it.

Mr Wanklyn gives the following as the composition of six different samples
of cream:--

                   1.      2.     3.      4.      5.     6.

  Water          72.20   71.2   66.36   60.17   53.62  50.00
  Fat            19.00   14.1   18.87   33.02   38.17  43.90
  Milk, Sugar,}
    Casein,   }   8.80   14.7   14.77    6.81    8.21   6.10
    and Ash.  }

A quart of good cream generally yields from 13 oz. to 15 oz. of commercial
butter.

Mr Blyth says: "The analysis of cream is conducted on exactly the same
principle as that of milk; but the cream must be weighed, not measured;
and smaller quantities may be evaporated to dryness in order to estimate
the water, if the ratio of water to the solids not fat is such that
adulteration may be suspected; for this ratio, although occasionally
disturbed by some of the casein rising with the fat, is practically the
same as in milk." Mineral adulterations, such as carbonate of magnesia,
will be detected, if present, in the ash. See MILK, BUTTER, &c.

=Cream, Al'mond.= _Prep._ From sweet almonds, 2 oz.; bitter almonds, 4 in
no.; blanched and beaten in a mortar to a smooth paste, adding a
teaspoonful of water to prevent oiling; and afterwards a pint of cream,
and enough powdered lump sugar to sweeten; the whole is then whisked to a
froth, the glasses filled with the liquor, and some of the froth placed on
the top of each. Some persons add the juice of a lemon.

=Cream, Bran'dy.= _Prep._ To the last add the yolks of 6 eggs; heat it
gently over the fire until it thickens, keeping it well stirred, then
farther add two or three glassfuls of brandy, and pour it into small cups
or shallow glasses.

=Cream, Burnt.= _Prep._ Cream, 1 quart; cassia, a small stick; peel of
half a lemon; boil for 5 minutes, cool a little, take out the spice, and
add the yolks of 9 eggs, and sugar, q. s. to sweeten; stir until cold, put
it into a dish, strew pounded sugar over it, and bake it until brown.

=Cream, Choc'olate.= _Prep._ Chocolate, scraped fine, 1 oz.; thick cream,
1 quart; sugar (best), 6 oz.; heat it nearly to boiling, then remove it
from the fire, and mix it well; when cold, add the whites of 8 or 10 eggs;
whisk rapidly, and take up the froth on a sieve; serve the cream in
glasses, and pile up the froth on the top of them.

=Cream, Cof'fee.= _Prep._ 1. As the last, omitting the chocolate, and
using a pint of the strongest made coffee.

2. Add a teacupful of very clear, concentrated, made coffee to 1 pint each
of clarified calf's feet jelly and good cream; sweeten with lump sugar,
give it one boil up, and pour it into shapes or glasses when nearly cold.

=Cream, Cold.= See COSMETIC, CERATE and GRANULATED CREAM (_below_).

=Cream, Costorph'in.= After a village near Edinburgh, where it is commonly
made. _Prep._ The milk of 3 or 4 consecutive days, together with the
cream, are allowed to remain until sour and coagulated; the whey is then
drawn off, and fresh cream added. It is eaten with sugar and fruit,
especially with strawberries and raspberries.

=Cream, Dev'onshire.= _Prep._ 1. (DEVONSHIRE RAW CREAM.) From sour cream
mixed with an equal quantity of fresh cream, and sweetened with sugar.
Eaten with fruit.

2. (DEVONSHIRE SCALDED CREAM, D. CLOUTED C.) The milk of yesterday is set
in a polished, shallow, brass pan, over a clear fire free from smoke, and
gradually heated until very hot, care being taken not to let it boil; when
the undulations on the surface look thick, and form a ring round the top
of the fluid, the size of the bottom of the pan, it is removed from the
fire and allowed to cool; the next day it is skimmed off for sale. Used
with either tea or coffee, and excellent with both; it is also eaten with
sugar and fruit, and is made into butter. See CREAM (_above_).

=Cream, D'Illotte's.= _Syn._ CRYSTALLISED CREAM, VEGETABLE C. The
ingenious manufacturer whose anagrammatic powers have converted his
patronym of Elliott into one less familiar to vulgar English ears,
prepares this really elegant hair cosmetic as follows:--Oil of almonds, 3
oz., and spermaceti, 1/2 oz., are melted together; and bergamot, neroli,
and verbena, of each 5 drops, and huile au jasmin, 10 drops, are then
stirred in, and the mixture is at once poured into small, wide-mouthed
bottles, to crystallise. If preferred harder, 1/2 dr. more spermaceti may
be used, but the precise quantity to produce the best crystalline
appearance depends greatly on the season of the year, more being required
in winter than in summer.

=Cream, Facti''tious.= _Syn._ MOCK CREAM. _Prep._ 1. Beat 3 eggs, with 2
oz. of sugar, and a small piece of butter, until the combination is
complete; then add warm milk, 1 pint; put the vessel into another
containing hot water, and stir it one way until it acquires the
consistence of cream.

2. Arrowroot, 1 spoonful; wet it with a little cold milk, then add,
gradually, boiling milk, 1/4 pint; mix well, and further add, of fresh
butter, 1 oz.; sugar, 1-1/2 oz.; cold milk, 3/4 pint; and continue
stirring until the whole is quite cold.

=Cream, Ice.= See ICE.

=Cream, Fruit.= _Prep._ From pulped or preserved fruit, 1 lb.; cream, or
good raw milk, 1 quart; sugar q. s.; boil for 1 minute; cool, and add a
glassful of brandy. A froth is raised on these creams with a chocolate
mill. It is taken off and placed on a hair sieve, and some of it, after
the glasses are filled with the cream, placed on the top of each. The
expressed juice of raspberries, of currants, and several other kinds of
fruit, also make delicious creams. In winter, raspberry jelly, jam, or
syrup may be used. A glass of good brandy improves these creams.

=Cream, Fur'niture.= See POLISH.

=Cream, Gran'ulated.= _Syn._ GRANULATED COLD CREAM. _Prep._ (Owen.) Almond
oil, 6 oz., white wax and spermaceti, of each 2 oz., are melted together,
and a little otto of roses added; the liquor is then poured into a large
Wedgwood-ware or marble mortar, previously warmed, and containing 1-1/2 to
2 pints of warm water; brisk agitation with the pestle is then had
recourse to, until the oleaginous portion is well divided, when the whole
is suddenly thrown into a vessel containing a gallon or two of clean cold
water; lastly, the granulated cream is thrown on a muslin filter; and as
much water as possible is shaken (gently) out of it; after which it is put
up for use.

=Cream, Lem'on.= _Prep._ From cream, 1 pint; yolks of 3 eggs; powdered
sugar, 6 oz.; the yellow rind of 1 lemon (grated), with the juice; mix,
apply a gentle heat, and stir until cold. If desired white, the whites of
the eggs should be used instead of the yolks.

=Cream, Or'ange.= Similar to lemon cream, but using oranges.

=Cream, Pis''tachio.= From the kernels of pistachio nuts, as almond cream.

=Cream, Rasp'berry.= See CREAM, FRUIT.

=Cream, Sat'urnine.= _Syn._ CREM'OR PLUM'BI ACETA'TIS, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Kirkland.) Cream, 1 oz.; solution of diacetate of lead, 1 dr.; mix.
Cooling, sedative, and astringent; a useful application in certain cases
to irritable ulcers, sore nipples, &c. It is poisonous.

=Cream, Scotch Sour.= _Prep._ (Gray.) Skimmed milk is put over night into
a wooden tub, with a spigot at the bottom, and this tub is put into
another filled with hot water; in the morning the small tub is taken out
and the thin part of the milk ('wigg') drawn off until the thick, sour
cream begins to come. This process requires practice as to the heat of the
water; when it succeeds, skimmed milk yields nearly one half of this
cream, which is eaten with sugar as a delicacy; it is only distinguishable
from cream by its taste, and sells for double the price of fresh milk.

=Cream, Stone.= _Syn._ CREAM BLANCMANGE. _Prep._ From isinglass, 1/2 oz.,
dissolved in boiling water, a teacupful, adding cream, 1 pint, and sugar,
4 oz.; stirred until nearly cold, and then poured over fruit or preserves,
placed on the bottom of glass dishes.

=Cream, Tarax'acum.= _Syn._ CREM'OR TARAX'ACI, L. _Prep._ (Dr Collier.)
From washed dandelion roots (sliced), sprinkled with spirit of juniper,
and then pressed for their juice.--_Dose._ A table-spoonful twice or
thrice daily, as a stomachic and tonic, in dyspepsia, &c.

=Cream, Vanil'la.= _Prep._ 1. Boil a stick of vanilla (grated), and
isinglass, 1/2 oz., in milk, 1 pint, until the latter is dissolved;
strain, add sugar, 6 oz., and cream, 1 pint; stir till nearly cold, then
pour it into moulds like blancmange.

2. Cream and strong isinglass jelly, of each 1 pint; sugar, 6 oz.; essence
of vanilla, 1/4 oz.; mix as before.

=Cream, Vel'vet.= _Prep._ As the last, but, instead of vanilla, flavour
with the rind and juice of a lemon, and about a teacupful of white wine.

=Cream, Whipped'.= _Prep._ From the whites of 12 eggs; cream, 1 quart;
pale sherry, 1/2 pint; essence of musk and ambergris, of each, 10 drops;
essences of lemon and orange peel, of each, 3 or 4 drops; whisk to a
froth, remove the latter on to a sieve, fill the glasses with the cream,
and then pile the froth on the top of them.

=CRE'ASOTE.= See KREASOTE.

=CRE'ATINE.= See KREATINE.

=CREAT'ININE.= See KREATININE.

=CREME.= [Fr.] _Syn._ CREAM. This name is applied to several compound
spirits and cordial liquors, especially by the French liqueuristes, who
pride themselves on the superior quality and cream-like smoothness of
their manufactures. Like the cordials of the English, they are mostly
dilute spirit, aromatised, and sweetened. See LIQUEURS.

=CREME DE BEAUTE.= A cosmetic consisting of an emulsion of bitter and
sweet almonds.

=CREN'IC ACID.= A brown substance discovered by Berzelius in certain
mineral waters. It is a modification of HUMUS, and is produced by the
decay of vegetable matter.

=CRESYLIC ACID.= C_{7}H_{8}O. _Syn._ CRESOL, KRESYLIC ACID, KRESOL. One of
the homologues of carbolic acid, found in coal tar. Cresylic, like
carbolic acid, is a useful disinfectant.

=CRIB-BITING.=--The use of deal or any unseasoned wood for the manger may
induce this habit in horses. To remedy it the stable fittings should be of
iron. As the habit very frequently arises from acidity of stomach in
horses, the administration of chalk or other antacids has been
recommended.

=CRICK'ETS.= These insects may be destroyed by putting Scotch snuff into
their holes, or by placing some pieces of beetle wafers for them to eat.

=CRINUM ASIATICUM.= (Ind. Ph.) _Habitat._ Low humid localities in Bengal,
the Concans, and other parts of India; also cultivated in gardens; Ceylon,
the Moluccas, and Cochin China.--_Officinal part._ The fresh root (_Crini
Radix_); bulbous, with a terminal stoloniferous fusiform portion
issuing from the crown of the bulb; emits an unpleasant narcotic
odour; readily dried in a stove, and reducible to powder after
desiccation.--_Properties._ Emetic; in small doses nauseant and
diaphoretic.--_Therapeutic uses._ Analogous to those of squill.

=Juice of Crinum= (_Succus Crini_; _Infusum Crini_, Beng. Ph.). Take of
the fresh root of crinum, 1/2 an ounce; cold water, 2 ounces. Bruise the
root in a stone mortar, gradually adding the water. Strain, with pressure,
through calico.--_Dose._ From 2 to 4 fluid drachms, every twenty minutes,
until the desired effect is produced.

=Syrup of Crinum= (_Syrupus Crini_). Take of the fresh root of crinum,
sliced, 8 ounces; boiling water, 1 pint; refined sugar, 1 pound. Macerate
the root in the water for two hours, bruise in a mortar, press through
calico, add the sugar, and dissolve with the aid of gentle heat.--_Dose._
About 2 fluid drachms, repeated as required. Used as a nauseant and emetic
for children.

=CROTON CHLORAL.= _Syn._ BUTYL CHLORAL. A colourless oleaginous liquid,
having an odour somewhat like that of ordinary chloral; insoluble in
water. Croton chloral may be prepared by the process of Kraemer and Pinner,
who were the first to obtain it. A current of chlorine gas is passed into
aldehyd during twenty-four hours. At the commencement of the operation the
action is very energetic; so much so that it is necessary to surround the
vessel containing the aldehyd with a refrigerating mixture, and it is only
towards the end that the temperature is raised to 100 deg. C. Large quantities
of hydrochloric acid are generated during all the time the chlorine is
acting on the aldehyd. The resulting product is submitted to fractional
distillation, and the liquid passing over between 163 deg. and 165 deg. C. is
croton chloral. Croton chloral is the hydride of trichlorcrotonyl
(C_{4}H_{2}Cl_{3}OH), or the aldehyd of crotonic acid (C_{4}H_{5}OOH) in
the radical of which three atoms of hydrogen have been replaced by three
atoms of chlorine. Like ordinary chloral, croton chloral combines with
water to form a crystallised hydrate which is the substance used in
medicine. Croton chloral hydrate occurs in white nacreous spangles. It is
very slightly soluble in cold water, more so in warm, and extremely
soluble in alcohol. A convenient solvent for it is glycerin, in which it
dissolves much more easily than in water. The dose of the hydrate as a
hypnotic is from 8 to 15 grains, for neuralgia 5 grains are given three
times a day. Dr Liebreich, who first introduced croton chloral to the
notice of the medical profession, says he has failed to discover that it
exercises any hurtful effects on the stomach and other organs. On the
contrary, Dr Worms asserts that he finds it not so generally tolerated as
ordinary chloral, and Gay affirms that it is more uncertain in its
narcotic effects.

=CRO'TON OIL.= _Syn._ OLEUM CROTO'NIS (B. P.), O. TIGLII (Ph. L. & D.), L.
The "oil expressed from the seeds of Croton tiglium" or purging croton.
This oil is a drastic purgative, and a powerful local irritant and
rubefacient. Rubbed on the skin, it produces a pustular eruption, and
frequently purges. In this way (diluted with thrice its weight of olive
oil) it is occasionally used as a counter-irritant.--_Dose_ (as a purge),
1 to 2 drops; in obstinate constipation, lead colic, &c.

The residuum from which the oil has been expressed is sometimes used in
veterinary practice under the name of croton cake, or croton farina; but
as the amount of oil it contains varies greatly, it is irregular and
uncertain in its effects.

=CROUP.= _Syn._ CYNAN'CHE LARYN''GEA, C. SUFFOCA'TIVA, C. TRACHEA'LIS, L.
An inflammatory disease affecting the larynx and trachea.

_Symp._ A permanently laborious and suffocative breathing, accompanied by
wheezing, cough, a peculiar shrillness of the voice, and more or less
expectoration of purulent matter, which continually threatens suffocation.
There are two varieties, acute croup and chronic croup. The latter is very
rare.

_Treat._ Bleeding by leeches or cupping, over the region of the trachea,
should be immediately had recourse to, when the symptoms are urgent; or
violent local irritants, as pieces of lint dipped in strong acetic acid,
or blisters, may be applied to the same part. In weakly subjects of
irritable constitution bleeding should be avoided. Dr Larroque recommends
repeated vomiting in the croup of children; and M. Marotte and M. Boudet
have adopted this plan with great success. The treatment consists in
making the patient attacked with croup vomit a great number of times
within the day, so as to detach the pseudo-membrane from the larynx nearly
as fast as it is formed. For this purpose M. Marotte employs one or other
of the following formulae:--

1. Tartar emetic, 1-1/2 gr.; syrup of ipecacuanha, 1 oz.; water, 2 oz.

2. Impure emetine, 3 gr.; syrup of ipecacuanha and water, of each 1-1/2
oz.

These draughts are administered by spoonfuls every ten minutes, until
there has been a sufficient number of vomitings. In this manner he says he
has been always able to make the patient expectorate a certain quantity of
false membrane. This treatment is accompanied by the use of small doses of
calomel, leeches to the throat, and blisters to the nape of the neck; but
it is the opinion of M. Marotte that the vomitings alone effect the cure.
Out of 25 cases that occurred at the Hopital des Enfans[Enfants], the only
authenticated case of cure among all these was effected by emetics. (M.
Boudet.)

The croup is a very dangerous disease, and medical aid should be
immediately sought wherever it can be procured. It is principally confined
to infancy, or to children under 9 years of age; but occasionally attacks
adults. One of our early friends, a young medical practitioner of great
promise, died of it prematurely, after only about 20 hours' illness.

=CROWDIE.= Mix the liquor in which a leg of mutton has been boiled with
half a pint of oatmeal, and two onions cut very fine; and add pepper and
salt. Make the oatmeal into a paste with a little of the liquor over the
fire, stir in the remainder of the ingredients, and let them boil gently
for twenty minutes. This forms a very nutritious and cheap dish.

=CROWING, IN CHILDREN.= _Syn._ CHILDCROWING. SPURIOUS CROUP. SPASMODIC
CROUP. This very formidable disorder almost always occurs during teething.
It comes on in paroxysms. In the intervals between the spasms the
respiration is quite natural; but during the attack there is great
difficulty of breathing accompanied with a crowing noise, and with violent
struggling on the part of the little sufferer. Convulsions and faintness
also sometimes occur. In his 'Advice to a Mother' Mr Chavasse prescribes
the following treatment:--

"The first thing, of course, to be done is to send immediately for a
medical man. Have a plentiful supply of cold and hot water always at hand,
ready for use at a moment's notice. The instant the paroxysm is on the
child, plentifully and perseveringly dash cold water upon his head and
face. Put his feet and legs in hot salt-mustard-and-water, and if
necessary place the child up to his neck in a hot bath, still dashing
water upon his face and head. If he does not quickly come round, sharply
smack the back and buttocks. As soon as a medical man arrives, he will
lose no time in thoroughly lancing the gums, and in applying appropriate
remedies. During the intervals, great care and attention must be paid to
the diet. If the child be breathing a smoky, close atmosphere, he should
be immediately removed to a pure one. Indeed in this disease there is no
remedy equal to a change of air--to a dry bracing neighbourhood. Even if
it be winter, change of air is the best remedy, either to the coast or to
a healthy farmhouse. In a case of this kind where it is not practicable to
send a child from home, then let him be sent out of doors during the
greater part of every day; let him, in point of fact, almost live in the
open air. I am quite sure from an extensive experience that, in this
disease, _fresh air, and plenty of it, is the best and principal remedy_."

=CRU'CIBLE.= _Syn._ MELTING POT; CRUCIBULUM, L.; CREUSET, Fr. A vessel
used by metallurgists and chemists for holding substances whilst they are
exposed to a high temperature. The crucibles commonly used for fusing
metals are formed of clay, or a mixture of plumbago and clay. For certain
purposes, crucibles of platinum, gold, silver, iron, porcelain, and lime,
are employed.

=Crucibles, Earth'en.= _Syn._ CLAY CRUCIBLES. From fire-clay, mixed with
silica, coke, burnt clay, or other infusible matter.

_Manuf._ The materials, having been ground and kneaded, are generally
moulded by hand upon a wooden block of the shape of the cavity of the
crucible. Another method of shaping a crucible consists in ramming the
ingredients into a suitable mould, formed of steel or gun-metal. (See
_engr._)

[Illustration:

_a a._ External steel mould.

_b b,_ Clay or composition for forming the crucible.

_c,_ Internal steel mould.

_d d,_ Wooden stand.

_e,_ Cord or chain to withdraw the internal mould or plug.]

Small crucibles are sometimes formed by pouring 'slip,' that is, clay
mixed with sufficient water to give it the consistence of cream, into
porous moulds, made of a species of stucco. A series of these moulds are
placed upon a table and filled with the semifluid composition. By the time
the whole (say 50 or 60) are filled, the 'slip' may be poured out of the
one first filled, leaving only a very small quantity behind to give the
requisite thickness to the bottom. The second and third may then be
treated in the same way, until the whole number have been attended to. In
each mould a perfect crucible is formed, by the abstraction of the water
of that portion of the 'slip' in immediate contact with the stucco, and
the crucible is either thicker or thinner in proportion to the time this
absorbent action has been allowed to go on. 70 or 80 crucibles may thus
be easily made in less than 15 minutes. The moulds and their contents are
next placed in a stove or slow oven. In a short time, from the contraction
of the clay in drying, the crucibles may be removed, and the moulds, as
soon as they have become dry, may be again filled; by care they will last
for years.

Earthen crucibles are used both in the burnt and unburnt state. Small
crucibles are generally kiln-burnt before they are used, but the large
Stourbridge clay 'casting-pots,' which are extensively employed in brass
foundries, are never previously burnt.

The following kinds of earthen crucibles are much used in the arts:--

=Crucibles, Cornish.= From Teignmouth clay, 1 part; Poole clay, 1 part;
sand from St. Agnes's Beacon, Cornwall, 2 parts. When smaller and less
refractory crucibles are needed, the same mixture is employed, with the
addition of an eighth part of China clay, or Kaolinite from St. Austell.
These crucibles are generally made round, and of two sizes, of which one
fits into the other; the larger being 3 inches in diameter at the top, and
3-1/2 inches high outside measure. They are coarse in grain, and of a
greyish-white colour, spotted with dark specks. They are always
kiln-burnt. Of all crucibles, none are more generally useful for
metallurgical experiments.

=Crucibles, Hessian.= From a mixture of equal weights of Almerode clay and
sand. They are generally triangular in shape, so that the melted metal may
be conveniently poured out from each corner. They are usually sold in
'nests' of six crucibles, fitting one in another. In the character of
their body, and in composition and qualities, they closely resemble the
Cornish.

=Crucibles, London.= From a very refractory clay. They have a
reddish-brown colour, and are close in grain. They are exceedingly useful
in assaying, as they resist the action of fused oxide of lead much better
than most clay crucibles. Being very liable to crack, they require to be
used with care.

WHITE FLUXING-POTS. From a peculiar kind of foreign clay. They are
manufactured by the Patent Plumbago Crucible Company, and are much
esteemed by metallurgists, being well moulded and very refractory. They
have a smooth surface, and withstand the action of fluxes satisfactorily.

=Crucibles, Stourbridge-clay.= From Stourbridge clay, 4 parts; burnt clay,
obtained by pounding and grinding old glass pots, 2 parts; pipe-clay and
coke-powder, of each 1 part.

Anstey's Patent. From Stourbridge clay, 2 parts; hard gas-coke (previously
ground and sifted through a sieve of 1/8th-inch mesh), 1 part.

_Obs._ These crucibles of Stourbridge clay are made large enough to hold
forty pounds or more of melted brass. They are only dried, and not baked.
For use they are warmed, placed on the furnace, bottom upwards, the
burning coke gradually heaped round them, and the firing continued until
they acquire a fully red heat. They are then quickly taken out of the
furnace, and put in again with the mouth upwards. If placed in the furnace
with the mouth upwards at first, they are sure to crack. After they have
been once used and allowed to become cold they are worthless.

=Crucibles, Plat'inum.= These are indispensable instruments in the
laboratory of the analytical chemist. They are chiefly employed in the
ignition of precipitates, and in the fusion of silicates with carbonated
alkalies to render them soluble, a preliminary step to their analysis. The
most ordinary form of the platinum crucible is that of a cup with a flat
bottom. They are always provided with lids, which are sometimes so
constructed that they may be used, when separated from the crucibles, as
capsules for ignitions and evaporations. Platinum crucibles are not acted
on by carbonated alkalies at a high temperature, but they are liable to be
seriously damaged by the caustic alkalies. Precipitates of the more
reducible metals must never be ignited in these crucibles, as the
reduction of the metals would infallibly destroy the vessels.

=Crucibles, Gold=, are exceedingly useful for many operations, on account
of the way which they stand caustic and carbonated alkalies, and nitric
acid, which destroy platinum or silver crucibles respectively. Their
drawbacks are their great expense and ready fusibility.

=Crucibles, Silver.= These are much used for fusions of alkalies, being
much less acted on than platinum crucibles, and also for water analyses,
from their cheapness and light weight. They are easily destroyed, however,
by acids.

=Crucibles, Plumba'go.= _Syn._ GRAPHITE C., BLACKLEAD C., BLUE POTS. From
graphite, ground and sifted, mixed with sufficient refractory clay to
render it plastic. They are shaped by hand on an ordinary potter's wheel,
or by moulds of metal like that figured above under the head of CRUCIBLES,
EARTHEN.

_Prop., &c._ Good blacklead crucibles, even when of the largest size,
support the greatest and most sudden alternations of temperature without
cracking, and may be used after repeated heating and cooling. Their
surface, within as well as without, may be made very smooth, so that
particles of melted metal will not hang about the sides. They are now
almost universally used for melting the precious metals.

=Crucibles, Por'celain.= These beautiful vessels are now made in Germany
and France of all shapes and sizes. They are formed of the most
exquisitely white, thin, and hard porcelain, which does not crack when
heated, and which is but little acted on by the most energetic chemical
reagents. For some operations they supersede platinum crucibles,
particularly in the ignition of the precipitates of the more reducible
metals. They do not retain colouring matter, and are not porous. Their
covers are excellently adapted for delicate cases of testing, the
whiteness of the porcelain showing the changes of colour in a single drop
of liquid most distinctly.

=Crucibles, Iron.= Used chiefly for preparing common reagents, as sulphide
of iron, calcic chloride, &c., and also for preparing pure caustic potassa
from the nitrate.

=CRUMP'ET.= A sort of muffin or tea-cake, very light and spongy. _Prep._
From flour, 2 lbs., made into a dough with warm milk-and-water, adding a
little salt, 3 eggs (well beaten), and 3 teaspoonfuls of yeast, mixed to
the consistence of thick batter; after standing before the fire for a
short time, to rise, it is poured into buttered tins, and baked slowly to
a fine yellow. For the table, crumpets are toasted lightly on both sides,
buttered, piled on a hot dish, and cut into halves.

=CRUST.= The paste with which pies, tarts, &c., are made, or covered.

1. (FINE.) From flour, 1 lb.; sugar, 1/4 lb.; melted butter, 1/2 lb.; 3
eggs; milk, q. s. Requires little baking.

2. (RAISED CRUST, FOR MEAT PIES, &C.) As the last, but using 6 oz. of lard
for the butter, and 2 instead of 3 eggs.

3. (SHORT.) From flour, 1 lb.; butter and sugar, of each 2 oz.; eggs, 2 in
no.; made into a stiff paste.

_Obs._ The quality is improved if the whole or a portion of the butter is
employed in the way directed under PUFF PASTE. For further information
hereon, consult the cookery books of Acton, Beeton, Rundell, and Soyer.

=CRY'OLITE= (3NaF_{1}AlF_{3}). A native double fluoride of aluminium and
sodium, found in large quantities in Greenland, employed in the
manufacture of alum, and also as a source of metallic aluminium.

=CRYOPH'ORUS.= See REFRIGERATION.

=CRYS'TAL.= A solid body, having a regular geometrical form. The plane
surfaces by which a crystal is bounded are termed faces; these intersect
in straight lines or edges; and these again meet in points, and form
angles. The axis of a crystal is an imaginary line passing through its
centre, and terminating either in the middle of two faces or of two edges,
or in two angles; and axes terminating in similar parts of a crystal are
named similar axes. When the axes of a crystal are properly chosen, and
placed in a right position, the various faces are observed to group
themselves in a regular and beautiful manner around these axes, and to be
all so related to them as to compose a connected series, produced
according to definite laws. The multitudinous forms of crystals have been
distributed by mineralogists and chemists into six primary classes or
systems, distinguishable from one another by the relative positions and
lengths of the three axes about which the planes or faces are arranged;
while the different figures of any particular system are distinguishable
by the arrangement of the planes in respect to the axes. Thus, the cube or
hexahedron, the rhombic dodecahedron, and the octahedron all belong to the
regular system, which is characterised by 3 equal axes cutting one another
at right angles. But in the cube each plane cuts 1 axis, and is parallel
to 2 axes; in the dodecahedron each plane cuts 2 axes, and is parallel to
a third; while in the octahedron each plane cuts the 3 axes. The names and
definitions of the six crystalline systems are given below:--

  1. REGULAR SYSTEM.       { The 3 axes equal
                           { and rectangular.
  2. SQUARE PRISMATIC S.   }
       2 equal axes.       } The 3 axes unequal,
  3. RIGHT PRISMATIC S.    } and rectangular.
       All unequal.        }
  4. RHOMBOHEDRAL S.       { The 3 axes equal,
                           { but not rectangular.
  5. OBLIQUE PRISMATIC S.       } The 3 axes not
       1 axis rectangular to 2. } equal, and not
  6. DOUBLY O.P.S.              } rectangular.
       None rectangular.        }

=CRYSTALLISATION.= The act or process by which crystals are formed. The
frequent reference to this subject in the pages of this work, and the
constant employment of the process of crystallisation in the manufacture
of salts, &c., in the laboratory, seem to point out the necessity of a few
explanatory remarks thereon under this head. When fluid substances are
suffered to pass with adequate slowness to the solid state, or when
solutions of solids are slowly concentrated by evaporation, or the solvent
powers of the menstruum, gradually lessened by cooling, the ultimate
particles of matter frequently so arrange themselves as to form regular
geometrical bodies, familiarly known by the name of crystals. This
wonderful property, which is possessed by a great variety of substances in
the mineral kingdom, and by nearly all saline bodies, is resorted to for
many useful and important purposes in the chemical arts. It is by means of
crystallisation that the majority of salts are obtained in a state of
purity; for in the act of passing into the crystalline state, the foreign
substances with which they are united are left behind in the
mother-liquor.

Salts are crystallised, either by allowing their hot and saturated
solutions to cool slowly, or by simply evaporating the menstrua as long as
crystals form. In the first case the liquid is commonly evaporated until a
pellicle appears on the surface, when the vessel is set aside in some
sheltered situation until cold, at which time the crystals are collected,
and the process repeated for fresh crystals. In the second case the
crystals are usually removed from the liquid as soon as they are
deposited. The first method is adopted for those salts that are
considerably more soluble in hot than in cold water, as carbonate of
soda, Epsom salts, &c.; the last method, for those that possess nearly
equal solubility in both cases, and also for many salts which are not
required in handsome crystals; thus common salt and chromate of potash are
crystallised in this way. Many of the alkaloids, and their salts, are
obtained in crystals, by allowing their solutions (generally alcoholic or
ethereal) to evaporate spontaneously. By repeating the processes of
solution and crystallisation two or three times with the same body, the
crystals obtained by the last operation will usually be found to be quite
pure.

Many solids may be readily obtained in a crystalline state by melting them
and allowing them to cool very slowly. Thus, iodide of sulphur is
crystallised by melting it in a flask placed in a salt-water bath, and
allowing it to remain in the water until the whole becomes cold. Sulphur
and many metals are crystallised by pouring them, in a state of fusion,
into a hot vessel having a plug in the bottom, which is withdrawn as soon
as the surface becomes cool, when the liquid portion runs out, and leaves
the under surface in the form of a mass of agglomerated crystals.
Perfectly pure wax, stearine, and spermaceti have a very pleasing
appearance when treated in this way.

=CRYS'TALLOID.= See DIALYSIS.

=CU'BEBIN.= A peculiar substance obtained from cubebs.

_Prep._ From cubebs (from which the oil has been expelled by
distillation), by digestion in alcohol, evaporating the resulting tincture
to one fourth, filtering, and then evaporating the remaining fluid almost
to dryness. The residuum is left in a cold place until it assumes a
semi-crystalline appearance, when it is thrown on a filter, and the fluid
portion (the 'cubebine' of M. Cassola) allowed to drain off. In 24 hours
the substance left on the filter is dissolved in 4 times its weight of
boiling alcohol (sp. gr. .90), the solution allowed to deposit its
undissolved resin (still maintaining it near the boiling temperature),
after which the clear portion is decanted. The crystals deposited as the
liquid cools are cubebin. It is purified by redissolving it in boiling
concentrated alcohol, and the addition of a little boiling water and
animal charcoal, when long, white needles will be deposited if the
solution is allowed to cool very slowly.

_Prop., &c._ It is insoluble in water, and nearly so in cold alcohol, but
very soluble in boiling alcohol. It strikes a fine crimson colour with
sulphuric acid, which remains unaltered for some hours; a property which
distinguishes it from piperin. Its physiological action has been but
little studied. According to Dr Goerres, this for the most part resembles
that of cubebs.

=CU'BEBS.= _Syn._ CUBEB PEPPER; CUBEBA (B. P. & U. S.), CUBEBAE (B. P.), L.
The immature and stalked fruit of _Piper cubeba_ or _Cubeba officinalis_.
Cubebs are stimulant, stomachic, and aromatic, like the other peppers;
they are also diuretic, and appear to possess a specific influence over
the urino-genital organs.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr., in affections of the
bladder and prostate gland, and in gleet and leucorrh[oe]a; 1 to 3 dr., in
the early and inflammatory stages of gonorrh[oe]a, in piles, &c. They may
be taken in water, milk, or bitter ale.

=CU'CUMBER.= The fruit of the _Cucumis sativus_ (Linn.). Used as a salad
vegetable. It is somewhat indigestible, but when properly dressed, with
plenty of oil, it may be eaten without the slightest fear of evil
consequences. The practice of pouring off the natural juice extracted from
the cucumber by salt cannot be too strongly condemned. See ELATERIUM.

=CUD'BEAR.= _Syn._ PERSIO. A dye-stuff obtained from _Lecanora tartarea_
and other lichens, by a process nearly similar to that used in making
ARCHIL. The lichen is watered with stale urine or other ammoniacal liquor,
and suffered to ferment for 3 or 4 weeks, after which the whole is poured
into a flat vessel, and exposed to the air until the urinous smell has
disappeared, and it has assumed a violet colour. It is then ground to
powder. Its use is confined to a few cases of silk dyeing, where it is
employed to yield shades of ruby and maroon; upon wool it gives deep-red
shades. The colours produced by it are very fugitive. Like archil, there
are two varieties of this dye-stuff--BLUE CUDBEAR and RED CUDBEAR. See
ARCHIL.

=CULM.= In _mineralogy_, a slaty kind of ANTHRACITE, occurring in Wales
and North Devon. The term is also applied to any impure, shaly kind of
coal.

=CU'MARIN.= See COUMARIN.

=CU'MIN.= _Syn._ CYMINI SEMINA, CYMINUM, L. The fruit (seed) of _Cuminum
cyminum_. It is carminative and aromatic, like the caraway and anise. See
PLASTER.

=CU'MINOL.= A colourless, transparent oil, of powerful odour. It exists
with CYMOL in OIL of CUMIN. See CYMOL.

=CU'PELLATION.= The process of assaying gold and silver and their alloys
by means of the CUPEL. See ASSAYING.

=CUP'PING.= This method of topical bleeding is performed as follows:--

The skin being softened by means of a sponge and warm water, and the hair
and other extraneous substances being previously removed, one of the small
bell-like glasses (CUPPING-GLASSES; CUCURBITU'LAE), having the air
contained in it rarefied by being passed over the flame of a spirit-lamp,
is immediately applied to the part. From the formation of a partial vacuum
beneath the cup, the pressure of the air on the surrounding surface causes
that portion immediately under the cup to swell, and the vessels to become
turgid. When this has taken place the cup is removed, and several
incisions are instantly made by means of a scarificator, an instrument
containing numerous lancets, which, by means of a spring, make a number of
incisions at the same moment; the depth of these incisions being regulated
by means of a screw which protrudes or withdraws the lancets, according to
the vascularity of the part, or the quantity of blood to be abstracted.
The cupping glass is now again applied. When a sufficient quantity of
blood has been collected in the cup, it is removed by gently introducing
the nail of one of the fingers under the upper edge, by which means, air
being allowed to enter, the cup becomes detached. The part being washed
with warm water to remove any clots of blood, another cup is applied as
before, and the operation continued until a sufficient quantity of blood
is withdrawn. Sometimes, especially when applied to the scalp, the cups
fill so rapidly with blood as to become detached almost immediately on
being applied. This method of local bleeding is frequently called 'CUPPING
WITH SCARIFICATIONS,'

When cupping-glasses are applied without the use of the lancet or
scarificator, the operation is called 'DRY CUPPING,' and is much used to
cause a speedy irritation of the skin and reaction, for the relief of
oppressive breathing, local pains, &c. To obtain the full benefit from
this operation, the cups should be suffered to remain upon the part until
they cause an exudation of a small quantity of serum, or a considerable
amount of irritation of the part. Dry cupping has been found extremely
beneficial in poisoned wounds; as it acts not only by abstracting the
poison, but also, by the pressure the glasses exercise on and around the
part, in preventing the absorption of it.

_Obs._ For the operation of cupping, a basin of hot water, sponges, and
clean, soft towels, should be provided. In clumsy hands, cupping is
occasionally a severe and painful operation; but this is not the case with
the skilful operator. A good cupper does not exhaust much of the air in
the cup before applying it, but simply passes its mouth rapidly over the
flame of the lamp. When it is held over the flame even for a few seconds,
the compression of the edge of the cup upon the skin is so great, that it
checks the flow of the blood to the scarified part. A good cupper also
removes the cup without spilling the contents, and completes the whole
operation quickly and neatly. There are, however, few persons, who are not
professional cuppers, who are sufficiently expert to exhaust the air in
the cup by means of the common lamp; although it is by far the best. A
good plan is to rarify the air in the cup by means of a small cone of
paper, dipped in spirits of wine, or strong brandy; this is ignited and
thrown in the cup, which is instantly to be applied to the proper spot.
Where cupping-glasses and the scarificator are not to be had,
wine-glasses, or any very small tumblers, may be substituted for the
first; and small incisions by means of a thumb lancet will answer the
purpose of the other.

The cicatrices of the scarification leave permanent marks on the skin; on
which account, when blood is to be drawn from the head or neck, the
glasses should be applied behind the ears, and a portion of hair removed
in such a manner that the part may be covered by what remains.

A most convenient cupping apparatus is manufactured by Mr Bigg, the
eminent surgical instrument maker of Leicester Square, consisting of cups
and an exhausting syringe, so arranged that the use of the spirit-lamp is
rendered unnecessary, and the operation of cupping may be performed nearly
as expertly by an inexperienced nurse as by the most accomplished
professional operator. It is invaluable in places remote from town.

=CURAR'INE.= _Syn._ CURARIA. The vegeto-alkaline base of curara, urari,
woorara, woorali, or wourali, the arrow-poison of Central America.

In physiological effects curarine is antagonistic to strychnia, a fact
which has led to its being proposed as an antidote for the latter poison.
Curarine is also said to have been employed in Germany in the treatment of
hydrophobia with such success that the patient to whom it was administered
recovered. It is a most potent poison, and should not be allowed to come
into contact with the fingers.

=CURB.= In _horses_. An enlargement at the back of a horse's hock caused
by injuring a ligament in this region. See SPRAIN.

=CURCU'MIN.= The yellow colouring matter of turmeric, obtained by
digesting the alcoholic extract of the powder in ether, and evaporating
the clear ethereal solution to dryness. A brownish-yellow mass, yielding a
bright-yellow powder. It is scarcely soluble in water, but very soluble in
both alcohol and ether. Boracic and hydrochloric acids redden it; alkalies
turn it reddish brown.

=CURD.= Coagulated casein. See CHEESE.

=CUR'RANTS.= The currants of our garden are varieties of the _Ribes
rubrum_ and _Ribes nigrum_. (Linn.) The first includes RED CURRANTS and
WHITE CURRANTS; the fruit of both of which are gently acidulous, cooling,
and wholesome. The juice makes excellent wine. The fruit of the last
(BLACK CURRANTS, QUINSY-BERRIES) is aperitive, and has been used in
calculous affections; the juice is made into wine, jellies, jams,
lozenges, &c. The young leaves are used as a substitute for tea; one or
two buds, or half a small leaf, impart to black tea the flavour and
fragrance of green. The currants of the grocers (ZANTE CURRANTS) are a
small variety of dried grapes. The word "currant" is a corruption of
Corinth, whence the fruit originally came.

=CUR'RY.= _Syn._ CURRIE. A noted dish in Indian cookery, much esteemed
throughout the East. Curries are simply stews, of which rice usually forms
a characteristic ingredient, highly flavoured with fried onions and curry
powder, to which sliced apples and lemon juice are sometimes added. They
are made from every variety of fish, meat, poultry, game, &c., according
to the fancy of the parties.

_To make a Dish of Curry._--Cut an onion into slices and fry it with an
apple, finely chopped, in two ounces of dripping; then add slices of cold
meat; mix a dessert-spoonful of curry powder and one of flour in half a
pint of water; pour it over the meat, and shake the whole over the fire
till it boils.

=Cur'ry Powder.= _Prep._ (Kitchener.) From coriander-seed, 1/4 lb.;
turmeric, 1/4 lb.; cinnamon-seed, 2 oz.; cayenne, 1/2 oz.; mustard, 1 oz.;
ground ginger, 1 oz.; allspice, 1/2 oz.; fenugreek-seed, 2 oz.; all dried
thoroughly, pounded in a mortar, rubbed through a sieve, and mixed
together.

The famous Ceylon curry powder is said by Dr Balfour to have the following
rather indefinite composition:--A piece of green ginger, two fragments of
garlic, a few coriander and cumin seeds, six small onions, one dry Chili,
eight peppercorns, a small piece of turmeric, half a dessert-spoonful of
butter, half a cocoa-nut, and half a lime. For it to be in perfection the
powder should be made the day on which it is cooked.

_Obs._ The above must be regarded as merely a substitute for Indian curry
powder, which contains many ingredients not to be obtained in England. It
should be kept in a bottle closely corked or stoppered. The curry powder
sold at the present time consists of coriander-seed, turmeric, cayenne,
fenugreek-seed, and a large proportion of sago-flour.

=CUS'CONINE.= See ARICINE.

=CUSPA''RIA.= _Syn._ CUSPARIA BARK (B. P.), ANGOSTU''RA B.; COR'TEX
ANGOSTU''RAE, C. CUSPA''RIAE, CUSPARIA (Ph. L. and E.), L. "The bark of
_Galipea cusparia_" (Ph. L.), or _Galipea officinalis_ (Ph. E.). A
valuable drug, imported directly or indirectly from South
America.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 30 gr., as a tonic, stomachic, and febrifuge,
in similar cases to those in which CASCARILLA, CALUMBA, and CINCHONA, are
commonly given.


  Characters.     |  False Angostura.                    |    True
                  |                                      | Angostura.

                                                         { Flat or rolled
  _Form_          { Thick, rugous, rolled upon           {   up, little
                  {   itself. Edges cut perpendicularly. {   wrinkled,
                                                         {   edges bevelled.

                  { Brown, or greenish-yellow,           {
                  {   presenting protuberances           {
                  {   or excrescences,                   {
                  {   produced by                        {
  _Colour_        {   the great development              { Greyish-yellow.
                  {   of the corky layer, which          {
                  {   has a still more yellow            {
                  {   colour.                            {

  _Taste_         | Very bitter.                         | Bitter.

  _Reaction       } Red colour when dropped              } Yellow
  with Nitric     }   upon the bark.                     } colour.
  Acid._          }

Angostura or cusparia bark has fallen into comparative disuse, in
consequence of nux vomica or false angostura bark having formerly, in
several instances, been mistaken for it, and administered with fatal
results. The leading characteristics of these two barks have been pointed
out by M. Gibourt. (See previous table.)

=CUSPAR'IN.= _Syn._ ANGOSTU''RIN, ANGOSTU''RA. The bitter principle of
Cusparia-bark. It is neutral; crystallises in tetrahedrons; is easily
fusible; soluble in rectified spirits, in acids, and in alkaline
solutions. It is precipitated of a whitish colour by tincture of galls.

=CUS'TARD.= A composition of milk, or cream, and eggs, sweetened with
sugar, and variously flavoured. Custards may be cooked either in the oven
or stew-pan.

_Prep._ 1. (Soyer.) Milk (boiling), 1 pint; sugar, 2 oz.; thin yellow peel
of half a lemon; mix, and set it aside for a short time; then take eggs, 4
in no., beat them well in a basin; add, gradually, the milk (not too hot),
pass the mixture through a colander or sieve, and fill the custard cups
with it; these are then to be placed over the fire in a stew-pan,
containing about one inch of hot water, and left there for 12 minutes, or
till sufficiently set. The above is for PLAIN CUSTARDS; but it forms a
good basis to receive any of the usual flavouring ingredients, as fresh or
stewed fruit, peels, essences, orange-flower water, brandy, or other
spirits, &c.

2. (Rundell.) As the last, but using cream instead of milk, or equal parts
of the two, with 2 additional eggs. Very rich; like the last, any suitable
flavouring matter may be added to it.

3. (ALMOND CUSTARDS,--Rundell.) As either of the above, adding blanched
sweet almonds, 4 oz.; bitter do., 6 in no.; beaten to a smooth paste.

4. (BAKED CUSTARDS,--Rundell.) From cream, 1 pint, with 4 eggs; flavoured
with mace, nutmeg, and cinnamon, and add a little white wine, rose-water,
and sugar; bake in cups.

5. (COFFEE CUSTARDS,--Soyer.) Hot milk and strong-made coffee, of each 1/2
pint; sugar, 2 oz.; dissolve, and add it, gradually, to 4 eggs (well
beaten), and proceed as in No. 1. Chocolate custards and cocoa custards
are made in the same way.

6. (COLD CUSTARD, _for invalids_,--Dewees.) 1 egg; sugar, a tablespoonful;
beat well together; and add, gradually, constantly stirring, cold water,
1/2 pint; rose water, 2 teaspoonfuls; and a little grated nutmeg. An
agreeable and nutritious demulcent. A wine-glassful every 2 or 3 hours, or
_ad libitum_.

7. (LEMON CUSTARDS,--Rundell.)--_a._ As No. 1 (nearly), using a little
more lemon peel. In the same way orange custards are made, but using
orange peel.

_b._ From candied lemon peel and lump sugar, of each 2 oz., beaten in a
mortar quite fine, and added to either No. 1 or No. 2. Orange and citron
custards may be made in the same manner. A little orange-flower water, or
marsala, or sherry, may be also added at pleasure. They are best baked.

8. (ORANGE CUSTARDS.) As _above_, No. 7, _a_ and _b_.

9. (RICE CUSTARDS,--Rundell.) Boil 1/2 a cupful of the best ground rice in
a pint of milk until dissolved, then mix it with a quart of cream; flavour
with nutmeg, mace, and a little brandy, and put it into a cup or a dish.

=CUTCH.= See CATECHU.

=CUTTLE-FISH.= The bone or skeleton of the _Sepia officinalis_ of Linnaeus,
or common cuttle-fish (CUTTLE-FISH BONE; OS SE'PIAE), is used by the
law-stationers to erase ink-marks from paper and parchment, an application
familiar to most schoolboys of the present generation. Reduced to powder
(PUL'VIS SE'PIAE), it forms a valuable dentifrice and polishing powder, and
is used for forming the moulds for small silver castings.

[Illustration]

The _Sepias_, which inhabit the seas of all quarters of the globe, like
the other _cephalapoda_, are carnivorous. They are able to exercise
considerable locomotive powers, by means of their tentaculae or arms which
surround the mouth, and which are usually provided with numerous suckers.
Head downward, they walk on these arms at the bottom of the ocean. The
_sepias_ are also fleet swimmers; effecting their progress through the
water either by making the expansion of their skin perform the same office
as fins; or by the forcible projection of water from the cavity of their
mouths, the reaction accompanying which operation drives them rapidly
through the water in a different direction. They are provided sometimes
with eight, and sometimes with ten tentaculae, and have naked bodies. The
black fluid which the animal is capable of ejecting from its ink-sac, when
pursued by its enemies, was formerly employed in the manufacture of the
pigment called from its source "sepia."

[Illustration]

=CUTS.= These are incised wounds of greater or less extent, and must be
treated accordingly. The divided parts should be drawn close together, and
held so with small pieces of strapping or adhesive plaster stretched
across the wound. If the part is covered with blood, it should be first
wiped with a damp sponge. When the wound is large and it is much exposed,
a good method is to sew the parts up. The application of a little creasote
or a spirituous solution of creasote will generally stop local bleeding,
provided it is applied to the clean extremities of the wounded vessels. A
good way is to place a piece of lint, moistened with creasote, on the
wound, previously wiped clean, or to pour a drop or two of that liquid on
it. An excellent method is to cover the part with a film of collodion.
Friar's balsam, quick-drying copal varnish, tincture of galls, copperas
water, black ink, &c., are popular remedies applied in the same way. A bit
of the fur plucked from a black beaver hat is an excellent remedy to stop
the bleeding from a cut produced by the razor in shaving. A cobweb is said
to possess the same property.

=CY'ANATE.= _Syn._ CY'ANAS, L. A salt in which the hydrogen of cyanic acid
is replaced by a metal or other basic radical.

=CYAN'IC ACID.= HCNO. _Syn._ ACIDUM CYAN'ICUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Cyanuric
acid, deprived of its water of crystallisation, is distilled in a retort,
and the product collected in a well-cooled receiver.

2. (Liebig.) A current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas is passed through
water in which cyanate of silver is diffused, the process being suspended
before all the cyanate of silver is decomposed.

_Prop., &c._ Cyanic acid is a limpid, colourless liquid; it reddens
litmus; is sour to the taste; possesses a modified sulphurous odour,
similar to that which is always perceived when any of its salts are
decomposed by an acid; it forms salt with the bases called CYANATES; when
in contact with water it suffers decomposition in a few hours, and is
converted into bicarbonate of ammonia; it cannot be preserved for any
time, as shortly after its preparation it spontaneously passes into a
white, opaque, solid mass, to which the name CYAMELIDE has been given. By
distillation this new substance is reconverted into cyanic acid.

=CY'ANIDE.= _Syn._ CYAN'URET; CYAN'IDUM, CYANURE'TUM, L. The compound
formed by the union of cyanogen with a metal or other radical. See
CYANOGEN, HYDROCYANIC ACID, and the respective bases.

=Cyanide, Al'kaline.= _Syn._ CRUDE CYANIDE OF POTASSIUM AND SODIUM.
_Prep._ (R. Wagner.) Dry ferrocyanide of potassium, 4 parts, dry carbonate
of soda, 1 part, are melted together in an iron crucible at a red heat,
and continually stirred until the iron rod comes out covered with a white
crust, when the heat is withdrawn, and after a few moments' repose the
supernatant liquid portion is poured out on a clean iron slab. This crude
mixed cyanide is quite as useful as the more expensive one of Liebig, and
is equally fit for technical applications, as electrotyping, gilding,
silvering, &c. See POTASSIUM, CYANIDE OF.

=CY'ANINE.= A base discovered by Mr G. Williams in CHINOLINE BLUE. See
_below_.

=Cyanine, I'odide of.= _Syn._ CHIN'OLINE BLUE. The action of iodide of
amyl upon chinoline gives rise to iodide of amylchinoline. Addition of
excess of soda to an aqueous solution of this iodide produces a black
resinous precipitate, which dissolves in alcohol with a magnificent blue
colour. This precipitate is the IODIDE OF CYANINE, or CHINOLINE BLUE. Many
attempts have been made to use it in dyeing; they have, however, failed on
account of the instability of the colour.

=CYAN'OGEN.= CN or Cy. A highly important compound radical or quasi
element, discovered by M. Gay Lussac in 1815.

Best obtained by carefully igniting dry cyanide of mercury in a small
retort, and collecting the gas over mercury.

_Prop., &c._ A colourless gas, possessing a pungent and peculiar odour,
resembling that of peach-kernels or prussic acid; under a pressure of
about 4 atmospheres, at a temperature of 45 deg., it assumes the liquid form
(Faraday), and this fluid again becomes gaseous on withdrawal of the
pressure; water absorbs nearly 5 times its bulk of cyanogen at 60 deg. Fahr.,
and alcohol about 23 times its volume; with hydrogen it forms hydrocyanic
acid, and with the metals a most interesting and important class of bodies
called cyanides or cyanurets; when kindled, it burns with a beautiful
purple flame, carbonic acid and nitrogen being evolved. Sp gr. 1.806. See
HYDROCYANIC ACID, &c.

Forms a bromide and iodide when the cyanide of mercury is distilled with
bromine or iodine, and which are colourless, volatile, highly poisonous
solids; and two isomeric chlorides, one a very volatile liquid, prepared
by passing chlorine over moist cyanide of mercury, and the other in white
volatile needles, prepared by exposing aqueous hydrocyanic acid to
chlorine in sunshine.

=CYANU''RIC ACID.= H_{3}C_{3}N_{3}O_{3}. _Syn._ PYRO-U''RIC ACID[dagger].
A peculiar acid, discovered by Scheele. It is a product of the
decomposition of the soluble cyanates by dilute acids, or of urea by heat,
&c.

=CY'DER.= See CIDER.

=CY'DONINE.= The peculiar gum of quince seed. It resembles bassorin in
most of its properties.

=CY'MIDINE.= An oily base, homologous with aniline, obtained by the action
of iron filings and acetic acid on nitro-cymol.

=CY'MOL.= A peculiar hydrocarbon found in oil of cumin, in admixture with
cuminol. The two bodies are separable in a great measure by distillation,
cymol being the most volatile portion of the oil.

=CYNAPINE.= An alkaloid obtained from _AEthusa cynapium_, or _fool's
parsley_. It possesses no practical interest.

=CYSTICERCI.= These parasites are embryo taenia or tapeworm, infesting the
bodies of men and different animals. One variety of the _cysticerci_ has
its habitat in the organisms of men, pigs, oxen, horses, camels, sheep,
and roe-deer; another in the muscles and internal organs of cattle; a
third is found in cattle, sheep, horses, the reindeer, squirrels, certain
kinds of monkeys, and occasionally in man; whilst a fourth--the _Cystercus
cellulosae_--is more especially met with in measly pork. Professor Gamgee
believes that probably 5 per cent. of the pigs in Ireland are affected
with this last _cystercus_.

The following figure represents a piece of measly pork infested with
cysticerci. Professor Leuckart seems to have shown pretty conclusively
that man may become infested with a certain form of tapeworm by partaking
of imperfectly cooked veal or beef, infested with the second variety of
the parasite.

[Illustration]

=CYST'INE.= C_{3}NH_{7}SO_{2}. _Syn._ CYST'IC OXIDE. Obtained from cystic
oxide calculi (in powder) by digestion in solution of ammonia. By
spontaneous evaporation the ammoniacal solution deposits small, colourless
crystals of cystic oxide. It forms a saline compound with hydrochloric
acid, and is decomposed by the strong alkalies.

=CY'TISINE.= A purgative bitter principle, extracted from the _Cytisus
Laburnum_ (Linn.), or _common laburnum_, and some other plants.


=DAGUERRE'OTYPE.= See PHOTOGRAPHY.

=DA''HLIA DYE= (d[=a]le'-y'[)a]). The shade of colour which is commonly
termed 'dahlia' is a reddish lilac. It is produced by combining a blue or
purple with red when a compound colour is used. Upon wool and silk it can
be obtained directly by means of archil or cudbear, either alone or
'blued' by a small quantity of sulphate of indigo. Upon cotton indifferent
shades of dahlia are obtained by macerating in sumac liquor, working in
tin solution, and dyeing in logwood mixed with some red wood.

=DA''HLINE.= A species of fecula obtained from the tubers of the dahlia.
It is identical with inuline. It is not employed in the arts.

=DAIR'Y.= The place where milk is kept, and cheese and butter made. The
best situation for a dairy is on the north side of the dwelling-house, in
order that it may be sheltered from the sun during the heat of the day.
Ample means should be provided to ensure ventilation, and at the same time
to exclude flies and other insects. The temperature should be preserved,
as much as possible, in an equable state, ranging from 45 deg. to 55 deg. Fahr. To
lessen the influence of external variations of temperature, the walls
should be double, or of considerable thickness, and the windows provided
with shutters or doors. In summer the beat may be lessened by sprinkling
water on the floor, which will produce considerable cold by its
evaporation. Dairies built of mud or 'cob' are preferred in the West of
England; and this preference arises from the uniform temperature they
maintain, on account of the great thickness of the walls, and their being
very bad conductors of heat. In large dairy-farms, where butter and cheese
are made, the dairy is generally a separate building, and divided into 3
or 4 apartments; one of which is called the 'milk-room,' a second the
'churning-room,' a third the 'cheese-room,' containing the cheese-press,
&c.; and a fourth the 'drying-room,' where the cheeses are placed to dry
and harden. To these may be added a scullery, furnished with boiler,
water, &c., for scalding and cleaning the dairy utensils.

Cleanliness is very essential in all the operations of the dairy, and in
none more so than in the milking of the cows. The hands and arms of the
milkmaid should be kept scrupulously clean, and should be well washed with
soap and water after touching the udder of a sick cow, as without this
precaution the sores may be conveyed to the healthy ones. The milk-cans
should be scalded out daily, and, as well as all the other dairy utensils,
should be kept clean and dry. Before placing the milk on the shelves of
the dairy it should be strained through a hair sieve or a searce covered
with clean cheese-cloth, as by this precaution any stray hairs that may
have fallen into the milk-pail will be taken out.

The average produce of a milch cow, supplied with good pasturage, is about
3 gallons daily from Lady-day to Michaelmas, and from that time to
February about 1 gallon daily. Cows of good breed will be profitable
milkers, to 14 or 15 years of age, if well fed. See BUTTER, CHEESE, CREAM,
&c.

=D'ALBESPYRE'S BLISTERING TISSUE.= Lard and ship's pitch, of each 1 part;
resina flav. and yellow wax, of each, 4 parts; finely powdered
cantharides, 6 parts; melted together, and spread over taffety.

=DAMAS'CUS BLADES.= See STEEL.

=DAMENPULVER--Ladies' Powder= (J. Pohlmann, Vienna). A face powder
composed of 14 parts white lead, 7 of talc, 1 of magnesia, coloured with
carmine and perfumed with volatile oil.

=DAMMAR.= A resin employed in mounting many microscopic objects; such as
teeth, hair, hard bone, and most tissues which have been previously
hardened by treatment with alcohol and chromic acid. Dammar is prepared
for use as follows:--

_a._ Gum dammar, 1/2 oz.; oil turpentine, 1 oz.; dissolve and filter.

_b._ Gum mastic, 1/2 oz.; chloroform, 2 oz.; dissolve and filter. Add
solution _a_ to solution _b_. (Dr Klein.)

If allowed to become thick by drying, dammar may be used as luting.

=DAMP=, under any form, should be avoided. A humid atmosphere or situation
is one of the commonest causes of agues, asthmas, rheumatism, and numerous
other diseases.

=Damp Linen= is very injurious, and should be especially avoided. In
travelling, when it is expected that the bed has not been properly aired,
a good plan is to sleep between the blankets. To ascertain this point the
bed may be warmed, and a cold, dry, glass tumbler immediately afterwards
introduced between the sheets, in an inverted position. After it has
remained a few seconds, it should be examined, when, if it is found dry,
and undimmed by steam, it may be fairly presumed that the bed is well
aired; but if the reverse should be the case, it should be avoided. When
it is impossible to prevent the use of damp linen, as articles of dress,
the best way to obviate any ill effects is to keep constantly in motion
and avoid remaining near the fire, or in a warm apartment, or in a draught
of cold air until sufficient time has elapsed to allow of the escape of
the moisture. The effect of evaporation is the reduction of the
temperature of the body; hence the depressing action of damp linen.

=Damp Walls.= Ivy planted against the sound wall of a house is said to
exclude dampness. If a wall is already damp, ivy planted against it will,
when grown up, cause it to become dry, provided the brickwork is sound and
the dampness does not arise from moisture attracted upwards from the
foundation. Sometimes, when ivy is propagated from flowering branches, it
will not adhere to a wall at all; the way to get over this difficulty is
to cut it back to near the surface of the ground. The young wood which
will then form will take hold and cling immediately to almost anything.

The following is said to be a good application for damp walls:--Dissolve
3/4 lb. of mottled soap in 1 gallon of water. This composition is to be
laid over the brickwork steadily and carefully with a large thick brush,
but not in such a manner as to form a froth or lather on the surface. It
must be allowed 24 hours to dry on the walls. Now mix 1/2 lb. alum with 4
gallons of water; let it stand 24 hours, and then apply it over the
coating of soap. The operation must be performed in dry weather.

=DAM'SON.= A species of small black plum, much used in the preparation of
tarts, &c. Damsons are rather apt to disagree with delicate stomachs, and
also to affect the bowels. See PLUM.

=DAN'CING.= The practice of dancing as an amusement or exercise must be
almost as old as the human race itself. Yet, notwithstanding its antiquity
and prevalence amongst all nations, both barbarous and refined, the
propriety and advantages of its cultivation are of a very questionable
character. In a hygienic point of view it can claim no preference, as an
exercise, over the more simple ones of walking and running; whilst, from
the associations it frequently induces, and the heated and confined
atmosphere in which its votaries commonly assemble to indulge in it, it
becomes the fertile parent of immorality and consumption. A celebrated
cyclopaedist has, perhaps harshly, but truthfully, defined dancing to be "a
silly amusement for the idle and thoughtless."

=DANDELI'ON.= _Syn._ PISS-A-BED; TARAX'ACUM (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. A common
British plant of the natural order Compositae. It is known among botanists
by the names _Taraxacum officinale_, _T. dens leonis_, and _Leontodon
Taraxacum_ (Linn.). Its root (_Taraxaci Radix_, B. P.) is employed in
medicine, being diuretic and tonic. It is roasted and used as coffee, and
when mixed with an equal weight of foreign coffee constitutes the article
once so much puffed under the name of 'dandelion coffee.' A similar
mixture prepared with chocolate forms the 'dandelion chocolate' of the
shops. The blanched leaves are used in salads, and the inspissated juice,
extract, and decoction are employed in medicine, and are considered as
detergent, aperitive, and deobstruent. Ground roasted dandelion root
cannot now be sold under the name of 'dandelion coffee' or mixed with
coffee unless it has previously paid the chicory duty. See DECOCTION,
EXTRACT, &c.

=DANDRIFF.= This is a scaly disease affecting the head, and giving rise to
the formation of the small troublesome particles known as scurf. A
serviceable application is two drachms of borax dissolved in a pint of
camphor water; the head to be washed with this lotion once or twice a
week, or much benefit may also be derived by washing the head with tepid
water, agitated with a piece of quillar bark until a strong lather is
produced; or with water containing salt of tartar, in the proportion of
two drachms of the salt to a pint of tepid water. As a general rule, the
use of soap is to be discountenanced.

=DAN'IELL'S BATTERY.= See VOLTAIC ELECTRICITY.

=DAPH'NIN.= A peculiar bitter principle, discovered by Vauquelin in the
_Daphne mezereum_ or _mezereon_. It is procured by separating the resin
from the alcoholic tincture of the bark by evaporation; afterwards,
diluting the residue with water, filtering, and adding acetate of lead. A
yellow substance falls down, which, when decomposed by sulphuretted
hydrogen, yields daphnin, under the form of small, colourless,
transparent, radiated needles. It is bitter; volatile; sparingly soluble
in cold water; freely soluble in hot water, and in alcohol and ether. It
possesses basic properties. See MEZEREON.

=DARNEL.= The powder of the seed of the _Lolium temulentum_, a poisonous
grass, is not unfrequently found mixed with the flour of wheat, oats, and
other cereals, and when these latter, under these circumstances, are
partaken of as food, they give rise to more or less alarming symptoms of
poisoning, which are thus enumerated by Dr Pareira:--Headache, giddiness,
languor, ringing in the ears, confusion of sight, dilated pupil, delirium,
heaviness, somnolency, trembling convulsions, paralysis, and great
gastro-intestinal irritation. One of the most specific signs of poisoning
by darnel seeds is said by Seeger to be the trembling of the whole body.
Dr Taylor mentions a case in which thirty persons who had partaken of
bread containing darnel seeds were violently attacked with the above
symptoms; and another case is on record of sixty persons in a prison at
Cologne being similarly attacked from the same cause. Hassall states that
the flour of the darnel seed presents the following appearance under the
microscope:--"The starch corpuscles are polygonal, and resemble in this
respect those of rice. They are, however, much smaller, and frequently
united into compound grains of various sizes, the larger grains consisting
of some fifty or sixty starch corpuscles." The structure of the testa is
very different from that of either rice or oat, or indeed any of the other
cereal grains. It is formed of three coats or membranes. The cells of the
outer coat form but a single layer, and, contrary to the arrangement which
exists in the oat, their long axes are disposed transversely, in which
respect they resemble rice. The fibres of the husk of rice and the cells
of the testa of Lolium are, however, very distinct in other respects. In
the former the cells are long and narrow, forming fibres, while in the
latter they are but two or three times as broad.

[Illustration]

The cells of the second coat, which are ranged in two layers, follow a
vertical disposition, an arrangement which is contrary to that which
obtains in all the other cereal grains with the exception of rice. The
cells of the third coat form but a single layer, and resemble those of
other grains.

=DATU'RA.= _Syn._ THORN-APPLE; STRAMO'NIUM (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. A genus of
plants belonging to the nightshade order, or '_Atropaceae_,' The species
_Datura Stramonium_ is an important medicinal plant, the leaves and seeds
being officinal in B. P. It is anodyne and sedative, but not hypnotic,
though it will often induce sleep by relieving pain. It affects the
constitution in much the same way as belladonna.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 or 5 gr.,
in asthma, gout, headache, neuralgic and rheumatic pains, &c. In spasmodic
asthma smoking the leaf often gives instantaneous relief, but must be
exhibited with care, as the whole plant is intensely poisonous. No
antidote is known. Another species, namely, _Datura tatula_, is now
preferred for cigars or cigarettes. Cigars are made from _Datura
Stramonium_ more frequently than from _Datura tatula_. They are
recommended for asthma. See ASTHMA, CIGARS (Stramonium), DATURIA
(_below_).

=DATU'RIA.= _Syn._ DATU'RINE, DATURIN'A, HYOSCY'AMINE. An organic alkali,
discovered by Geiger and Hesse in _Datura Stramonium_ or thorn apple. It
occurs also in _Hyoscyamus niger_ or henbane. It is best obtained from the
seeds. Daturia dissolves in 280 parts of cold and 72 parts of boiling
water; it is very soluble in alcohol, less so in ether. It tastes bitter,
dilates the pupil strongly, and is very poisonous. It may be sublimed
unaltered, and may be obtained in prismatic crystals by the addition of
water to its alcoholic solution. With the acids it forms salts, which are
mostly crystallisable.

=DAVIDS-THEE--David's Tea= (B. Fragner, Prague). Recommended as a domestic
remedy for chronic catarrh of the lungs and air passages, and especially
for tuberculosis. A mixture of equal parts of great centaury, hyssop,
chervil (Scandix odorata), white horehound, milfoil, Iceland moss, and
carduus benedictus.

=Davids-Thee, Echter Karolinenthaler--Genuine Karolin's Dale David's Tea=
(Kral). Recommended for the same diseases as the preceding. A mixture of
white horehound, milfoil, Iceland moss, great centaury, and ground ivy.
According to a communication from a Bohemian apothecary the original
prescription reads thus:--Herba cerefolii (Scandicis, chervil), hb.
centaurii minoris (lesser centaury), hb. marrub. (horehound), flor.
millefol. (milfoil flowers), lichen. Isl., of each 6 parts; hb. hyssopi, 3
parts; hb. cardui benedicti, 2 parts. (A. Selle.)

=DEAD, DISPOSAL OF.= As every dead body during the process of the
decomposition it undergoes gives rise to products that are not only in the
highest degree offensive, but in an especial sense dangerous to the health
and lives of a community, the disposal of the dead in a manner best
calculated to ensure, with the removal of the corpse from amongst the
survivors, the least injurious consequences of its subsequent decay,
becomes a problem of supreme importance to the sanitarian.

Probably amongst the nations of antiquity the Romans, with their eminently
practical minds, and as we may infer from their other enlightened sanitary
arrangements, were the only ancient people who were not guided either by
superstitious or religious ideas in the disposal of their dead, at one
time burned, but afterwards buried them. The Greeks practised cremation,
the Egyptians embalmment (previously disembowelling the body), under the
belief that after the lapse of many thousands of years the soul would
return to its earthly mansion. The Hebrews sometimes burned their dead,
and sometimes interred them. Amongst the ancient Hindoos the body was got
rid of sometimes by cremation, sometimes by being cast into the Ganges, or
other sacred river, and sometimes by exposure, until eaten by vultures.
The Icthyophagi, or fish-eaters, appear to be the only people of antiquity
who disposed of their dead by throwing them into the sea.

Amongst modern civilised nations interment is the method almost
universally adopted for disposing of the dead.

Embalmment has been of late years occasionally practised in America, and
was frequently adopted during the late civil war in many cases, since it
afforded the means of sending the bodies of the slain to surviving
relatives at long distances. Sir Henry Thompson's advocacy of cremation
was the means of causing the establishment in England a few years back of
a society for its introduction; but neither here nor in Germany, where it
has occasionally been employed, has the practice being adopted, save in a
very few instances, most of which seem to have been merely experimental.
In Calcutta cremation is still practised to some extent by the native
population; the process being very effectively carried out by a French
company, which has been established for some years. We may mention here an
important modification of the ordinary form of interment proposed by Mr
Sydney Hadden. Mr Hadden's proposal is to dispense with the coffin, and to
place the corpse instead in a large wickerwork receptacle filled with
flowers, then inter it.

Of the three modes of disposal of the dead, viz. by burial, by burning,
and by consignment to the sea, the first, as we have already said, is the
almost invariably prevalent custom amongst civilised communities. That in
a sanitary point of view it is less to be commended than either of the
other methods is, we think, not difficult of demonstration. When a body is
burned the resulting gaseous products of combustion, which most probably
consist mainly of carbonic acid, carbonic oxide, and nitrogen, diffuse
harmlessly into the atmosphere, and there remains behind only the calcined
bones which formed the skeleton. An experiment by Sir Henry Thompson has
shown that cremation may be performed without giving rise to odour of any
kind at a comparatively small expense, and within a very moderate space of
time. He burned a body weighing 227 lbs. in fifty-five minutes by placing
it in a cylindrical metallic vessel seven feet long and six feet in
diameter, previously heated to incandescence. The evolved gases were made
to pass over a large surface of strongly heated fire-bricks, which formed
part of the furnace in which the metallic vessel was placed. The furnace
and its fittings were designed by Dr Siemens. The remaining ashes weighed
about 5 lbs. In his pamphlet 'On Cremation,' Sir Henry Thompson has
proposed that the custom, if adopted, should be carried out in the
following manner: "When death occurs, and the necessary certificate has
been given, the body is placed in a light wood shell, then in a suitable
outside receptacle preparatory to removal for religious rites or
otherwise. After a proper time has elapsed it is conveyed to the spot
where cremation is to be performed. There nothing need be seen by the last
attendant or attendants than the placing of a shell within a small
compartment, and the closing of the door upon it. It slides down into the
heated chamber, and is left there an hour until the necessary changes have
taken place. The ashes are then placed at the disposal of the attendants."
Sir Henry suggests that, previous to the burning of any corpse, proper
officers appointed for the purpose should examine into and certify as to
the cause of death, and if satisfied that it has resulted from natural
events, that they should give the certificate he alludes to.

Sir Henry Thompson proposes that the functions of the officers appointed
for this purpose should be the same as those of the _medicins
verificateurs_, who are medical inspectors appointed by the municipality
of Paris and the other large cities, whose duty consists in visiting each
house where a death occurs, in assuring themselves that the person is
really dead, and that there are no suspicious circumstances attending the
demise.

In Paris alone there are more than eighty of such medical functionaries.

Burial by casting the corpse into the depths of the sea possesses the
great advantage over ordinary interment of removing it from near the
habitation of man, whilst the sea water, by its antiseptic properties,
would be as little favorable to the dissemination of noxious putrescent
compounds as cremation is. On the contrary, if the dead are disposed of by
the ordinary method of burial, the objectionable effects arising from
their decomposition in the earth are, under the most favorable conditions,
only partially overcome; and the reason is obvious, since whilst deep-sea
burial prevents animal decay altogether, and burning destroys the body,
which, if not got rid of, would become putrid; burial in the earth permits
its slow and lengthened decomposition to go on unchecked, and to thus very
frequently become a source of contamination and danger to health.[251]

[Footnote 251: "After death the buried body returns to its elements and
gradually, and often by the means of other forms of life which prey on it,
a large amount of it forms carbonic acid, ammonia, sulphuretted and
carburetted hydrogen, nitrous and nitric acids, and various more complex
gaseous products, many of which are very fetid, but which, however, are
eventually all oxidised into the simpler combination. The non-volatile
substances, the salts, become constituents of the soil, pass into plants,
or are carried away into the water percolating through the ground. The
hardest parts, the bones, remain in some soils for many centuries,
and even for long periods retain a portion of their animal
constituents."--PARKES.]

The atmosphere in the vicinity of graveyards and cemeteries is notoriously
unhealthy, whilst water taken from wells situated near them is often so
impure as to be wholly unfit for drinking. Several instances are on record
in which the disturbance of an old graveyard has frequently been the means
of disseminating disease. But although the disposal of the dead by means
either of cremation or by consignment of the body to the deep caverns of
the ocean are methods, in a hygienic point of view, immeasurably superior
to earth-burial, there are, we think, certain obstacles to their adoption,
even to a limited extent, by civilised communities, at any rate, for many
years to come.

"Both cremation and deep-sea burial are open to the objection, that should
the proposed officers appointed to inquire into the circumstances
attending death have been mistaken in their verdict, as for instance in
overlooking, or not suspecting a case of secret poisoning, not only would
the murderer escape detection, but a sense of possible immunity from
punishment might act as an encouragement to others who were equally guilty
minded. The proposal that the stomach should be preserved, and kept for a
certain time, and, in case of suspicion justifying it, examination, would
in many instances fail to lead to detection, since, if certain alkaloids
had been employed, they would have to be searched for, not in the stomach,
but in the tissues of the dead body. Again, an obstacle to the universal
adoption of deep-sea burial would be, in the case of vast continents, the
difficulty of transmission from their interior, of the corpse, to the
shore. But even if these objections against cremation and sea-burial could
be overcome (and possibly they may be eventually), there would still
remain the invincible repugnance of the survivors to what sentiment and
feeling will persist in regarding as cruel indignity and irreverence
toward the dead.

"Yet the eventual disposal of our frames is the same in all cases; and it
is probably a matter merely of custom which makes us think that there is a
want of affection, or of care, if the bodies of the dead are not suffered
to repose in the earth that bore them.

"In reality, neither affection nor religion can be outraged by any manner
of disposal of the dead which is done with proper solemnity and respect to
the earthly dwelling-place of our friends. The question should be placed
entirely on sanitary grounds, and we shall then judge it rightly.

"What is the use of preserving for a few more years the remains which will
be an object of indifference to future generations? The next logical step
would be to enshrine these remains in some way so as to ensure their
preservation, and we should return to the vast burial mounds in Egypt.

"At present the question is not an urgent one, but if peace continue, and
if the population of Europe increase, it will become so in another century
or two.

"Already in this country we have seen, in our own time, a great change;
the objectionable practice of interment under and round churches in towns
has been given up, and the population is buried at a distance from their
habitations. For the present that measure will probably suffice, but in a
few years the question will again inevitably present itself."[252]

[Footnote 252: Parkes.]

Since however, for the reasons above specified, earth-burial seems to be
the only means of disposing of the dead likely to prevail for many years
to come, the question arises as to how its attendant evils can be as much
as possible minimised. The following suggestions, that may assist to
effect this, are offered:--As quickly as possible after death the body
should be covered with sawdust, to which carbolic acid has been added, a
precaution which not only prevents the escape of fetid gases, but also of
putrescent fluids from a badly jointed coffin. Charcoal, although an
excellent disinfectant, from its colour, could not out of consideration
for the feelings of the relatives or friends, be used until the coffin
with its contents had been screwed down.

It is always desirable (save for some special reason) that the corpse
should be interred within three or four days of the demise. If a body has
to be kept above ground for some time, Mr Herbert Barker recommends a thin
layer of sawdust and sulphate of zinc to be placed over it, in the
proportion of two parts of the former to one of the latter. The coffin
should be made of a material impervious to the air, and of such strength
as to withstand the pressure of the overlying earth.

Mr Wynter Blyth, in his 'Dictionary of Hygiene,' recommends a coffin
described by Mr Baker in his evidence before the sanitary commission. "The
body being first of all placed in a common shell, this shell is placed in
the coffin; the interval between the two is filled with common pitch, and
then the outside coffin is coated over with pitch; so that it is as
perfectly air-tight as a leaden shell. If desired a glass can be placed so
as to leave the face exposed to the view of a jury when necessary with
regard to the interment.

"The advantages of deep over shallow burying are obvious. The greater the
mass of superincumbent earth into which the gaseous products of
decomposition diffuse, the better the chance of their absorption and
removal by the soil, and the less risk of their consequent escape into the
contiguous atmosphere, as well as of the danger of contamination to the
water of wells, &c. The depth of the grave varies in different countries.
In Austria it is 6 ft. 2 in.; in Hesse Darmstadt, from 5 ft. 7 in. to 6
ft. 6 in.; Munich, 6 ft. 7 in.; Stuttgard, 6 ft. 6 in.; Russia from 6 ft.
10 in. In our country the practice is generally to make the depth about 6
feet, but then coffins may be placed one on the other, so that, as an
actual fact, they often very closely approach the surface. The regulations
followed at Stuttgard are much to be commended. In the cemeteries there
the space allotted for each grave is an oblong piece of land 10 feet in
length and 5 feet broad. In France the graves vary in depth from 1-1/4
metres (4.921 feet) to 2 metres (6.561 feet). They are 8 decimetres (2.264
feet) in breadth, and distant the one from the other from 3 to 4
decimetres (11.911 inches to 1.132 feet.)" (Blyth.)

To render a cemetery therefore as little prejudicial as possible to a
community, not alone should deep burial be enforced, but only one body
should be permitted to be deposited in a grave, at least, till after the
lapse of some years. Some sanitary authorities recommend the use of
quicklime or charcoal, advising them to be thrown into the grave previous
to its being closed. Of the two, charcoal is the preferable disinfectant,
although it does not entirely prevent putrefaction, nor the evolution of
bad-smelling gases. No more efficient means of absorbing organic matters,
and carbonic acid given off by the decaying corpse in the earth, can be
devised than that of rapidly growing trees and shrubs in abundance around
the graves.

For the funereal cypress and yew, which are slowly growing trees, why
should a needless sentiment prevent the substitution of the much more
sanitary and less sombre-looking eucalyptus in countries where this plant
will flourish?

Old burial-grounds which have become offensive may be best disinfected by
covering the ground with fresh earth to the depth of several inches, and
by planting it with trees and sowing it with grass seed. Twenty-six city
graveyards covering a superficial area of about 48,000 square yards, and
in which, according to moderate calculation, there were not less than
48,000 tons of human remains, were successfully dealt with in this manner.

In the case of church vaults they should be first opened, a quantity of
quicklime thrown into them, and thus freely exposed to the external air.
The coffins should then be rearranged crossways like bricks in a building,
and filled in with dry earth or masons' rubbish, mixed with about 5 or 10
per cent. of vegetable charcoal. The vaults should next be ventilated by
means of an upcast and downcast shaft of the size of a rain-water pipe,
and the whole should then be closed in. In 1860, two hundred and fifty
vaults in seventy-one city churches were thus disinfected.[253] These
vaults contained the coffins and remains of at least 11,000 dead bodies,
which, previous to the adoption of the above measures, were very
offensive.[253] When bodies are removed from the vaults to other places,
Dr Letheby recommends them to be in closed coffins and in cases containing
an abundant supply of carbonate of lime powder.

[Footnote 253: Letheby.]

The disposal of the dead frequently becomes a matter of considerable
difficulty in time of war or during a siege. Under these circumstances
cremation may be found the most desirable method of getting rid of them.
If the bodies are buried they should always be at as great a distance as
possible from one another, and as deep as they can be. If procurable,
charcoal should be thrown over them; if it cannot be obtained sawdust and
sulphate of zinc, or carbolic acid, may be employed. Quicklime is also
commonly used, but it is less useful.

At Metz, in 1870, the following plan was adopted:--A pit of about 17 feet
in depth was filled with dead disposed of as follows:--A row of bodies was
laid side by side; above this a second row was placed, with the heads laid
against the feet of the first row; the third row were placed across, and
the fourth row in the same way, but with the heads to the feet of the
former; the fifth row was placed as No. 1, and so on.

Between each layer of bodies about an inch of lime, in powder, was placed.
From 90 to 100 bodies were thus arranged on a length of 6-1/2 feet, and
reached to about 6 feet to the surface; the pit was then filled up with
earth, and though 8400 bodies were put in that pit there were no
perceptible emanations at any time.

Around Metz the graves of men, horses, and cattle were disinfected with
lime, charcoal, and sulphate of iron. Immense exertions were made to clean
and disinfect the camps and battle fields, and in the month of May, 1871,
from 1200 to 1600 labourers were employed by the Germans. Wherever
practicable the ground was sown with oats or barley or grass. The hillocks
formed by the graves were planted with trees.

In many cases at Metz bodies were dug up by the Germans, when there was
any fear of water-courses being contaminated, or if houses were near. On
account of the danger to the workmen, graves containing more than six
bodies were left untouched, and the work was always done under the
immediate superintendence of a physician. The earth was removed carefully,
but not far enough to uncover the corpse; then one end of the corpse was
uncovered, and as soon as the uniform or parts of the body were seen,
chloride of lime and sawdust, or charcoal and carbolic acid, put in; the
whole earth round the body was thus treated, and the body at length laid
bare, lifted and carried away. The second body was then treated in the
same way.

Near Sedan, where there were many bodies very superficially buried,
burning was had recourse to. Straw mixed with pitch was put into the
graves, and was lighted; one ton of pitch sufficed for from 15 to 20
bodies. Opinions as to this practice were divided, and it is not certain
how many graves were thus dealt with. It seems probable that only the
surface of the body was burnt, and when many bodies were together in the
grave, some were not touched at all. On the whole the experiment appears
to have been unsuccessful.

The Belgian experience at Sedan was in favour of employing chloride of
lime, nitric acid, sulphate of iron, and chlorine gas. Carbolic acid did
not answer so well. The sulphate of zinc and charcoal, which Barker found
so useful, was not tried.[254]

[Footnote 254: Parkes.]

Various statutes have been framed for the burial of the dead and for the
management and selection of the burial-grounds. In the carrying out of
these enactments the local authorities have only an indirect voice,
exception being made in the case of a local government district in which
the vestry determines to appoint a burial board. The vestry then has power
to constitute the local board so appointed the burial board of such
district or parish, and to rule that the expenses of such burial board
shall be met by a rate levied on such parish, after the manner of a
general district rate.

Vict. 21 and 22, c. 90, s. 49, enacts that if such parish has been
declared a ward for the election of members of the local board, such
members are to form the burial board for the parish.

By Vict. 24 and 25, c. 61, s. 21, it is enacted that a sanitary authority
may provide a proper place for the reception of dead bodies, as well as
for those which are to be subjected to a post-mortem examination.

A sanitary authority is also empowered to make arrangements for interment.
Any urban sanitary authority has the power of regulating these matters by
by-laws. When once constituted a burial board, a sanitary authority has to
see to the carrying out of the Burial Acts, to repair the fences of
disused burial grounds, and generally to keep in proper order and regulate
all burial grounds within its jurisdiction.

The law enacts that the proper sanitary authority shall close any burial
ground which is detrimental to the health of those living in its
neighbourhood, or of persons frequenting any church; and throws upon such
sanitary body the duty of providing a proper place of interment elsewhere.

It may be well to know that by common law it is incumbent upon any person
under whose roof a death has taken place to provide the corpse with
interment. Such person may neither cast the body forth, nor carry it
uncovered to the grave, but he must give it decent burial. This obligation
is imposed upon public bodies as well as on private persons.

Upon presentation of a certificate signed by a properly qualified medical
practitioner, a justice of the peace may order, under certain
circumstances, the removal of the dead body to a mortuary.

Interment within the walls, or underneath the pavement or floor of any
church, or other place of public worship, built in any urban district,
has since August 31st, 1848, been interdicted under a penalty of L50.

=DEAF'NESS.= An imperfection or absence of the sense of hearing. When
deafness is present in infancy and childhood, it is accompanied with
dumbness, or imperfect articulation, in consequence of the impossibility
of conveying a knowledge of the sounds necessary for the exercise of the
imitative faculty of speech. Deafness frequently arises from some
imperfection or obstruction of the passage leading to the membrane of the
tympanum or drum of the ear. In some cases this passage is totally closed
by a membrane, or some malformation of the tube, which may frequently be
removed by a surgical operation. Even instances of partial obliteration of
this passage have occurred, which have been successfully treated. The
researches of Mr Yearsley have established the fact, that enlarged tonsils
are a very common cause of deafness; and when such is the case, their
excision will generally effect a cure. To this form of the affection Mr
Yearsley applies the term 'throat deafness.' Another cause of deafness is
the presence of foreign bodies in the aural passages or the accumulation
of hardened wax. In these cases the best treatment is to inject warm water
into the ear by means of a proper syringe. When deafness arises from
imperfection of the tympanum or drum of the ear, the effects of the
application of the artificial membrana tympani invented by Mr Yearsley
(moistened cotton wool) are generally immediate and truly wonderful. By
its aid persons previously so deaf as to be incapable of bearing their
share in conversation have been enabled to hear an ordinary whisper.
Insects may be destroyed by pouring a spoonful of warm olive oil, or
camphorated oil, into the ear over night, retaining it there until the
next morning by means of a piece of cotton wool, when it may be washed out
with a little mild soap and warm water. When there is a deficiency of the
natural secretion of wax, or a dryness of the aural passage, mild
oleaginous stimulants may be employed. For this purpose a little olive
oil, almond oil, to which a few drops of oil of turpentine, oil of
juniper, or camphor liniment, have been added, may be used with advantage.
A piece of cotton wool moistened with glycerin is an excellent application
in such cases. When deafness is accompanied with continued acute pain, or
a discharge of purulent matter, inflammation of the tympanum, or some
other portion of the internal ear, probably exists, and medical advice
should be sought as soon as possible. The deafness that frequently
accompanies a violent cold is generally caused by obstructions in the
Eustachian tubes, and goes off as soon as the secretions return to a
healthy state. In some forms of deafness blisters behind the ears are
useful. A clove of garlic wrapped in cotton or gauze, or a few drops of
the juice introduced into the ear, is extremely efficacious in nervous
deafness. When imperfect hearing depends upon obtundity of the auditory
nerve, or an extensive obliteration or malformation of the internal ear,
it scarcely admits of cure.

=Deafness, Taylor's Remedy for.= _Prep._ From oil of almonds, 1 lb.;
garlic, bruised, 2 oz.; alkanet root, 1/2 oz.; digest for a week, and
strain. A little is poured into the ear in deafness.

=DEATH.= In cases of sudden death interment should be deferred till signs
of putrefaction begin to appear, especially when no gradation of disease
has preceded, as in cases of apoplexy, hysterics, external injuries,
drowning, suffocation, &c. No sooner has breathing apparently ceased, and
the visage assumed a ghastly or a death-like hue, than the patient, after
his eyes are closed, is too often hurried into a coffin, and the body,
scarcely yet cold, is precipitated into the grave. So extremely fallacious
are the signs of death that the semblance has been frequently mistaken for
the reality. By prompt means and judicious treatment, many persons, when
in such a condition, have been happily restored to their families and
friends. The effects of sound upon animal life is astonishing. The beat of
a drum, for instance, has had a very beneficial effect upon persons in a
state of suspended animation. At one time a scream, extorted by grief,
proved the means of resuscitating a person who was supposed to be dead,
and who had exhibited the usual recent marks of the extinction of life. In
cases of catalepsy or trance, having the semblance of death, the action of
the lungs and heart continues, though in a nearly imperceptible degree. By
placing a cold mirror or piece of highly polished metal immediately over
the mouth of the patient, symptoms of moisture will appear upon the
surface if the most feeble respiration takes place.

=DEBIL'ITY.= _Syn._ DEBIL'ITAS, L. Weakness; languor; feebleness. When
this arises from a diseased action of the stomach, the occasional use of
mild aperients, followed by bitters and tonics, may be had recourse to.
When from a general laxity of the solids, and there are no symptoms of
fever, nor a tendency of blood to the head, a course of chalybeates
generally proves advantageous. See ANAEMIA, ATROPHY, &c.

=DECANTA'TION.= The operation of pouring or drawing off the clear portion
of a liquid from the impurities or grosser matter that has subsided. It is
commonly performed, either by gently inclining the vessel, or by the use
of a syphon or pump. In the laboratory it is much resorted to in the
purification of precipitates, or other similar operations, where repeated
edulcoration or washing is required, for which purpose it is preferable to
filtration, from being less troublesome and more economical. In these
cases, after a sufficient time having been allowed for the subsidence of
the precipitate or powder, or for the clearing of the supernatant fluid,
the latter is decanted, and its place supplied by a fresh portion of
water, which, after sufficient agitation, is similarly treated, and the
whole operation repeated as often as necessary.

=DECANT'ERS.= There is often much difficulty experienced in cleaning
decanters, especially after port wine has stood in them for some time. The
best way is to wash them out with a little pearlash and warm water, adding
a spoonful or two of fresh-slaked lime, if necessary. To facilitate the
action of the fluid against the sides of the glass, a few small cinders or
pieces of raw potato may be used. A spoonful of strong oil of vitriol will
also rapidly remove any kind of dirt from glass bottles. Decanters which
have become furred by holding hard water may be cleaned with a spoonful of
hydrochloric acid ('spirits of salt'), diluted with 3 or 4 times its
weight of water. See STOPPERS.

=DECARBONISA'TION.= This operation is performed on cast iron, to convert
it into soft iron. The articles to be decarbonised are packed in finely
powdered haematite, or native oxide of iron, to which iron filings are
often added, and exposed for some time to a strong red heat, by which the
excess of carbon is abstracted or burnt out. The process somewhat
resembles annealing or cementation.

=DECAY'.= See EREMACAUSIS.

=DEC'IMALS.= _Syn._ DECIMAL FRACTIONS. Fractions which have for their
denominator 10, or some power of ten; as 100, 1000, &c.; the number of
ciphers in the denominator being always equal to the number of figures in
the numerator. Thus, .2, .25, .125, respectively represent 2/10, 25/100,
125/1000. The denominator of decimals is never written, the dot placed
before the first figure of the numerator expressing its value. Ciphers
placed on the right hand of a decimal fraction do not alter its value; for
.5, .50, .500, are each equal to 1/2; but ciphers placed on the left hand
of a decimal diminish its value in a tenfold proportion; thus, .3, .03,
.003, respectively answer to the common fractions 3/10, 3/100, and 3/1000.
Every figure on the left-hand side of the dot or decimal sign is a whole
number.

ADDITION and SUBTRACTION OF DECIMALS are performed in the same manner as
with common numbers, care being taken to place the numbers under each
other according to their several values; as, tens under tens, hundreds
under hundreds, &c.

MULTIPLICATION OF DECIMALS is performed in precisely the same manner as
with whole numbers, merely pointing off as many figures in the product as
there are decimals in the multiplier and multiplicand put together.

DIVISION OF DECIMALS. As the last, but pointing off as many figures in the
quotient as the decimal places in the dividend exceed those of the
divisor. If there are not figures enough in the quotient, the deficiency
must be supplied by prefixing left-hand ciphers. Ciphers are also added to
the right hand of the dividend, or to a remainder, where there are more
figures in the divisor than in the dividend, by which the quotient may be
carried on to any extent.

A vulgar fraction is reduced to a decimal by dividing the numerator
(increased sufficiently with ciphers) by the denominator. Thus, 1/2 = .5,
1/8 = .125, &c.

The value of a decimal, of any denomination, is found by multiplying it by
the number of parts in the next less denomination, and cutting off as many
places to the right hand as there are decimals, and so on until the terms
are exhausted. Thus, .634 oz. is =

   .634
      8

  5.072 drachms.
     60

  4.320

or, 5 dr. 4-1/3 gr. (nearly).

The constant use of decimals in the laboratory, in the surveys of the
Excise, and in numerous chemical calculations, induces us to press the
subject on the attention of operatives and others of neglected education.
An attentive perusal of the above, and a few hours' application, will make
the matter familiar to them.

=DECOC'TION.= _Syn._ DECOCT'UM, L. An aqueous solution of the active
principles of any substance obtained by boiling; also the process of
preparing such solutions.

The effect of decoction in water differs greatly from that of infusion. At
the temperature of 212 deg. Fahr., the essential oils and aromatic principles
of vegetables are dissipated or decomposed; while by infusion in hot
water, in covered vessels, they remain for the most part uninjured. The
solvent powers of boiling water are, however, much greater than those of
hot water; and many vegetable principles scarcely acted on by the one are
freely soluble in the other. This is the case with many of the alkaloids,
on which the medicinal virtues of several vegetables depend. On the other
hand, the solutions of many substances, though more readily made by
boiling, are speedily weakened or rendered inert by ebullition, in
consequence of the active principles being either volatilised along with
the steam, or oxidised or decomposed by exposure to the atmosphere. This
is particularly the case with substances abounding in extractive or
astringent matter. When the medicinal properties of vegetables are
volatile, or are injured by a strong heat, infusion should be had recourse
to, in preference to boiling; but when a solution of the fixed
constituents is alone sought, decoction is preferable.

The substances employed for making decoctions should be well bruised, or
reduced to a very coarse powder, or, if fresh and soft, they should be
sliced small. In the former case, any very fine powder or adhering dust
should be removed with a sieve, as its presence tends to make the product
thick and disagreeable, and also more troublesome to strain. The vessel in
which the ebullition is conducted should be furnished with an accurately
fitting cover, the better to exclude the air; and the application of the
heat should be so conducted that the fluid may be kept simmering, or only
gently boiling, as violent boiling is not only quite unnecessary, but
absolutely injurious to the quality of the product. In every case the
liquor should be strained whilst hot, but not boiling, and the best method
of doing this is to employ a fine hair sieve, or a coarse flannel bag. In
general it is found that, as decoctions cool, a sediment is formed, in
consequence of the boiling water dissolving a larger portion of vegetable
matter than it can retain in solution when cold. This deposit for the most
part consists of the active principles of the solution, and, unless when
otherwise ordered, should be mingled with the clear liquid by agitation,
when the decoction enters into extemporaneous compositions, or when the
dose is taken.

The length of time occupied by the ebullition is another point demanding
some attention. Long boiling is in no case necessary, and should be
avoided, especially in decoctions prepared from aromatic vegetables, or
those abounding in extractive. The Colleges, in such cases, direct the
ingredients "to be boiled for a short time," or "for ten minutes;" or they
limit the period of the ebullition by stating the quantity that must be
volatilised, as--"boil to a pint, and strain." The last method is
generally employed for those substances that do not suffer by lengthened
boiling.

In preparing compound decoctions those ingredients should be boiled first
which least readily give up their active principles to the menstruum, and
those which most readily part with them should be added afterwards. In
many cases it is proper simply to infuse the more aromatic substances in
the hot decoction of the other ingredients, by which means their volatile
principles will be better preserved.

Distilled water, or perfectly clean rain water, should alone be used for
decoctions, extracts, and infusions. Spring and river water, from
containing lime, have much less solvent matter.

The aqueous solutions of organic matter, from the nature of their
constituents, rapidly ferment or putrefy, at the ordinary temperature of
the atmosphere. Neither decoctions nor infusions are fit to be used in
dispensing, unless made the same day. They should, consequently, be only
prepared in small quantities at a time, and any unconsumed portion should
be rejected, as it would be imprudent for the dispenser to risk his own
reputation, and the welfare of the patient, by employing an article of
dubious quality.

It has of late years become a general practice for the wholesale houses to
vend preparations under the name of 'Concentrated Decoctions,' which, with
the exception of the compound decoction of aloes, are stated to be of 8
times the pharmacop[oe]ial strength; so that one drachm of these liquids
added to seven drachms of water forms extemporaneous decoctions,
professedly resembling those of the pharmacop[oe]ia. The decoction of
aloes is made of only four times the usual strength, as the nature of its
composition would not permit of further concentration. Such preparations
are, however, very imperfect substitutes for the freshly made decoctions.
The extreme difficulty of forming concentrated solutions of vegetable
matter with bulky ingredients too often leads to the omission of a portion
of the materials, or to the practice of concentrating the liquid by long
evaporation. In the first case the strength is, of course, less than it
should be; and in the second, the quality is injured, and perhaps the
preparation is rendered nearly inert by the lengthened exposure to heat,
and the consequent volatilisation or decomposition of its active
constituents. The common practice of adding a considerable portion of
spirit to these preparations, which is absolutely necessary to preserve
them, is also objectionable, as, in many of the cases in which decoctions
are prescribed, this article, even in small quantities, exerts a
prejudicial action. Some concentrated decoctions have been recently
offered for sale which do not contain alcohol, being preserved by the
addition of sulphurous acid, or sulphite of lime.

=Decoction of Alconorque.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ALCONORCO. American alconorque
bark, 1/2 oz.; water, 16 oz,; boil to 8 oz., and strain.--_Dose_, 1 oz.
two or three times a day, in phthisis.

=Decoction of Alder.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ALNI. Bark of common alder, 1 oz.;
water, 20 oz.; boil to 16 oz.

=Decoction of Alder, Black.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM RHAMNI FRANGULAE. Black alder
bark, dried, 1 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to 1 pint, and strain.

=Decoction of Al'oes.= _Syn._ COMPOUND D. OF A., BALSAM OF LIFE; BAUME DE
VIE, Fr.; DECOCTUM AL'OES (Ph. E.), D. A. COMPOS'ITUM (B. P. and Ph. D.),
L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Extract of liquorice, 1 oz.; extract of socotrine
aloes, 2 dr.; powdered myrrh and saffron, of each, 1-1/2 dr.; carbonate of
potassa, 1 dr.; tincture of cardamoms, 8 oz.; water, a sufficiency.
Coarsely powder the extract of aloes and myrrh, and put them, together
with the carbonate of potash and extract of liquorice, into a covered
vessel, with a pint of distilled water; boil gently for five minutes, then
add the saffron; let the vessel with contents cool, then add the tincture
of cardamoms, and, covering the vessels closely, allow the ingredients
to macerate two hours, finally strain through flannel, pouring as much
distilled water over the contents of the strainer as will make the product
measure 30 oz.

2. (Ph. E.) Aloes, myrrh, and saffron, of each 1 dr.; extract of
liquorice, 1/2 oz.; carbonate of potassa, 40 gr.; water, 16 fl. oz.; boil
to 12 fl. oz.; strain, and add of compound tincture of cardamoms 4 fl. oz.

3. (Ph. D.) As No. 1 (nearly), but using hepatic aloes.

A warm cathartic.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1-1/2 oz.; in habitual costiveness,
dyspepsia, jaundice, &c.

_Obs._ By boiling the saffron as ordered by the Dublin and Edinburgh
Colleges, nearly the whole of its fragrance is dissipated. A better plan
is to macerate it in the tincture for a few days, previously to adding the
latter to the decoction of the other ingredients. After the tincture has
been strained off from the saffron, the latter may be washed with a little
water, to remove any adhering colour and odour, and this may be added to
the decoction. The addition of the tincture produces a deposit of
mucilaginous and feculent matter, which has been dissolved out of the
liquorice, for which reason some houses omit the latter altogether, and
supply its place with an equal quantity of sugar or treacle, and a little
colouring. By this method the liquid, after being once obtained clear,
will continue so for any length of time.

4. (Wholesale.) Solazzi juice, 1-1/2 lb.; kali (carbonate of potassa), 4
oz.; hepatic aloes, 5-1/2 oz.; myrrh (small), 5 oz.; water, 4-1/2 galls.;
boil to 3 galls., strain through flannel, cool, and add, of compound
tincture of cardamoms, 10 pints; previously digested for 10 days on
saffron, 2-1/2 oz.; mix well, and add essential oil of nutmeg, 15 drops;
oils of cassia and caraway, of each 10 drops; and oils of cloves and
pimento, of each 5 drops; in a week decant the clear portion from the
sediment, and preserve it in a cool place.

5. (Concentrated; D. A. CONCENTRA'TUM, L.)--_a._ Lump sugar, 8 oz.;
colouring, 1/4 pint; carbonate of potash, 2 oz.; aloes, 3-1/2 oz.; myrrh
and saffron, of each 2-1/2 oz.; compound tincture of cardamoms, 1/2 a
gall.; water, 3 pints; boil the first five in the water, until reduced to
nearly one half; cool, and add the tincture, previously digested for a
week, on the saffron; and proceed as above. 14 oz. of extract of liquorice
may be used instead of the sugar and colouring.

_b._ Aloes, myrrh, liquorice, and potassa (all in powder), and saffron as
last; compound tincture of cardamoms, 5-3/4 pints; digest a fortnight, and
filter. In this way a very odorous and beautiful preparation is produced,
which has been much admired. The above are said to possess four times the
strength of the College preparation.

=Decoction, Anticol'ic.= _Syn._ ANTICOLIC AP'OZEM, DEGLAND'S COLIC
MIXTURE; APOZ'EMA ANTICOL'ICUM, L. _Prep._ Senna leaves, 2 oz.; boiling
water, 1 pint; simmer gently to 16 fl. oz.; press out the liquor, add
sulphate of soda, 1 oz.; syrup of buckthorn, 2 oz.; and strain through
flannel. Used by glassfuls in lead colic, or after poisoning by lead.

=Decoction, Antidar'trous.= Decoction of Bitter Sweet (see _below_).

=Decoction of Apocynum.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM APOCYNI. Root of _Apocynum
cannabinum_, 1 oz.; juniper berries, 1 oz.; water, 3 pints. Boil to 2
pints. A wine-glassful frequently. In dropsy.

=Decoction of Ar'nica.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ARNICAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Swediaur.)
Flowers of _Arnica montana_, 1 oz.; water, 3 pints; boil to a quart;
filter, and add of syrup of ginger, 3 oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz. every
two or three hours; in aphonia, paralysis of the voluntary muscles,
rheumatism, &c.; and as a substitute for bark in putrid fever, agues, &c.

2. (Ph. Cast. Aust., 1841.) Arnica root, 2 dr.; water, 9 oz.; boil to 6
oz., and strain.--_Dose_, 1 oz.; as the last.

=Decoction of Asparagus.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ASPARAGI. Roots of asparagus, 1
oz.; water, 2 pints; boil for 10 or 15 minutes; diuretic.

=Decoction, Astrin'gent.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ASTRIN'GENS, L. _Prep._
(Swediaur.) Oak-bark, pomegranate peel, and tormentil root, of each 2 dr;
water and milk, of each 1 lb.; boil 12 minutes, add of cinnamon, 2 dr.;
boil 2 or 3 minutes longer, and strain.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful.

=Decoction of Avens Root.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GEI. (Dr A. T. Thompson.) Avens
root, 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil for 15 minutes, and strain.

=Decoction of Baobab Tree.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ADANSONIAE. Bark of the baobab
tree, 6 dr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, and strain. Used as a
substitute for decoction of bark.

=Decoction of Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF CINCHO'NA; DECOCTUM CINCHO'NAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. Ph. L.:--_a_. (D. OF YELLOW B.; D. CINCHONAE, B. P.) Yellow
cinchona or calisaya bark (bruised), 1-1/4 _oz._; distilled water, 1 pint;
boil for 10 minutes in a lightly covered vessel; when cold, strain and
pour on the marc sufficient water to make up 1 pint.

_b._ (D. OF PALE B.; D. C. PALLIDAE, Ph. L.) From pale cinchona or loxa
bark, as above (_a._)

_c._ (D. OF RED B.; D. C. RUBRAE, Ph. L.) From red bark, as above (_a_).

2. (Ph. E.) Brown, grey, yellow, or red cinchona (bruised), 1 oz.; water,
24 fl. oz.; boil for 10 minutes; when cold filter the liquor, and
evaporate it to 16 fl. oz.

3. (Ph. D.) From pale or loxa bark, similar to the 'Decoctum cinchonae
pallidae' of Ph. L. (1. _b._ _above_).

_Dose, &c._ 1 to 2 fl. oz., 3 or 4 times daily, as a tonic, stomachic, and
febrifuge, when the stomach will not bear the administration of bark in
powder; in fevers, dyspepsia, convalescence, &c. The plan recommended by
the Edinburgh College of filtering the decoction when cold is absurd.
According to Soubeiran, 146 gr. of the deposit thus removed contained 86
gr. soluble in alcohol, and rich in the cinchona alkaloids. This liquid
should, therefore, be well shaken before pouring it out for use, instead
of being filtered. The addition of a few drops of either sulphuric or
hydrochloric acid to the water greatly increases its solvent power, and
also, consequently, the medicinal value of this preparation. (See
_below_.)

=Decoction of Bark (Acid'ulated).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CINCHONAE ACIDULA'TUM,
L. _Prep._ 1. To the water for any one of the above, add dilute sulphuric
acid, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; boil 10 minutes, and strain whilst hot.

2. (Sir J. Wylie.) Cinchona bark, 1 oz.; water, 16 fl. oz.; diluted
sulphuric acid, 1 dr.; as last.

=Decoction of Bark (Facti''tious).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CINCHONAE FACTITIUM, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. Bor.) Willow bark and horse-chestnut bark, of each 1/2 oz.;
calamus root and cloves, of each 1/4 oz.; water, 16 fl. oz.; boil to one
half. Used as a substitute for decoction of cinchona bark, but is vastly
inferior.

=Decoction of Bark and Ser'pentary.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CINCHONAE CUM
SERPENTA'RIA, L. _Prep._ (Sir J. Pringle.) Peruvian bark, 3 dr.; water, 1
pint; boil to one half, and infuse in the hot decoction, serpentaria root,
3 dr. As a diaphoretic stimulant, and tonic, in fevers, and as a gargle in
sore throat.

=Decoction of Bar'ley.= _Syn._ BARLEY-WATER; DECOCTUM HOR'DEI (B. P.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Pearl barley, 1 oz. (washed clean); boil for 20 minutes
in 15 oz. of water, and strain.

2. (Ph. D.) Similar to above. (See _Obs. below_.)

=Decoction of Barley (Compound.)= _Syn._ PEC'TORAL DECOCTION, FE'VER
DRINK; DECOCTUM PECTORA'LE, PTISAN'A COMMU'NIS, DEC. HOR'DEI COMPOS'ITUM
(Ph. L.), MISTU'RA HOR'DEI (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Decoction of
barley (simple), 1 quart; figs (sliced) and raisins (stoned), of each
2-1/2 oz.; fresh liquorice (sliced), 5 dr.; water, 1 pint; boil to a
quart, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Pearl barley, 2-1/2 oz.; water, 4-1/2 pints; boil to 3 pints;
add figs and raisins, of each 2-1/2 oz.; liquorice root, 5 dr.; water, 1
pint; and boil to 2 pints, as before.

_Obs._ The above are used as demulcents in fevers, phthisis, strangury,
&c., taken _ad libitum_. They are slightly laxative, and when this would
be an objection to their use, a few drops of laudanum may be added. Mixed
with an equal quantity of decoction of bark, barley-water forms an
excellent gargle in cynanche maligna (ulcerated sore throat), and, with a
like quantity of milk and a little sugar, a good substitute for the breast
in dry nursing infants. It is, also, often acidulated with lemon juice or
sulphuric acid, and sweetened (Decoctum hordei acidulatum). Gum Arabic, 4
dr., and nitre, 1 dr., to each pint, is a common addition in gonorrh[oe]a.
Cream of tartar, 1 dr., is occasionally added to render it more aperient.

=Decoction of Bistort.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM BISTORTAE. Bistort root, 2 oz.;
water, 1-1/2 pints; boil 15 or 20 minutes, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 oz. to 2
oz.; astringent.

=Decoction, Bit'ter.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM AMA'RUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Dried tops of
lesser centaury and wormwood, and leaves of germander, of each 3 dr.;
water, 1-1/4 pint; boil to a pint.

2. Gentian root, 1/2 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil 10 minutes, take out the
root, slice it, and add it again to the decoction with dried orange peel,
1/4 oz.; boil to 1 pint, and strain.

=Decoction of Bitter Sweet.= _Syn._ ANTIDAR'TROUS AP'OZEM; APOZEMA
DULCAMA''RAE, L. _Prep._ (Trousseau and Reveille.) Dulcamara, 1 dr.; water,
16 oz.; boil to 9 oz., and strain. To be taken in three doses during the
day. Every other day the quantity is to be increased until 12 dr. or even
2 oz. are taken daily, "so that the patient may begin to feel dryness of
the throat, and some disorder of vision and digestion;" and "continue at
this quantity for several weeks in succession." In obstinate skin
diseases. See DECOCTION OF DULCAMARA.

=Decoction of Blue Cardinal Flowers.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM LOBEL'IAE, D. L.
SYPHILIT'ICAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.) Root of _Lobelia syphilitica_, 1
handful; water, 12 lb.; boil to 7 lb., and strain.

2. (Swediaur.) Dried root, 5 oz.; water, 12 lb.; as last. Alterative,
purgative, and diuretic.

_Obs._ This decoction was strongly recommended by Swediaur in certain
complaints. He gave half a pint at first, twice daily, and afterwards 4
times a day, unless it acted too strongly on the bowels, when the
frequency of the dose was diminished, or it was discontinued for 3 or 4
days, and then had recourse to again, until the cure was effected.

=Decoction of Bran.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM FURFURIS, L. _Prep._ 1. From bran,
1/4 lb.; water, 1-1/4 pint; boil to a pint. In diabetes; and sweetened
with sugar, as a demulcent and laxative in cough and sore throat.

2. Bran, 1 quart; water, 1-1/2 gall.; boil 5 minutes, and add cold water,
q. s. to bring it to the proper temperature. As an emollient foot-bath.

=Decoction of Broom.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SPAR'TII CACUMIN'IUM; D. SCOPA''RII
(Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. D.) Broom-tops (dried), 1/2 oz.; water, 1/2
pint; boil 10 minutes, and strain.

2. (Ph. B.) Broom-tops (dried), 1 oz.; distilled water, 1 pint; boil for
10 minutes, and strain. (See _below_.)

=Decoction of Broom (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SPAR'TII CACUMINIUM C.,
D. SCOPA''RII (Ph. E.), D. S. COMPOS'ITUM (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Tops of broom (recent and dried), juniper berries (bruised), dandelion
root (bruised), of each 1/2 oz.; distilled water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a
pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Tops of broom and juniper, of each 1/2 oz.; cream of tartar,
2-1/2 dr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, as last. The above are
diuretic and laxative.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1 wine-glassful, 3 or 4 times a
day; in dropsy, especially of the belly (ASCITES).

=Decoction of Buckbean.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM MENYANTHIS. Buckbean, 1 oz.;
water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint.

=Decoction of Burdock.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ARC'TII, D. BARDA'NAE, L. _Prep._
1. Bardana root, 6 oz.; water, 5 pints; boil to 3 pints, and strain.

2. (Wood.) Dried root, 2 oz.; water, 3 pints; boil to 2 pints, and strain.
As an alterative; a pint or more daily, in all those cases in which
sarsaparilla is recommended.

=Decoction of Cabbage-tree Bark.= DECOCTUM GEOFFROYAE (Ph. E. 1817), D. G.
INERMIS (Ph. D. 1826). _Prep._ (Ph. D.) Bark of the cabbage tree
(bruised), 1 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to a pint, and strain. Cathartic,
narcotic, and anthelmintic.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 table-spoonfuls for an adult;
1 to 2 teaspoonfuls for a child, followed by demulcents and castor oil; in
worms, &c.

=Decoction of Calumba (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CALUM'BAE COMPOS'ITUM,
L. _Prep._ (Ph. U. S. 1831.) Calumba and quassia, of each 2 dr.; orange
peel, 1 dr.; rhubarb, 20 gr.; carbonate of potassa, 30 gr.; water, 20 fl.
oz.; boil to 16 fl. oz., strain, and, when cold, add of compound tincture
of lavender, 1/2 fl. oz. Bitter, tonic, and stomachic.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
table-spoonfuls 3 or 4 times daily.

=Decoction of Centaury.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CIMICIFUGE, F. H. Lesser
centaury, 2 oz.; water, 2 pints; boil for a few minutes, and strain.

=Decoction of Cey'lon Moss.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM FU''CI AMYLA'CEI, D.
PLOCA''RIAE CANDI'DAE, L. _Prep._ From Ceylon moss, 2 dr.; water, milk, or
whey, 1 pint; boil to 16 fl. oz., and strain. It may be sweetened and
flavoured. In irritation of the mucous membranes and in phthisis.

=Decoction of Cham'omile.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ANTHE'MIDIS, D. CHAMAEMELI, L.
From chamomiles, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; digest for 10 minutes,
simmer gently for 2 or 3 minutes longer, and strain with pressure. (See
_below_.)

=Decoction of Chamomile (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CHAMAEMELI COMPOSITUM,
L. _Prep._ (Ph. D. 1826.) Chamomile flowers (dried), 1/2 oz.; fennel seed,
2 dr.; water, 16 oz.; boil a short time, and strain. Both the above are
bitter, stomachic and tonic; the last is vermifuge. They are chiefly used
as fomentations and clysters.

=Decoction of Cherry Laurel Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM LAURO-CERASI CORTICIS.
(Dr Kastner.) Cherry laurel bark, 2 oz.; water, 2 pints; boil, and strain.

=Decoction of Chiret'ta.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CHIRAYTAE, L. _Prep._ From
chiretta or chyrata, 5 dr.; water, 1 pint; boil 8 or 10 minutes and
strain.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1 wine-glassful 2 or 3 times daily, as a stomachic
tonic; in flatulency and acidity, especially in the dyspepsia of gouty
persons.

=Decoction of Cincho'na.= See DECOCTION OF BARK.

=Decoction of Coffee.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CAFFEI. Boil 10 dr. of raw coffee
berries in 8 oz. of water to 5 oz. To be given in 3 doses during the
intermissions of intermittent fever.

=Decoction of Col'ocynth.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM COLOCYNTH'IDIS, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
Bat.) Colocynth pulp, 1 dr.; water, 8 oz.; boil 10 minutes, and when quite
cold, add of syrup of orange peel, 1 oz.; sulphuric ether, 1 dr.--_Dose_,
2 to 6 dr., 2 or 3 times a day; in dropsy, &c.

=Decoction of Colts'foot.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM TUSSILAG'INIS, L. _Prep._
(Pereira.) Fresh leaves of coltsfoot, 2 oz. (or flowers, 1 oz.); water, 2
pints; boil to a pint and strain. A popular remedy in chronic coughs and
chest diseases. It is emollient and demulcent.--_Dose._ Half a teacupful,
_ad libitum_. (See _below_.)

=Decoction of Coltsfoot (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM TUSSILAGINIS
COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ (Taddei.) Coltsfoot flowers, 6 oz.; figs, raisins,
and jujubes, of each 2 oz.; water, 12 pints; boil down to 4 pints; add
liquorice root, 2 oz.; again boil and strain. As the last.

=Decoction, Com'mon.= See DECOCTION OF MALLOWS.

=Decoction of Cor'sican Moss.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HELMINTH'OCORTI, L. _Prep._
From the moss, 5 dr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint.--_Dose._ A
wine-glassful, three times a day; as a vermifuge. In 1822, Mr Farr brought
it forward as a remedy for cancer.

=Decoction of Cot'ton Root.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GOSSYP'II, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Bouchelle.) Inner part of the root of the cotton plant, 4 oz.; water, 1
quart; boil to a pint.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful, occasionally, as an
emmenagogue; or, every 30 or 40 minutes, to produce uterine contractions,
for which purpose it is said to be as effectual as ergot of rye.

=Decoction of Dandeli'on.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM TARAX'ACI (B. P.), L. _Prep._
1. (B. P.) Fresh dandelion root (bruised), 1 _oz_.; water, 1-1/2 pint;
boil to a pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Herb and root (fresh), 7 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to a pint.
Aperient, stomachic, and tonic.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz., or more, 2 or 3
times daily.

=Decoction, Diaphoret'ic.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM DIAPHORETICUM, L. Decoction of
bark, 1 pint; liquor of acetate of ammonia, 4 oz.; aromatic confection, 1
oz.--_Dose_, 2 or 3 table-spoonfuls every 3 hours.

=Decoction of Dog-grass.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GRAMIN'IS, L.; PTISANE
CHIENDENT, Fr. _Prep._ From dog-grass root (_Triticum repens_), 1 oz.;
liquorice root, 1/2 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil 20 minutes, and strain.
Aperient and pectoral; by cupfuls, _ad libitum_. (See _below_.)

=Decoction of Dog-grass (Ioduret'ted).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GRAMINIS
IODURE'TUM, L. _Prep._ (Magendie.) Decoction of dog-grass, 32 fl. oz.;
syrup of peppermint, 2 oz.; iodide of potassium, 1/2 dr.; mix. By cupfuls,
_ad libitum_.

=Decoction of Dog-wood.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM COR'NUS FLORIDAE, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
U. S.) Dog-wood bark (bruised), 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil 10 minutes, and
strain whilst hot. Tonic and astringent; recommended as a substitute for
bark.--_Dose_. A wine-glassful.

=Decoction of Dulcama'ra.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF BITTER SWEET, D. OF WOODY
NIGHTSHADE; DECOCTUM DULCAMA''RAE (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Woody nightshade or bitter sweet (the new shoots), 10 dr.; water, 1-1/2
pint; boil to a pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Dulcamara (chopped small), 1 oz.; water, 24 fl. oz.; boil to a
pint, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Twigs of woody nightshade, 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil 10
minutes in a covered vessel, and strain. It should measure about 16 fl.
oz. Alterative, diaphoretic, and diuretic.--_Dose_. A wine-glassful, or
more, 2 or 3 times a day; in chronic coughs and chronic skin diseases, and
in most of those cases wherein sarsaparilla proves useful. See DECOCTION
OF BITTER SWEET, also _below_.

=Decoction of Dulcama'ra (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM DULCAMA''RAE
COMPOSI'TUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (Augustin.) Dulcamara (bitter sweet), 4 dr.;
burdock root, liquorice root, sassafras chips, and guaiacum wood, of each,
2 dr.; water, 2 lbs.; boil to 16 fl. oz., and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
wine-glassfuls 2 or 3 times a day.

2. (Foy.) As the last, but using dulcamara, 2 oz.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1
wine-glassful; in similar cases to those in which the simple decoction is
given, especially in chronic rheumatism and venereal affections.

=Decoction of El'der Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SAMBU''CI, D. S. CORTICIS. L.
_Prep._ 1. (Sydenham.) Inner bark of elder, 1 oz.; water and milk, of each
1 pint; boil to one half, and strain.

2. (Collier.) Bark, 1 oz.; water, 16 fl. oz.; boil to 1/2 pint, and
strain.

3. (Pereira.) Bark, 1 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to one half.--_Dose_. One
wine-glassful 2 or 3 times a day; as an aperient and resolvent in various
chronic disorders, in dropsy, and in certain cutaneous affections; or, 2
wine-glassfuls, as before, as a hydragogue cathartic in dropsies.

=Decoction of Elecam'pane.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HELEN''II, D. INU'LAE, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. U. S.) Elecampane root, 1/2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil a few
minutes and strain. Tonic and expectorant, and, in some cases, diuretic
and diaphoretic.--_Dose_. A wine-glassful every hour or two. (See
_below_.)

=Decoction of Elecampane (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HELENI COMPOSITUM,
D. INULAE C., L. _Prep._ (Rotier.) Elecampane, 1 oz.; hyssop and ground
ivy, of each 2 dr.; water, 1 pint; boil 15 minutes, strain, and add of
honey, 2 oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 table-spoonfuls; as the last.

=Decoction of Elm Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM UL'MI (B. P.), L. _Prep._ Elm
bark (cut in small pieces), 1 oz.; distilled water, 16 oz.; boil to 8 oz.,
and strain.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 oz., three or four times a day, as a cheap
substitute for sarsaparilla in scaly skin diseases. (See _below_.)

=Decoction of Elm Bark (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ULMI COMPOSITUM, L.
_Prep._ (Jeffrey.) Simple decoction of elm bark, 8 pints; liquorice root,
sassafras and guaiacum chips, of each 1 oz.; mezereon root, 3 dr.; boil
for one hour, and strain. More active than the last.

=Decoction of Er'got.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ERGOT'AE, D. SECA'LIS CORNUTI, L.
_Prep._ (Pereira.) Ergot of rye (bruised), 1 dr.; water, 6 fl. oz.; boil
10 minutes, and strain.--_Dose_. One third at intervals of half an hour,
until the whole is taken; as a parturifacient.

=Decoction of Fern Root.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM FILICIS; D. RADICIS F., L.
_Prep._ (Dr Wood.) Dried fern-root, 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil to 16 fl.
oz., and strain. By wine-glassfuls, fasting, until it excites slight
nausea; as a vermifuge, more particularly for tapeworm.

=Decoction of Figs.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM FICI, L. _Prep._ (Cadet.) Figs
(chopped), 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil, and strain. Demulcent and pectoral;
taken _ad libitum_. (See _below_.)

=Decoction of Figs (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM FICI COMPOSITUM, L.
_Prep._ (Foy.) Figs and raisins (chopped), of each 2 oz.; liquorice root,
1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 quart; boil 15 minutes, and strain. As the last.

=Decoction for Ene'mas.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM PRO ENEMA'TE, L. Barley-water, or
thin gruel, is commonly used under this name. See DECOCTION OF MALLOWS,
&c.

=Decoction for Fomenta'tions.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM PRO FOMENTO, L. _Prep._
(Ph. L. 1788.) Dried leaves of southern wood, tops of sea wormwood, and
chamomile flowers, of each 1 oz.; laurel or bay leaves (dried), 1/2 oz.;
water, 1 pint, boil a few minutes, and strain.

=Decoction of Galls.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GAL'LAE, (Ph. L.) _Prep._ From galls
(bruised), 2-1/2 oz.; water, 1 quart; boiled to one half, and strained. As
an astringent, fomentation, enema, or injection, in prolapsus ani, piles,
and leucorrh[oe]a.

=Decoction of Guaiac'um.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GUAIAC'I (Ph. E.), D. G.
COMPOSITUM (Ph. D. 1826), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. E.) Guaiacum shavings, 3 oz.;
raisins (chopped), 2 oz.; water, 8 pints; simmer down to 5 pints, adding
towards the end, sassafras (rasped or sliced), and liquorice root
(bruised), of each 1 oz.

2. (Ph. D.) Guaiacum wood, 3 oz.; sassafras, 10 dr.; liquorice root, 2-1/2
oz.; water, 10 pints, as the last; to strain 5 pints.

_Obs._ The above form the once celebrated 'Decoction of the
Woods,'--_Dose._ A teacupful 3 or 4 times daily, or oftener, in chronic
rheumatism, cutaneous diseases, after a course of mercury, &c. Although
its virtues are of a very dubious kind, there is no doubt that it
frequently does good, especially when persevered in with a sudorific
regimen.

=Decoction of Hairy Horehound.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM BALLOTAE LANATAE, L. _Prep._
(Rehmann.) Siberian or woolly horehound (Ballota), 1-1/2 oz.; water, 1
quart; boil to one half.--_Dose._ A tumblerful, or more, twice a day; in
rheumatic, gouty, and dropsical affections, especially the latter. See
DECOCTION OF HOREHOUND.

=Decoction of Harts'horn.= See MIXTURES.

=Decoction of Hel'lebore.= 1. (DECOCTION OF BLACK HELLEBORE; DECOCTUM
HELLEBORI NIGRI, L.) _Prep._ 1. (A. T. Thomson.) Black hellebore root, 2
dr.; water, 1 pint; boil 15 minutes.--_Dose_, 1 fl. oz., every 4 hours; in
dropsy, worms, chronic skin diseases, &c., occurring in non-irritable
habits.

2. (DECOCTION OF WHITE HELLEBORE; DECOCTUM VERATRI, Ph. L. & D.) _Prep._
(Ph. L. 1836.) White hellebore (bruised), 10 dr.; water, 1 quart; boil to
a pint, and when cold, add of rectified spirit, 3 fl. oz. Used as a
lotion, in itch, lepra, psoriasis, scald-head, &c.; and to destroy
pediculi. In most cases it should be diluted with water, and should never
be applied to the unsound skin.

=Decoction of Holly Leaves.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ILICIS. (Foy.) Holly leaves,
1/2 oz.; water, 16 oz.; boil to 12 oz. For three doses.

=Decoction of Horehound.= _Syn._ COMPOUND DECOCTION OF HOREHOUND; DECOCTUM
MARUBII COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ (Dr R. E. Griffith.) Dried horehound
(_Marrubium vulgare_), 1 oz.; liquorice root and flax seed (bruised), of
each 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; macerate for 3 or 4 hours (boil a
minute), and strain. An excellent demulcent and pectoral.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
fl. oz., as required, in coughs, &c.

=Decoction of Horse-chest'nut Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HIPPOCASTANEI, L.
_Prep._ (Dr Wood.) Horse-chestnut bark (coarsely powdered), 10 dr.; water,
1 pint; boil 10 minutes, and strain. Used for decoction of cinchona bark.
A little liquorice root is frequently added. (See _below_.)

=Decoction of Horse-chest'nut Bark (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM
HIPPOCASTANEI COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph[oe]bus.) Horse-chestnut bark,
1-1/2 oz.; water, 18 fl. oz.; boil to one half, strain, and when quite
cold, add of sulphuric ether, 1 to 2 dr.; syrup of orange peel, 1 oz. To
be used during the intermission of an ague in wine-glassfuls at a time.

2. (Spielman.) Horse-chestnut bark and willow bark, of each 1/2 oz.;
calamus aromaticus and root of water avens, of each 2 dr.; water, 16 fl.
oz.; boil to one half. As the last.

=Decoction of Iceland Moss.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF LIVERWORT; DECOCTUM
CETRARIAE (Ph. L.); D. LICHENIS ISLANDICI (Ph. D.); D. LICHENIS (Ph. L.
1824.) _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Liverwort (Iceland moss), 5 dr.; wecm 1-1/2;
pint; boil to a pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. D.) Iceland moss, 1 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil for 10 minutes in
a covered vessel, and strain. Nutritious, demulcent, pectoral, and
tonic.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 fl. oz., every 3 or 4 hours; in chronic affections
of the chest and stomach, especially pulmonary consumption, old coughs,
dyspepsia, chronic diarrh[oe]a, and dysentery. It may be flavoured and
sweetened; milk is frequently added to it. The bitter matter may be
removed by steeping the moss for some time in pretty warm water, or in
cold water, to which a very little carbonate of potash has been added.
Without this is done, it is intensely bitter and nauseous.

=Decoction of Indian Ba'el.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF AEGLE MARMELOS; DECOCTUM
BAEL, L. From the dried unripe fruit of _AEgle marmelos_ (Indian bael), 2
oz.; water, 1 pint; boil to one third, and strain.--_Dose_, 2 fl. oz. two
or three times a day; in dysentery, diarrh[oe]a, and English cholera.

=Decoction of Indian Pink.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SPIGELIAE, L. _Prep._ Indian
pink root, 5 dr; water, 1 pint; boil 5 minutes; add senna, 4 dr.; digest
15 minutes, strain and add of manna, 1 oz.--_Dose._ A small teacupful, 3
times a day, for an adult; 1/2 oz. to 1 oz., or less, for children; as an
anthelmintic purge.

=Decoction of Indian Sarsaparil'la.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HEMEDES'MI, L.
_Prep._ (Pereira.) Root of Indian sarsaparilla (_Hemedesmus Indicus_), 2
oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint. Diuretic, alterative, and
tonic.--_Dose._ By wine-glassfuls, as decoction of sarsaparilla.

=Decoction of I''rish Moss.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CHON'DRI. _Prep._ (Pereira.)
Carrageen or Irish moss, 1 oz.; macerate in lukewarm water for 10 minutes,
take it out and drain it, and then boil it in water (or milk), 3 pints,
for 15 minutes, and strain through linen.

_Obs._ If twice the above weight of moss is employed, a mucilage
(_mucilago chondri_) is produced, which may be flavoured with lemon juice,
spices, &c., and forms a most nutritious article of spoon diet. It is
taken in the same cases as decoction of Iceland moss; and is frequently
employed in cookery, as a substitute for animal jelly, in the preparation
of blancmanges, soups, &c.

=Decoction of I''singlass.= See LISBON DIET DRINK.

=Decoction of Jamaica Dogwood.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CORNUS FLORIDAE. (U. S.
Ph.) Bark of Jamaica dogwood, 1 oz.; water, 16 oz. o.m.; boil 10 minutes
and strain, and make up to 1 pint o.m. As a substitute for cinchona, but
is more astringent.

=Decoction of Jujubes.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM JUJUBARUM. Boil 2 oz. of jujubes
(stoned), for an hour, in a sufficient quantity of water to produce 2
pints of decoction.

=Decoction of Ju'niper Berries (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM JUNIPERI
COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.) Juniper berries, 2 oz.; cream of
tartar, 3 dr.; water, 4 pints; boil to a quart, strain, and add compound
spirit of juniper, 2 fl. oz. Diuretic.--_Dose_, 2 or 3 wine-glassfuls, 3
times a day, warm.

=Decoction of Linseed (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM LI'NI COMPOSITUM (Ph.
D.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. D.) Linseed, 1 oz.; liquorice root (bruised), 1/2
oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil for 10 minutes in a covered vessel, and
strain whilst hot. Emollient and demulcent.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful _ad
libitum_; in gonorrh[oe]a, dysentery, pulmonary affections, &c. It may be
flavoured with lemon peel, and sweetened. See INFUSIONS.

=Decoction of Liquorice.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GLYCYRRHIZAE, L. _Prep._ (Ph. D.
1826.) Liquorice root (sliced), 1-1/2 oz.; water, 16 fl. oz.; boil 10
minutes and strain. A mild demulcent; it is taken either alone, by
wine-glassfuls, or is used as a vehicle for more active remedies.

=Decoction, Lisbon.= See LISBON DIET DRINK.

=Decoction of Liv'erwort.= See DECOCTION OF ICELAND MOSS.

=Decoction of Log'wood.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HAEMATOXYLI (Ph. L. E. & D.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Logwood chips, 10 dr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a
pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Logwood, 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil to 10 fl. oz., adding
towards the last, cinnamon (in powder), 1 dr.

3. (Ph. D.) Logwood, 1 oz.; water, 1/2 pint. Astringent and
tonic.--_Dose_, 1 table-spoonful to a wine-glassful; in diarrh[oe]a, as
required.

4. (Ph. B.) Logwood in chips, 1 oz.; cinnamon in coarse powder, 60 gr.;
distilled water, 1 pint. Boil for 10 minutes, and strain to make up 1
pint.

=Decoction of Mad'der.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM RUBIAE, D. R. TINCTORIAE, L. _Prep._
1. (Dewees.) Powdered madder, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; simmer for 15
minutes, and add of cloves (bruised), 1 dr.; when cold, strain.--_Dose._ A
wine-glassful, 2 or 3 times daily; in amenorrh[oe]a, chlorosis, &c.; or
every 3 hours, a short time previous to the expected menstrual discharge.

2. (W. Cooley.) To the last add ammonio-citrate of iron, 3 dr.

3. (St. Marie.) Powdered madder, 1/2 oz.; hops, 1 dr.; English walnut
leaves, 3 dr.; water, 1 quart; boil to 1-1/2 pint, strain, and when cold,
add of tincture of tartrate of iron, 1 dr.--_Dose_, 2 fl. oz., night and
morning; in scrofula, &c.

=Decoction of Mal'lows.= _Syn._ COMMON DECOCTION; DECOCTUM COM'MUNE, D.
PRO ENEMA'TE (Ph. L. 1787), D. MALVAE COMPOSITUM (Ph. L. 1836), L. _Prep._
(Ph. L. 1836.) Common mallows (dried), 1 oz.; chamomile flowers (dried),
1/2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil 15 minutes, and strain. Used chiefly for
fomentations and enemas.

=Decoction of Malt.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM BI'NAE, D. BYNES, D. MALTI, L. _Prep._
(Swediaur.) Ground malt, 3 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to a pint, and
strain. An oz. of syrup of lemons, or of saffron, may be added to the cold
decoction; or, a little liquorice root, with the malt. Demulcent and
laxative. A cupful _ad libitum_. Infusion of malt (sweet wort) is a more
convenient and elegant preparation.

=Decoction of Marshmal'low.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ALTHAE'AE (Ph. D. 1826 and Ph.
E. 1813), L. _Prep._ (Ph. D. 1826.) Dried root and herb of marshmallow, 4
oz.; raisins (stoned), 2 oz.; water, 7 pints (wine measure); boil down to
5 pints, strain, allow it to deposit the sediment and decant the clear
liquid. Demulcent.--_Dose._ A cupful _ad libitum_, in coughs, colds,
calculous affections, and other diseases of the urinary organs. See
MIXTURES.

=Decoction of Matico.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM MATICO'NIS, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Jeffreys.) Matico leaves, 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil 12 minutes, and
strain. Astringent.--_Dose_, 1 fl. oz., 2 or 3 times a day; in haemorrhagic
and other discharges.

=Decoction, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM HYDRARGYRI, D. MERCURIALE, L.
_Prep._ 1. Quicksilver, 4 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil in a glass or earthen
vessel for an hour, adding water to replace that lost by
evaporation.--_Dose._ A teacupful.

2. Mercurial pill, 1 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to a pint.--_Dose._ A
wine-glassful. Both were formerly taken for worms and the itch.

3. Corrosive sublimate, 1 gr.; (dissolved in) spirit of wine, 30 drops;
extract of sarsaparilla, 3 dr.; decoction of sarsaparilla, 8 fl. oz.;
mix.--_Dose._ One large table-spoonful, 3 times a day; in syphilis and
obstinate skin diseases.

=Decoction of Mezere'on.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM MEZEREI (Ph. E. and Ph. D.
1826), L. _Prep._ (Ph. E.) Root-bark of mezereon, 2 dr.; liquorice root, 4
dr.; water, 1 quart; simmer to 1-1/2 pint, and strain. Stimulant and
sudorific.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful, or more, three or four times a day;
in chronic rheumatism, scrofula, secondary syphilis, lepra, and some other
cutaneous affections. Much boiling injures the virtues of mezereon. (See
_below_.)

=Decoction of Mezere'on (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM MEZEREI COMPOSITUM,
L. _Prep._ (Van Mons.) Mezereon, 2 dr.; bitter sweet, 4 dr.; burdock, 2
oz.; water, 2 quarts; boil to 3 pints, add of liquorice root, 2 dr., and
strain. As the last, and in obstinate diseases of the skin.

=Decoction of Mugwort.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ARTEMISIAE VULGARIS. Mugwort root,
1 oz.; water, 24 oz. Boil for half an hour. In epilepsy.

=Decoction of Myrrh.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM MYRRHAE. (Ph. D.) Myrrh, 2 dr.;
water, 8-1/2 oz.; triturate the myrrh with the water gradually added; then
boil for 10 minutes in a covered vessel, and strain.

=Decoction, Narcotic.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM ANODYNUM, D. NARCOTICUM, L. _Prep._
(Hosp. Form.) Common nightshade (dried), 1 oz.; poppy heads, 3 in no.;
water, 1 pint; boil 10 minutes, and strain. As an anodyne fomentation,
used warm.

=Decoction of Ni'tre.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM NITROSUM, D. NITRATUM, D. POTASSAE
NITRATIS, L. _Prep._ 1. Nitre, 1/2 oz.; white sugar, 2 oz.; cochineal, 20
gr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil a few minutes, and strain.

2. (Hosp. Form.) Barley-water, 1 pint; nitre, 5 dr.; dissolve. Diuretic,
diaphoretic, and refrigerant. A wine-glassful, frequently; in
gonorrh[oe]a, sore throat, acute rheumatism, scurvy, &c.

=Decoction of Oak Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM QUERCUS (Ph. L. E. & D.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ph. L. & E.) Oak bark (bruised), 10 dr.; water, 1 quart; boil
down to a pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. D.) Oak bark, 1-1/2 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil 10 minutes, and
strain. Astringent. Used as a gargle in ulcerated sore throat, relaxation
of the uvula, &c., and as a wash, and as an injection in piles,
leucorrh[oe]a, haemorrhages, prolapsus ani, &c.

3. (Ph. B.) Oak bark bruised, 1-1/2 oz.; distilled water, 1 pint; boil for
10 minutes, and strain.

=Decoction of Oats.= _Syn._ WATER GRUEL; DECOCTUM AVENAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Cullen.) Oatmeal, 1 oz.; water, 3 quarts; boil to a quart, strain, and
when cold, decant the clear liquid from the sediment.

2. (A. T. Thomson.) Washed groats, 4 oz.; water, 4 pints; boil to a quart.
Nutritious and demulcent. Taken _ad libitum_, to promote the action of
purgatives, and as an enema, either alone, or as a vehicle for more active
substances. It is too thin for food. See GRUEL.

=Decoction of Parei'ra.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM PAREIRAE (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ 1.
(Ph. L.) _Pareira brava_ root (sliced), 10 dr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to
a pint, and strain.

2. (Sir B. Brodie.) Pareira, 4 dr.; water, 3 pints; boil to a pint, as
last. The above are given in gonorrh[oe]a, leucorrh[oe]a, and chronic
inflammation of the bladder.--_Dose._ Of the first, 1/2 to 1
wine-glassful, 3 or 4 times a day; of the second, about twice that
quantity, or more. It is commonly combined with some tincture of
hyoscyamus; and when the triple phosphates are present in the urine,
dilute hydrochloric or nitric acid may be added. See PAREIRA.

=Decoction, Pec'toral.= See DECOCTION OF BARLEY.

=Decoction of Pel'litory.= DECOCTUM PYRE''THRI, L. _Prep._ (Guy's Hosp.)
Pellitory root, 1 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, and strain. Used
as a gastric stimulant, and as a gargle in the relaxation of the uvula.

=Decoction of Pome'granate.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GRANA'TI (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._
(Ph. L.) Pomegranate rind (fruit-bark), 2 oz.; distilled water, 1-1/2
pint; boil to a pint, and strain. Astringent. Used as a gargle and
injection, in sore throat, leucorrh[oe]a, &c.; and internally, in
diarrh[oe]a, dysentery, &c.--_Dose_, 1 fl. oz., or more.

=Decoction of Pomegranate Root.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GRANATI RADICIS (Ph. L.),
L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Root-bark of pomegranate (sliced), 2 oz.; water, 1
quart; boil to a pint, and strain.

2. (Collier.) Bark of the root, 2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil to one half.
This is the common form used in India.

_Dose, &c._ A wine-glassful, half-hourly, until the whole is taken, a
light diet and a dose of castor oil having been taken the day previously.
In tapeworm, Dr Collier recommends the whole of the last preparation to be
given at 2 doses, at the interval of 2 hours. It purges, and in 5 or 6
hours frequently expels the worm; if this does not take place, it should
be persevered in. "Look for the head of the taenia (tapeworm); for if that
is not expelled, you have done nothing." (Collier.) Oil of turpentine and
kousso are now more frequently given in taenia in this country.

=Decoction of Poppies.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF POPPY-HEADS, FOMENTATION OF
P.-H.; DECOCTUM PAPAVERIS (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Poppy-heads (bruised), 4 oz.; water, 2 quarts; boil for 15 minutes, and
strain.

2. (Ph. E. & D.) As the last, but using only 3 pints of water. Used as an
emollient fomentation, in painful swellings, excoriations, &c. The
addition of a 1/4 pint of vinegar is said to promote its efficacy.

3. (Ph. B.) Poppy-heads bruised, 2 oz.; distilled water, 1-1/2 pint. Boil
for 10 minutes and strain. The product should measure a pint.

=Decoction of Quas'sia.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM QUASSIAE, L. _Prep._ From quassia
chips (small). 1 dr.; water, 1-1/4 pint; boil to a pint, and add syrup of
orange peel, 2 oz.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful, occasionally, as a stomachic
tonic. See INFUSIONS.

=Decoction of Quince.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF QUINCE SEED, MUCILAGE OF Q. S.;
DECOCTUM CYDONII (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ From quince seeds, 2 dr.; water, 1
pint; boil for 10 minutes, and strain. Used as an emollient and sheathing
application to abraded or wounded surfaces, as cracked lip, nipples, &c.;
and to the skin in erysipelas, to painful haemorrhoidal tumours, and the
like. Prepared with a little less water, it is used by the hairdresser as
'bandoline' or 'fixateur.'

=Decoction of Red Gum.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM GUMMI RUBRI (Mr Squire.) Red gum,
1 oz.; water, 2 pints; boil 10 minutes, and strain.

=Decoction of Rice.= _Syn._ RICE WATER, RICE DRINK; DECOCTUM ORY'ZAE, L.
_Prep._ RICE, 2 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to one half, and strain.
Demulcent. A good drink in fevers, coughs, &c., either alone or sweetened
and flavoured with a little lemon peel.

=Decoction of Sarsaparil'la.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SAR'ZAE (Ph. L. & E.), D.
SARSAPARILLAE (Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Sarsaparilla (sliced), 5
oz.; water, 2 quarts; boil to a quart, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Sarsaparilla, 5 oz.; boiling distilled water, 4 pints;
macerate for 2 hours, in a vessel lightly covered, and placed in a warm
situation; then take out the root, bruise it, return it again to the
liquor, boil down to a quart, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Sarsaparilla, 2 oz.; boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; digest an
hour, boil 10 minutes, cool, and strain.

4. (Ph. B.) Digest 2-1/2 _oz._ of Jamaica sarsaparilla cut transversely in
1-1/2 pint of boiling water for an hour, boil for 10 minutes, cool, and
strain. Make up to one pint.

_Obs._ The medicinal virtues of sarsaparilla root reside wholly in the
bark, or cortical portion; it is therefore quite unnecessary to bruise it,
as directed in the Ph. E. By those houses which do largely in decoction of
sarsaparilla, the root is seldom split or cut; the bundles in which it is
made up being simply untied and spread open, to allow of the free exposure
of every part to the solvent action of the water. By this plan the whole
of the soluble portion of the bark is extracted, whilst the feculent
matter that pervades the wood is only partially dissolved out. According
to Soubeiran, a mere infusion is preferable. The dose is a teacupful to
half a pint, 3 or 4 times a day.

An extemporaneous decoction of sarsaparilla is made by dissolving 3/4 oz.
of the simplest extract in 1 pint of hot water. See SARSAPARILLA, and
_below_.

=Decoction of Sarsaparilla (Concentrated).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SARZAE
CONCENTRATUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (Wholesale.) Sarsaparilla (Jamaica) 10-1/2
lbs., is placed in a large and well-cleaned copper boiler, and enough
boiling water added to cover it; it is then left to macerate, without
boiling, for 3 or 4 hours, after which it is boiled for about an hour, and
the clear liquor drawn off into another clean copper pan; the root (after
it has well drained) is then washed or 'sparged'[255] with boiling water,
until the latter runs off scarcely coloured; the washings are added to the
decoction, and the whole evaporated as quickly as possible to 6-1/2 pints;
it is then set to cool, and rectified spirit of wine, 1-1/2 pint, further
added; after agitation, the whole is set aside in a well-corked bottle, in
a cool place, for a week. In a few days it is usually found as clear and
brilliant as brandy, with very little sediment, and will keep for any
length of time uninjured. Some manufacturers, instead of washing the root,
give it a second and third water, boiling it each time and evaporating the
mixed liquors.

[Footnote 255: For an explanation of the operation of 'sparging' see page
356.]

2. (Extemporaneous.) Extract of sarsaparilla, 6-1/2 oz.; water, 12 fl.
oz.; dissolve, add rectified spirit, 2-1/2 fl. oz., and water, q. s. to
make the whole exactly measure a pint.

_Obs._ 1 drachm of this decoction, mixed with 7 drachms of water, forms a
similar preparation to the Decoctum Sarzae of the Ph. L., and is now very
frequently substituted for it in dispensing. See SARSAPARILLA, EXTRACTS,
and _below_.

=Decoction of Sarsaparilla (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SARZAE COMPOSITUM
(Ph. L. & E.), D. SARSAPARILLAE C. (Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Decoction of sarsaparilla (boiling), 4 pints; sassafras chips, guaiacum
wood (rasped), and fresh liquorice root (bruised), of each 10 dr.;
mezereon (root-bark), 3 dr.; boil for 15 minutes, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) As the last, but using 4 dr. of mezereon.

3. (Ph. D.) Sarsaparilla (sliced), 2 oz., sassafras, guaiacum turnings,
and liquorice root (bruised), of each 2 dr.; mezereon root-bark, 1 dr.;
boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; digest for an hour, then boil for 10 minutes,
cool, and strain.

4. (Extemporaneous.) Compound extract of sarsaparilla, 7-1/2 dr.; boiling
water, 1 pint; dissolve.

5. (Ph. B.) Jamaica sarsaparilla, cut transversely, 2-1/2 oz.; sassafras,
guaiacum turnings, bruised liquorice root, of each 1/4 oz., mezereon root
bark 60 grains; digest them with 1-1/2 pint of boiling water in a covered
vessel for an hour, then boil for 10 minutes, cool, and strain. Make up to
1 pint.

_Obs._ This decoction is an imitation of the once justly celebrated
'Lisbon Diet Drink.' It is an alterative and diaphoretic.--_Dose._ A
teacupful, or more, 3 or 4 times a day, either along with, or after, a
mercurial course; and in syphilis, scurvy, scrofula, chronic rheumatism,
lepra, psoriasis, and several other skin diseases, and especially in
cachexia, or general bad habit of body. During its use the skin should be
kept warm. See SARSAPARILLA and _below_.

=Decoction of Sarsaparilla (Concentrated Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SARZAE
COMPOSITUM CONCENTRATUM, D. SARSAPARILLAE C. C., L. There is a very
considerable trade done in this article, in consequence of compound
decoction of sarsaparilla being taken in large doses, both alone and in
combination with other remedies, and the pharmacop[oe]ial preparation
spoiling if kept longer than about 12 hours, in warm weather. Like the
concentrated simple decoction, it is said to be of 8 times the usual
strength, so that when mixed with 7 times its weight of water, it forms a
similar preparation to the Decoctum Sarzae Compositum,--Ph. L., for which
it is very generally substituted in dispensing.

_Prep._ 1. (Wholesale.) Sarsaparilla (red Jamaica), 96 lbs.; mezereon root
(not root-bark), 9 lbs.; liquorice root (bruised), 16 lbs. The mezereon
and liquorice are first laid (loosely) on the bottom of a clean copper
pan, and the bundles of sarsaparilla (untied and loosened) packed over
them, in horizontal layers, alternately at right angles with each other.
Three or four boards, with as many iron 1/2-cwt. weights, are next placed
on the top of the whole. Water is now run in, to about ten inches higher
than the ingredients, and heat is applied until ebullition commences. The
materials are now allowed to macerate, without boiling, for 3 or 4 hours,
after which the liquor is gently boiled for about an hour, care being
taken to add fresh water from time to time, so as to keep the whole well
covered. The decoction is next run off, and set evaporating as quickly as
possible. The ingredients are then washed with successive portions of
boiling water, by allowing it to descend from a species of shower-bath,
after the manner of 'sparging,' described under BREWING.[256] This is
repeated until the water runs off nearly colourless, the smallest quantity
being employed that will effect the object in view. The whole of the
liquid is now evaporated without delay, until reduced to 8-1/4 galls.,
when, after cooling, 2 dr. of essential oil of sassafras, dissolved in 2
galls. of rectified spirit of wine, are added, and afterwards 1 pint of
essence of guaiacum. The liquid is then placed in a suitably sized barrel,
set upon its head, and fitted with a small cock (not placed too near the
bottom), and allowed to repose for a week, by which time it becomes clear
and brilliant, and fit for sale. This is the form adopted by the large
metropolitan drug-houses most celebrated for this preparation. The product
that may be drawn off fit for sale is something over 10 galls. The
residuum, forming the 'bottoms,' consists chiefly of fecula. The latter is
well stirred up with 3 or 4 galls. of cold water, and allowed to settle.
The clear decanted 'washings' are used as water or liquor in making the
next batch of decoction.

[Footnote 256: See page 356.]

2. (Extemporaneous.) Compound extract of sarsaparilla, 7-1/2 oz.; boiling
water, 12 fl. oz.; dissolve, then add of rectified spirit of wine, 2-1/2
fl. oz.; mix well, and further add of water, q. s. to make the whole
measure a pint.

_Obs._ To conduct this process successfully, several large copper pans are
required; one of which (to boil the ingredients in) must be capable of
containing from 140 to 150 gallons at the least, and the others must be
sufficiently large to receive the liquors as they are drawn off. Those for
the evaporation should be very shallow, in order that it may proceed
rapidly; and the whole should be heated by steam. An excellent plan is to
employ large wooden vats, and to apply the heat by means of pipes laid
along the bottom, and supplied with high-pressure steam. This method is
less expensive than the use of double steam pans, as above. When essence
of guaiacum is not used, 24 lbs. of guaiacum shavings, from which the dust
has been sifted, are boiled with the other ingredients, instead. Those
desirous of using the proportions of the ingredients ordered by the
Colleges may do so by taking eight times the given quantities, and
proceeding as above. The following are special preparations:--

FELTZ'S DECOCTION OF SARSAPARILLA. _Syn._ AP'OZEM OF FELTZ; DECOCTUM SARZAE
CUM ICHTHYOCOL'LA, L.; PTISANE DE FELTZ, Fr. _Prep._ From sarsaparilla
(sliced), 3 oz.; isinglass and crude antimony (in powder), of each 1/2
oz.; water 5 pints; boil to one half, and strain. Used in skin diseases.

JAUPERAND'S DECOCTION OF SARSAPARILLA. _Syn._ DECOCTUM SARZAE CUM RADICE
CHINA, L.; PTISANE DE JAUPERAND, Fr. _Prep._ (Bories.) Sarsaparilla and
China root, of each 2 oz.; senna and sassafras chips, of each 1/2 oz.;
carbonate of potassa, 1 dr.; water, 2 galls.; simmer, gently, for several
hours, and strain 12 pints; when cold, decant the clear.--_Dose_, 2 fl.
oz., two or three times daily; in scrofula, &c.

VINACHE'S DECOCTION OF SARSAPARILLA. _Syn._ DECOCTUM SARZAE CUM SENNA, L.;
PTISANE DE VINACHE, Fr. _Prep._ (Foy.) Sarsaparilla, China wood, and
guaiacum wood, of each 1-1/2 oz.; crude antimony (tied in a rag), 2 oz.;
water, 6 pints; macerate for 12 hours (7 in hot weather), boil to one
half, add sassafras chips and senna, of each 1/2 oz., infuse 1 hour
longer, and strain; when cold, decant the clear. Recommended in scrofula,
secondary syphilis, and various cutaneous affections.

ZITTMANN'S DECOCTION OF SARSAPARILLA. _Syn._ DECOCTUM ZITTMANNI, L.;
PTISANE DE ZITTMANN, Fr. _Prep._ 1. (STRONGER DECOCTION; D. Z. FORTE, Ph.
Bor. 1847.) Sarsaparilla, 12 oz.; water, 72 lbs. (say 5-3/4 galls.);
digest 24 hours, then add (suspended in a bag), white sugar and alum, of
each 6 dr.; calomel, 4 dr.; cinnabar, 1 dr.; boil to 24 lbs., adding
towards the end of the process, senna, 3 oz.; liquorice root, 1-1/2 oz.;
aniseed and fennel seed, of each 1/2 oz.; finally strain, with pressure
and after some time decant the clear portion. The formula in the 'Ph.
Suec.' 1845 is similar; that in the 'Hamburg Codex' directs only 24 lbs.
of water to be used, and the whole to be reduced to 16 lbs.

2. (WEAKER DECOCTION; D. Z. TENUE.--Ph. Bor. 1847.) Add to the residuum
(waste) of the last preparation sarsaparilla, 6 oz.; water, 72 lbs. (say,
5-3/4 galls.); boil to 24 lbs.; adding towards the end of the process,
lemon peel, cinnamon bark, liquorice root, and cardamoms (all bruised), of
each 3 dr.; press, strain, &c., as before. In the 'Ph. Suec.' 1845 double
the above weights of lemon peel and liquorice root are ordered, and in the
'Hamburg Codex' (1845) 24 lbs. of water only are ordered, and the whole
is to be boiled down to 16 lbs.

_Obs._ Both the above are used in Germany and on the Continent generally,
in the same cases as those in which compound decoction of sarsaparilla is
administered in England. They may be drunk almost _ad libitum_. A trace of
mercury may be detected in the stronger decoction, when properly prepared.
See SARSAPARILLA.

=Decoction of Sen'ega Root.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF AMERICAN SNAKE ROOT, D.
OF RATTLESNAKE ROOT; DECOCTUM POLYGALAE, D. SENEGAE (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._
(Ph. L.) Senega or seneka root, 10 dr.; water, 1 quart; boil to a pint,
and strain.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 wine-glassfuls three or four times daily; in
humoral asthma, chronic cough, dropsy, &c. It is stimulant, expectorant,
and diuretic, and, in large doses, emetic and cathartic. It is frequently
conjoined with ammonia. It is the antidote employed by the Senega Indians
against the bite of the rattlesnake. (Dr Tennant.)

=Decoction of Simaru'ba Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SIMARU'BAE, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Wright.) Simaruba bark, 2 dr.; water, 24 fl. oz.; boil to one half, and
strain. Tonic.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz.; in chronic dysentery and
diarrh[oe]a.

=Decoction of Squills (Compound).= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SCILLAE COMPOSITUM, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. U. S. 1841.) Squills, 3 dr.; juniper berries, 4 oz.; snake
root, 3 oz.; water, 4 lbs.; boil to one half, strain, and add of sweet
spirits of nitre, 4 fl. oz. In chronic coughs and other chest affections,
unaccompanied with active inflammatory symptoms.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 fl. oz.,
twice or thrice daily.

=Decoction of Starch.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM AM'YLI (Ph. L.), MUCILA'GO AM'YLI
(Ph. E. & D.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. L. & E.) Starch, 1/2 oz.; add, gradually,
water, 1 pint, and boil for a short time. The Dublin preparation is nearly
twice as strong. Used as an enema in dysentery, diarrh[oe]a, and
excoriations of the rectum.

=Decoction, Sudorif'ic.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SUDORIF'ICUM, L. The old name of
the compound decoctions of sarsaparilla and guaiacum.

=Decoction of Su'et.= _Syn._ ARTIFICIAL GOAT'S MILK; DECOCTUM SE'VI, L.
_Prep._ Suet, 1 oz.; tie it loosely in a piece of muslin and simmer it in
cow's milk, 1-1/4 pint; adding towards the last, white sugar, 1/2 oz. In
scrofulous emaciation and phthisis; taken _ad libitum_.

=Decoction of Tam'arinds.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM TAMARIND'ORUM, L. _Prep._
Tamarinds, 1-1/2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil for 5 minutes, and strain. A
pleasant drink in fevers, asthma, chronic coughs, &c.

=Decoction of Tamarinds and Sen'na.= _Syn._ DEC. TAMARINDORUM CUM SENNA
(Ph. E. 1744), L. _Prep._ Tamarinds, 6 dr.; cream of tartar, 2 dr.; water,
1-1/2; pint; boil in a glazed earthen vessel until reduced to 16 oz.; then
infuse therein for 12 hours, senna, 4 dr.; strain, and add of syrup of
violets, 1 oz. A gentle aperient.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful, or more.

=Decoction of Tar.= _Syn._ TAR WATER; DECOCTUM PI'CIS LIQ'UIDAE, L. _Prep._
Tar, 1 oz.; water, 1-1/2; pint; boil to 1 pint.--_Dose._ A pint or more
daily; in chronic catarrh; and as a wash in chronic skin diseases,
especially those of the head, in children.

=Decoction, Ton'ic.= _Syn._ STRENGTHENING DECOCTION; DECOCTUM ROBORANS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Peruvian bark (bruised), 1/2 oz.; Virginian snake root, 2 dr.;
water, 1 pint; boil to one half, strain whilst hot, and add, spirit of
cinnamon, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; diluted sulphuric acid, 1-1/2 dr.--_Dose_, 2 oz.
two or three times a day.

2. Decoction of bark, 5 oz.; tincture of bark, 6 dr.; aromatic confection,
1/2 dr.; salvolatile, 1 dr.--_Dose_, 1 or 2 table-spoonfuls night and
morning; especially in diarrh[oe]a.

=Decoction of Tor'mentil.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM TORMENTIL'LAE (Ph. L.), L.
_Prep._ (Ph. L.) Tormentil root (bruised), 2 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil
to a pint, and strain. Astringent.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz., in chronic
diarrh[oe]a, &c.

=Decoction of Tur'meric.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CURCU'MAE, L. _Prep._ From
turmeric root (in powder), 1-1/2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil for 5 minutes,
and strain. A mild aromatic stimulant and stomachic.--_Dose._ A
wine-glassful _ad libitum_. It is principally used as a test for alkalies,
which turn it brown. Unsized paper dipped into it and dried forms the
turmeric test-paper of the chemist.

=Decoction of Verbe'na.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM VERBE'NAE, L. From verbena
(vervain), 2 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to 1 pint, and strain.

_Obs._ The _Verbena officinalis_ was formerly highly recommended by
Etmuller, Hartman, De Haen, Morley, and others, in scrofula, cephalalgia,
&c., but afterwards fell into neglect. More recently, a decoction of the
plant has been highly extolled by Boshanov and others as an anti-febrile.

=Decoction, Vul'nerary.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM VULNERA''RIUM, L. _Prep._ From
ground ivy and broad-leaved plantain, of each 1/2 oz.; water, 3 pints;
boil to 1 quart, strain, and add sugar, 1 oz. A popular pectoral and
tonic, especially in old coughs; also to heal wounds.--_Dose_, 1/2 a
teacupful or more twice a day.

=Decoction of Wal'nut Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM JUGLAND'IS, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
Gen.) Green bark of walnuts, 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil for 15 minutes,
and strain. As an anti-syphilitic. Before the general introduction of
sarsaparilla it was much esteemed in most cases in which that drug is now
taken.--_Dose, &c._ The same as those of comp. dec. of sarsaparilla.
Pearson says that "when the putamen (green rind) of the walnut has been
omitted, either intentionally or by accident (from _Decoctum
Lusitanicum_), the same good effects have not followed its use as when it
contained this ingredient.

=Decoction of Walnut Leaves.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM JUGLAND'IS FOLIO''RUM, L.
_Prep._ (Negrier.) Walnut leaves, 1 handful; water, 1 quart; boil 15
minutes, and strain. Detersive, diaphoretic, and alterative.--_Dose, &c._
As the last, especially in chronic rheumatism, secondary syphilis, &c.

=Decoction of Wa'terdock.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM RUMI'CIS, D. R. AQUAT'ICI, L.
_Prep._ (A. T. Thomson.) Root of common waterdock (_Rumex obtusifolius_),
1 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil for 10 minutes, and strain.

_Obs._ This decoction is astringent, and was once much celebrated as a
remedy for scurvy and some other cutaneous affections. "It is the only
remedy which proves efficacious in that disease when the ulcers are
healed, and the patient is attacked with asthma." (Linnaeus, on the Scurvy
of the Laplanders.)

=Decoction, White= (Sydenham's). _Syn._ HARTSHORN DRINK; MIS'TURA COR'NU
USTI. _Prep._ Prepared burnt hartshorn, 2 oz.; gum Arabic, 1 oz.; water, 3
pints; boil to 1 quart, and strain. Mucilaginous; demulcent. Taken _ad
libitum_.

=Decoction of Whor'tleberry.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF BEAR-BERRY, D. OF
UVA-URSI; DECOCTUM UVAE URSI (Ph. L. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.)
Whortleberry leaves, 1 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. D.) Uva-ursi (the leaves), 1/2 oz.; water, 1/2 pint; boil 10
minutes, and strain.

_Dose, &c._ 1 to 3 fl. oz. two or three times daily; in phthisis and
purulent affections of the urinary organs, unaccompanied with active
inflammation; especially in chronic affections of the bladder.

=Decoction of Wil'low Bark.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SALICIS, D. S. CORTICIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Wilkinson.) Willow bark (_Salix latifolia_), bruised, 1-1/2
oz.; macerate in water, 2 lbs., for 6 hours, then boil for 15 minutes, and
strain. Tonic, astringent, and febrifuge.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful.

2. (Nieman.) Willow bark (_Salix alba_), 1-1/2 oz.; water, 3/4 pint; boil
to one half.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz. Both are used as substitutes for
decoction of cinchona bark.

=Decoction of Win'ter-green.= _Syn._ DECOCTION OF PYROLA, D. OF UMBELLATED
WINTER-GREEN, D. OF PIPSISSEWA; DECOCTUM CHIMAPHILAE (Ph. L.), D. PYROLAE
(Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Chimaphila (dried herb), 1 oz.; water,
1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, and strain.

2. (Ph. D.) Winter-green (dried leaves), 1/2 oz.; water, 1/2 pint; boil 10
minutes in a covered vessel, and strain. Tonic, stomachic, alterative, and
diuretic.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 fl. oz.; in dropsies, scrofula, debility, loss
of appetite, &c.; and in those affections of the urinary organs in which
uva-ursi is commonly given.

=Decoction of Worm'seed.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SANTONICI, L. _Prep._ 1.
Wormseed, bruised, 2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil down to 16 fl. oz., and
strain.

2. (Dr R. E. Griffith.) Fresh leaves of wormseed(_Chenopodium
anthelminticum_),--Linn.), 1 oz.; water, 1 pint; orange peel, 2 dr.; boil
(10 minutes), and strain. The above are bitter, stomachic, and
vermifuge.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful twice a day; in worms. It is also used
as an injection against ascarides.

=Decoction of Yar'row.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM MILLEFOLII, L. _Prep._ From
milfoil or yarrow tops, 1-1/2 oz.; water, 1-1/4 pint; boil to a pint, and
strain. Astringent, tonic, and vulnerary.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful thrice
daily; in dropsies, &c. It is also used as a fomentation to bruises, &c.

=Decoction of Black Snake Root.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM CIMICIFUGE. Black snake
root, 1 oz.; water, 16 oz.; boil for 10 minutes.--_Dose_, 1 oz. to 2 oz.
in rheumatism and dropsy.

=Decoction of Stavesacre.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM STAPHISAGRIAE. Stavesacre seed,
1 oz.; water, 2 pints; boil for a few minutes, and strain. For external
use.

=Decoction of Snails.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM LIMATUM (MARS MOUCHON). Flesh of
vine or garden snails (cleansed from shell and intestines), 5 oz.; water,
2 pints; simmer gently for 2 hours, adding towards the end, maiden hair 2
oz., and strain.

=Decoction of Soapwort.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM SAPONARIAE (SWEDIAUR). Soapwort, 2
oz.; water, 4 lbs.; boil to 2 lbs., and strain.

=Decoction of Wood-Soot.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM FULIGINIS (Dr Neligan).
Wood-soot, 4 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint.

=DECOLORA'TION.= The blanching or removal of the natural colour of any
substance. Syrups and many animal, vegetable, and saline solutions are
decoloured or whitened by agitation with animal charcoal, and subsequent
subsidence or filtration. Many fluids rapidly lose their natural colour by
exposure to light, especially to the direct rays of the sun. In this way
castor, nut, poppy, and several other oils are whitened. Fish oils are
partially deodorised and decoloured by filtration through animal charcoal.
Cottons and linens are still commonly bleached by the joint action of
light, air, and moisture. The peculiar way in which light produces this
effect has never been satisfactorily explained. The decoloration of
textile fabrics and solid bodies generally is called bleaching. See
BLANCHING, BLEACHING, OILS, TALLOW, SYRUPS, SUGAR, &c.

=DECOMPOSI''TION= (-z[)i]sh'un). In _chemistry_, the resolution of
compounds into their elements, or the alteration of their chemical
constitution in such a manner that new products are formed.

=DEFECA'TION.= The separation of a liquid from its lees, dregs, or
impurities by subsidence and decantation. It is commonly employed for the
purification of saline solutions and glutinous or unctuous liquids on the
large scale in preference to filtration; than which it is both more
expeditious and expensive. See CLARIFICATION, DECANTATION, FILTRATION, &c.

=DEFLAGRA'TION.= The sudden combustion of any substance for the purpose of
producing some change in its composition, by the joint action of heat and
oxygen. The process is commonly performed by projecting into a red-hot
crucible, in small portions at a time, a mixture of nitrate of potash, and
the body to be oxidised.

=DELIQUES'CENCE.= Spontaneous liquefaction by absorption of the moisture
of the atmosphere. Deliquescent salts are those which by exposure
gradually assume the liquid state. They should all be kept in well-closed
bottles or jars.

=DELIR'IUM TRE'MENS.= [L.] The madness of drunkards; a disease of the
brain resulting from the excessive and protracted use of intoxicating
liquors, particularly of ardent spirits. The early symptoms are extreme
irritability and fretfulness, with unusual mobility of the body.
Sleeplessness and unpleasant dreams soon follow. At length frightful
dreams and visions harass the patient. He sees remarkable sights, hears
extraordinary sounds, and labours under all the strange delusions of
insane persons, which, however vague and unfounded, operate on him with
all the force of realities till he becomes furiously mad. The fit almost
always comes on after hard drinking; and the hands are usually, but not
always, tremulous. A similar affection is occasionally produced by the
abuse of opium, excessive mental anxiety, night watching, or depletion.
According to Dr Armstrong, even respiring the fumes of ardent spirits
will, under some circumstances, produce this disease. Persons who have
undergone surgical operations under the influence of chloroform are more
liable to attacks of this kind than other persons.

The _treatment_ of delirium tremens consists mainly in the judicious use
of opium, laudanum, or morphia, in rather large doses, frequently
repeated. Thirty to sixty drops of laudanum may be given every hour or two
during the fit, its effects being carefully watched. The object is to
produce quiet sleep, from which the patient usually wakes free from the
worst symptoms of the disease. Diaphoretics and mild aperients may also be
given, and a light, nutritious diet adopted throughout. Depletion,
especially bleeding, should be particularly avoided. Alcoholic stimulants
and wine, in certain cases, have proved useful. Under this treatment, the
patient, unless of a very bad habit of body, or much debilitated by
previous excesses, usually recovers. He is, however, very liable to
relapses and subsequent attacks, which are best prevented by judicious
moral management.

The judicious administration of chloral hydrate, in doses of from thirty
to sixty grains as well as of bromide of potassium in twenty-grain doses,
either alone or combined with the chloral, has lately been had recourse to
with the happiest results, for the production of sleep in cases of
delirium tremens or in the insomnia of dipsomaniacs.

The repetition of the dose of chloral requires to be regulated with very
great caution; and it is only in the case of emigrants and others unable
to obtain medical aid that we would recommend it to be given, and then
only should opium have failed to produce the desired effect. Not _more_
than sixty grains of the chloral should be administered during the
twenty-four hours. The internal administration of tincture of capsicum in
moderately large doses, in the intervals of the opiates or chloral
hydrate, has lately been tried in the treatment of this disease, it is
said, with success.

=DELPHIN'IC ACID.= _Syn._ PHOCE'NIC ACID. A fatty acid, obtained by
saponifying the oil of the delphinus or porpoise. According to recent
experiments, it is identical with valeric acid.

=DELPHIN'INE.= _Syn._ DEL'PHINE, DEL'PHIA, DELPHIN'IA. An alkaloid
discovered by Lassaigne and Feneulle in _Delphinium staphysagria_ or
stavesacre.

_Prep._ 1. The husked seeds (in powder) are boiled in a little water, and
pressed in a cloth; a little pure magnesia is then added to the filtered
decoction, the whole is boiled for a few minutes, and refiltered; the
residuum, after being well washed, is digested in boiling alcohol, which
dissolves out the alkaloid, and gives it up again by gentle evaporation
and cooling.

2. The bruised, but unshelled, seeds are digested in dilute sulphuric
acid, the filtered liquor precipitated with carbonate of potassa, and the
precipitate digested in alcohol as before.

3. (Parrish.) An alcoholic extract of the seeds is treated with dilute
sulphuric acid, precipitated with an alkali, again dissolved in dilute
sulphuric acid; the colouring matter precipitated by a few drops of nitric
acid, the alkaloid by potassa. The alkaloid is then dissolved in absolute
alcohol, and the solution thus formed is evaporated; one pound yields
about one drachm.

_Prop., &c._ A light-yellowish or white, odourless powder; extremely acrid
and bitter; scarcely soluble in water; dissolves in ether, and readily in
alcohol; and has an alkaline reaction. Its alcoholic solution produces a
burning and tingling sensation when rubbed on the skin, and a similar
sensation is produced in various parts of the body when it is taken in
doses of a few grains. It has been exhibited in neuralgia and rheumatism
by Dr Turnbull.--_Dose_, 1/12 gr. every three hours, made into a pill with
1 gr. each of the extracts of henbane and liquorice. It is also used
externally under the form of ointment and lotion.

=DELPHINUM--A Boot Varnish.= Shell-lac, 7.5 grammes dissolved in alcohol,
15 grammes, mixed with 20 drops fish oil, and .1 gramme lampblack.
(Geisse.)

=DEMUL'CENTS.= In _medicine_, substances which are calculated to soften
and lubricate the parts to which they are applied. Though having the same
signification as the word EMOLLIENTS, it is desirable to restrict the
latter term to such as are intended for external application, and to
include under the above head only such as are intended for internal
exhibition. The principal demulcents are gum Arabic, gum tragacanth,
liquorice, honey, arrow-root, pearl barley, isinglass, gelatin, milk,
almonds, spermaceti, almond and olive oils, and most other mucilaginous,
amylaceous, saccharine, and oily substances. For use, these are made into
MUCILAGES, DECOCTIONS, EMULSIONS, or MILKS, with water, and form suitable
beverages in dysentery, diarrh[oe]a, catarrh, diseases of the urinary
organs, and all other diseases where diluents are useful. See EMOLLIENTS.

=DENGUE.= This disease is most commonly met with in the East and West
Indies, and occasionally as an epidemic in America. In England it rarely
shows itself in an epidemic character. The symptoms of dengue appear to
combine those of rheumatism and scarlet fever. On the third or fourth day
an eruption shows itself, accompanied with pains in the limbs, glandular
swellings, and languor. The course of the disease is varied by frequent
remissions. It does not come within our design to indicate the treatment,
which appears to be the same as that pursued in scarlet fever.

=DENS'ITY.= Comparative masses of equal weights, or the quantity of matter
contained in a given space. It is commonly used synonymously with SPECIFIC
GRAVITY, which, however, refers to comparative weights of equal bulks.
Thus, quicksilver is said to have a density greater than that of copper,
and alcohol one less than that of oil of vitriol.

=DENTI'FRICES.= _Syn._ DENTIFRICIA, L. Substances applied to the teeth, to
cleanse and beautify them. The most useful form of dentifrices is that of
powder (TOOTH POWDER); but liquids (TOOTH WASHES), and electuaries (TOOTH
ELECTUARIES, TOOTH PASTES), are also employed. The solid ingredients used
in dentifrices should not be so hard or gritty as to injure the enamel of
the teeth; nor so soft or adhesive as to adhere to the gums, after rinsing
the mouth out with water. Pumice-stone (in fine powder) is one of those
substances that acts entirely by mechanical attrition, and is hence an
objectionable ingredient in tooth powder intended for daily use. It is,
however, very generally present in the various advertised dentifrices,
which are remarkable for their rapid action in whitening the teeth. Bath
brick is another substance of a similar nature to pumice, and, like that
article, should be only occasionally employed. Cuttle-fish bone, coral,
and prepared chalk, are also commonly used for the same purpose, but the
last is rather too soft and absorbent to form the sole ingredient of a
tooth powder. Charcoal, which is so very generally employed as a
dentifrice, acts partly mechanically and partly by its chemical property
of destroying foul smells and arresting putrefaction. For this purpose it
should be newly burnt, and kept in well-closed vessels, until used, as by
exposure to the air it rapidly loses its antiseptic powers. Powdered
rhatany, cinchona bark, and catechu, are used as astringents, and are very
useful in foulness or sponginess of the gums. Myrrh and mastic are
employed on account of their odour, and their presumed preservative action
and power of fixing loose teeth. Insoluble powders have been objected to
on account of their being apt to accumulate between the folds of the gums
and in the cracks of the teeth, and thus impart a disagreeable appearance
to the mouth. To remedy this defect, a reddish or flesh-coloured tinge is
commonly given to them with a little rose pink, red coral, or similar
colouring substance, when any small portion that remains unwashed off is
rendered less conspicuous. Some persons employ soluble substances as tooth
powders, which are free from the above objection. Thus, sulphate of potash
and cream of tartar are used for this purpose, because of the grittiness
of their powders and their slight solubility in water. Phosphate of soda
and common salt are also frequently employed as dentifrices, and possess
the advantage of being readily removed from the mouth by means of a little
water. Among those substances that chemically decolour and remove
unpleasant odours, the only ones employed as dentifrices are charcoal and
the chlorides of lime and soda. The first has been already noticed; the
others may be used by brushing the teeth with water to which a very little
of their solutions has been added. A very weak solution of chloride of
lime is commonly employed by smokers to remove the odour and colour
imparted by tobacco to the teeth. Electuaries, made of honey and
astringent substances, are frequently employed in diseases of the gums.
The juice of the common strawberry has been recommended as an elegant
natural dentifrice, as it readily dissolves the tartarous incrustations on
the teeth, and imparts an agreeable odour to the breath. See PASTE and
POWDER (Tooth), also WASHES (Mouth).

=DENT'INE.= The tissue of which the teeth are composed.

=DENTISTRY.= The art or practice of a dentist. Directions for the
extraction of teeth, as well as elaborate details for stopping them, and
for the manufacture of artificial ones, are branches of the dentist's art,
which, as they necessitate the exercise of considerable skill and long
practice, do not call for notice in a work like the present. We shall
confine ourselves, therefore, to that section of dentistry which concerns
itself with stoppings for the cavities of decayed teeth, and for the
preparation of which we give the following formulae:--

1. (Soubeiran's.) Powdered mastic and sandarach, of each 4 dr.; dragon's
blood, 2 dr.; opium, 15 gr.; mix with sufficient rectified spirit to form
a stiff paste. A solution of mastic, or of mastic and sandarach, in half
the quantity of alcohol, is also used, applied with a little cotton or
lint.

2. Sandarach, 12 parts; mastic, 6 parts; amber, in powder, 1 part; ether,
6 parts. Applied with cotton. Or simply a paste of powdered mastic and
ether. Or a saturated ethereal solution of mastic, applied with cotton.

3. Taveare's cement is made with mastic and burnt alum. Bernoth directs 20
parts of powdered mastic to be digested with 40 of ether, and enough
powdered alum added to form a stiff paste.

4. Gutta percha, softened by heat, is recommended. Dr Rollfs advises
melting a piece of caoutchouc at the end of a wire, and introducing it
while warm.

5. (Gauger's Cement.) Put into a quart bottle 2 oz. of mastic and 3 oz. of
absolute alcohol; apply a gentle heat by a water-bath. When dissolved, add
9 oz. of dry balsam of tolu, and again heat gently. A piece of cotton
dipped in this viscid solution becomes hard when introduced into the
tooth, previously cleansed and dried as above.

6. (Mr Robinson's.) After washing out the mouth with warm water containing
a few grains of bicarbonate of soda, and cleaning the cavity as above
directed, he drops into it a drop of collodion, to which a little morphia
has been added, fills the cavity with asbestos and saturates with
collodion, placing over all a pledget of blotting paper.

7. (Ostermaier's Cement.) Mix 12 parts of dry phosphoric acid with 13 of
pure and pulverised quicklime. It becomes moist in mixing, in which state
it is introduced into the cavity of the tooth, where it quickly becomes
hard. [In some hands this has failed, from what cause we are not aware.]
The acid should be prepared as directed under ACID, PHOSPHORIC.

8. (Silica.) This name has been given to a mixture of Paris plaster,
levigated porcelain, iron filings, and dregs of tincture of mastic, ground
together.

9. (Wirih's Cement.) It is said to consist of a viscid alcoholic solution
of resins, with powdered asbestos.

10. (Metallic Cement.) Amalgams for the teeth are made with gold or
silver, and quicksilver, the excess of the latter being squeezed out, and
the stiff amalgam used warm. Inferior kinds are made with quicksilver and
tin, or zinc. A popular nostrum of this kind is said to consist of 40 gr.
of quicksilver and 20 of fine zinc filings, mixed at the time of using. Mr
Evans states that pure tin, with a small portion of cadmium, and
sufficient quicksilver, forms the most lasting and least objectionable
amalgam. The following is the formula:--Melt 2 parts of tin with 1 of
cadmium, run it into ingots, and reduce it to filings. Form these into a
fluid amalgam with mercury, and squeeze out the excess of mercury through
leather. Work up the solid residue in the hand, and press it into the
tooth. Or, melt some beeswax in a pipkin over the fire, throw in 5 parts
of cadmium, and, when melted, add 7 or 8 parts of tin in small pieces;
pour the melted metals into an iron or wooden box, and shake them till
cold, so as to obtain the alloy in a powder. This is mixed with 2-1/2 or 3
times its weight of quicksilver in the palm of the hand, and used as
above.

Another cement consists of about 73 parts of silver, 21 of tin, and 6 of
zinc, amalgamated with quicksilver. An amalgam of copper is said to be
sometimes used. But this class of stoppings is altogether disapproved of
by other authorities. Pure leaf-gold seems the least objectionable.

11. (Marmoratum.) Finely levigated glass, mixed with tin amalgam.

12. (Poudre Metallique.) The article sold under this name in Paris appears
to be an amalgam of silver, mercury, and ammonium, with an excess of
mercury, which is pressed out before using it.

13. (Fusible Metal.) Melt together 8 parts of bismuth, 5 of lead, 3 of
tin, and 1-1/2 or 1.6 of quicksilver, with as little heat as possible.
(Chaudet.)

14. (Non-expensive Metallic Tooth-stopping.) Take 1 part of sulphate of
mercury, 1 part of copper in fine powder; rub them well together with a
little warm water; when the amalgam is formed wash well, and remove the
surplus of mercury by pressing it through chamois.--_Pharm. Journ._

EXPENSIVE METALLIC TOOTH-STOPPING AND MUCH PREFERABLE. Take pure gold,
pure gelatin, 1 part of each; pure silver, 2 parts; melt, and when
refrigerated, reduce to a powder by means of a file; wash well and dry. In
the moment of using it add sufficient mercury to form a plastic
paste.--_Pharm. Journ._

PASTE FOR DESTROYING THE SENSIBILITY OF THE DENTAL PULP PREVIOUS TO
STOPPING. Arsenious acid, 30 gr.; sulphate of morphia, 20 gr.; creasote,
q. s. [Unsafe; it is only inserted by way of warning against what may
prove an unsuspected cause of mischief.]

PIVOTS FOR ARTIFICIAL TEETH. An alloy of platinum and silver.

SPRINGS FOR ARTIFICIAL TEETH. Equal parts of copper, silver, and
palladium. (Chaudet.)

For Cachou Aromatise, and other compounds for sweetening the breath, see
PERFUMERY.

=DENTI'TION.= See TEETHING.

=DEOB'STRUENT.= In medicine, a substance which removes obstructions, and
opens the natural passages of the fluids of the body, as the pores,
lacteals, and glands. Iodine, mercury, sarsaparilla, and aperients, are
deobstruents.

=DEO'DORISER.= Any substance having the power of absorbing or destroying
fetid effluvia. Chlorine, chloride of lime, chloride of zinc, nitrate of
lead, sulphate of iron, and freshly-burnt charcoal, are the most effective
and convenient deodorisers. Peat charcoal has been highly recommended for
deodorising manure, &c., on the large scale. When it is mixed with these
substances their fetor is immediately destroyed, and a compost produced,
which may be substituted for guano for agricultural purposes.
'Biedermann's Centralblatt fuer Agricultur Chemie' for June, 1877, contains
the results of some experiments undertaken by A. Eckstein on the
comparative deodorising values of certain substances. Herr Eckstein found
that 1 kilo of copperas dissolved in water destroyed the stench of
sulphuretted hydrogen in a privy used daily by at least 100 persons. The
action ceased after twelve hours. A solution of aqueous sulphate of copper
produced a similar result. When 1 kilo of solid copperas was employed the
action lasted for two days. The same result was obtained by using 1 kilo
of a mixture compound of copperas, sulphate of copper, and carbonate of
lime. Liquid sulphurous acid was found to act very rapidly, rendering the
atmosphere difficult to breathe for an hour; its action ceased after
twenty-three hours. Crude carbolic acid, which was used to the extent of
30 grams, gave so unpleasant a smell for two days as to render the result
impossible to be arrived at. One kilo of copperas enclosed in a bag of
parchment paper only began to act after two hours, and kept the place
odourless for two days. One kilo of good chloride of lime, placed in a
similar bag, did not lose its effect for nine days. With 60 grams of
permanganate of soda the action commenced immediately, but the effect was
over in twenty-four hours; when enclosed in parchment paper it was
efficacious for two days. In Herr Eckstein's opinion the most powerful
deodoriser known is chloride of lime along with sulphuric acid. Powdered
gypsum is a good absorber of ammonia, and for this purpose may be
sprinkled over the floors of stables, manure heaps, &c. See DISINFECTANT.

=DEOX'IDATION.= See REDUCTION.

=DEPIL'ATORY.= A cosmetic employed to remove superfluous hairs from the
human skin. Depilatories act either mechanically (MECHANICAL
DEPILATORIES), or chemically (CHEMICAL DEPILATORIES). To the first class
belong adhesive plasters, that, on their removal from the skin, bring away
the hair with them. The second class includes all those substances which
destroy the hair by their chemical action.

Lime or orpiment, and generally both of them, have formed the leading
ingredients in depilatories, both in ancient and modern times. The first
acts by its well-known causticity, and also, when an alkali is present, by
reducing that also, either wholly or in part, to the caustic state. The
action of the orpiment is of a less certain character, and its use is even
dangerous when applied to a highly sensitive or an abraded surface. The
addition of starch is to render the paste more adhesive and manageable.

In using the following preparations, those which are in the state of
powder are mixed up with a little warm water to the consistence of a
paste, and applied to the part. Sometimes soap lye is used for this
purpose, and some persons spread the pulpy mass on a piece of paper, and
apply it like a plaster. In 12 or 15 minutes, and sooner, if much smarting
ensues, the whole should be washed off with warm water, and a little cold
cream, lip-salve, or spermaceti cerate, applied to the part. The
application of the liquid preparations is generally accompanied with
gentle friction, care being taken to prevent them extending to the
adjacent parts. All the following effect the object satisfactorily, with
proper management; but some are much more effective than others. A small
wooden or bone knife is the best for mixing them with. They must all be
kept in well-stoppered bottles, and no liquid must be added to them until
shortly before their application; and then no more should be mixed than is
required for immediate use.

=Depilatory, Arsen'ical.= Orpiment (sulphide of arsenic) forms the
principal ingredient in many fashionable depilatories, but its use is not
free from danger. The following are well-known preparations:

1. (COLLEY'S D.) From nitre and sulphur, of each 1 part; orpiment, 3
parts; quicklime, 8 parts; soap lees, 32 parts; boil to the consistence of
cream. Very caustic.

2. (DELCROIX'S D.; 'POUDRE SUBTILE,') Orpiment, 1 oz.; quicklime, 10 oz.;
starch, 14 oz.

3. (ORIENTAL D.; ORIENTAL RUSMA.)--_a._ Quicklime, 3 oz.; orpiment, 1/2
dr.; strong alkaline lye, 1 lb.; boil together in a clean iron vessel
until a feather dipped into the liquor loses its flue.

_b._ From pearlash, 2 oz.; orpiment, 3 dr.; liquor of potassa, 1/2 pint;
boil together as before. One of the most caustic and consequently the most
certain of depilatory preparations; but, with the rest of its class, open
to the objections of containing orpiment. (See No. 7.)

4. (PASTE D.; 'PATE EPILATOIRE,') To No. 1 add of orris root, 3 parts.

5. (PLENCK'S D.; 'PASTA EPILATORIA,') Orpiment, 1 part; quicklime and
starch, of each 12 parts.

6. (SOAP D.; 'SAVON EPILATOIRE,') Turkish depilatory and soft soap, equal
parts. Must not be mixed until about to be applied. (See No. 7.)

7. (TURKISH D.; TURKISH RUSMA.) Orpiment, 1 part; quicklime, 9 parts. For
use, it is mixed up with soap lees, and a little powdered starch.

=Depilatory, Boettger's.= Powdered sulphydrate of sodium, one part; washed
chalk, three parts; made into a thick paste with a little water. Let a
layer about the thickness of the back of a knife be spread upon the hairy
surface. After two or three minutes the stoutest hairs are transformed
into a soft mass which may be removed by water. A more prolonged action
would attack the skin.

=Depilatory, Boudet's.= _Prep._ Sulphide of sodium (crystallised), 3
parts; quicklime (in fine powder), 10 parts; starch, 10 parts; mix. To be
mixed with water, and applied to the skin, and scraped off in 2 or 3
minutes with a wooden knife. Very effective and safe.

=Depilatory, Cazenave's.= _Syn._ MAHON'S D.; POMMADE EPILATOIRE DE
CAZENAVE, Fr. _Prep._ Quicklime, 1 part; carbonate of soda, 2 parts; lard,
8 parts; mix. Applied as an ointment.

=Depilatory, Chi'nese.= _Prep._ 1. Quicklime, 8 oz.; pearlash (dry) and
liver of sulphur, of each 1 oz.; all reduced to a fine powder; mixed, and
kept in a close bottle.

2. (ROSEATE D.) As No. 1., but coloured with a little rose pink or light
red.

These preparations are applied in the same manner as Boudet's Depilatory.

=Depilatory, Colley's.= See DEPILATORY, ARSENICAL.

=Depilatory, Hydrosulphate of Lime.= _Prep._ (Beasley.) Mix quicklime and
water to a thick cream, and pass into the mixture 25 or 30 times its
volume of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. When the gas ceases to be absorbed,
stop the process. The pulpy mass is spread on paper, and applied for 12 or
15 minutes. It is very effective, but has a most disgusting smell.
Spolasco's depilatory is a very similar preparation (see _below_).

=Depilatory, Mechan'ical.= _Syn._ DEPILATORY PLASTEE. _Prep._ From pitch
and resin, equal parts, melted together and spread on leather. Applied as
a plaster.

=Depilatory, Rayer's.= _Prep._ Quicklime, 2 oz.; salt of tartar, 4 oz.;
charcoal, 1/4 oz. Less active than Chinese Depilatory.

=Depilatory, Redwood's.= _Prep._ A strong solution of sulphide of barium,
made into a paste with powdered starch, and applied immediately. Mr
Redwood says this is "the best and safest depilatory."

=Depilatory, Ro'seate.= See DEPILATORY, CHINESE.

=Depilatory, Spolasco's.= _Prep._ Freshly prepared sulphide of calcium and
quicklime, equal parts. Almost equal to Redwood's (_above_).

=DEPOSI'TION (of Metals).= See ELECTRO-TYPE.

=DERBY CONDITION POWDERS= (J. Tobias Simpson, New York). Celebrated as a
safe, infallible, and speedy remedy for glanders, coughs, colds, over
feeding, worms, mouth disease, and loss of horns or hair, in horses and
other valuable domestic animals. Tartar emetic, 2 grammes; black antimony,
20 grammes; sulphur, 10 grammes; nitre, 10 grammes; fenugreek, 40 grammes;
juniper berries, 20 grammes. (Schaedler.)

=DER'BYSHIRE NECK.= See GOITRE.

=DERMASOT= (Apotheker Bertschinger, Baden, Switzerland). For profuse
perspiration of the feet. Consists of acetate of alumina, 7.5 grammes;
distilled water, 120 grammes; butyric ether, 2 drops; rosanilin to colour
it slightly. (Weber.)

=DESBRIERRE'S CHOCOLATE A LA MAGNESIE.= 44 grammes of chocolate paste and
15 grammes of calcined magnesia, made into two tablets. (Reveil.)

=DESIC'CANTS.= _Syn._ DESICCAN'TIA, L. In _pharmacology_, substances that
check secretion and dry sores of abraded surfaces, without acting as
styptics, or constringing the fibres of the parts to which they are
applied. See ASTRINGENTS.

=DESICCA'TION.= _Syn._ EXSICCA'TION. The evaporation or drying off of the
aqueous portion of solid bodies. Plants and chemical preparations are
deprived of their humidity by exposure to the sun, a current of dry air,
an atmosphere rendered artificially dry by sulphuric acid, or by the
direct application of heat by means of a water bath, a sand bath, or a
common fire. Planks and timber are now seasoned, on the large scale, in
this way, by which a condition may be produced, in 2 or 3 days, which on
the old system is barely attainable in as many years. "Endeavours were
made to enforce the importance and value of the desiccation of woods to
the builder, cabinet maker, architect, and civil engineer, so long back as
1843, but without success. Since that period certain persons have availed
themselves, commercially, of our ideas and experiments on the subject,
without any acknowledgment, either verbal or pecuniary." (Cooley.)

=DESTEM'PER.= _Syn._ DISTEMPER. Colours ground up with size, gum, or white
of egg, and water, as in scene painting. The art of executing work in
distemper is called 'distemper painting.'

=DETER'GENT.= An agent having the power of removing offensive matter from
the skin. The name is now generally restricted to applications that tend
to cleanse foul wounds and ulcers.

=Detergent, Collier's.= _Prep._ From liquor of potassa, 2 fl. dr.; rose
water, 5-1/2 fl. oz.; spirit of rosemary, 1/2 fl. oz.; mix. One of the
best applications known to free the head from scurf, when the hair is
strong and healthy. The head should be afterwards sponged with clean,
soft water.

=DETONA'TION.= See FULMINATING COMPOUNDS.

=DEUTOX'IDE.= See OXIDES.

=DEUTSCHE SIEGESTROPFEN--German Triumphal Drops= (Schmidt). 480 grammes of
a brown fluid with an agreeably sweet spirituous and aromatic taste,
containing in a hundred parts five parts of the portion soluble in weak
spirit of cloves and orange peel, 29 parts sugar, 36 parts alcohol, and 30
parts water. (Wittstein.)

=DEW-POINT.= The temperature at which dew begins to form, as observed by a
thermometer. It varies with the humidity of the atmosphere.

=DEX'TRIN.= C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}. _Syn._ STARCH GUM, DEXTRINA, DEXTRINUM,
BRITISH GUM. A soluble substance resembling gum, formed by the action of
dilute acids at the boiling temperature, and by infusion of malt, at about
160 deg. Fahr., on starch. It is also formed when potato starch and some of
the other farinas are exposed to a heat of about 400 deg.. See DIASTASE and
GUM (British).

=DEX'TRO-RACE'MIC ACID.= See RACEMIC ACID.

=DIABE'TES.= See URINE.

=Diabetes (Saccharine).= The symptoms observed in this generally fatal
ailment are the passing of an excessive quantity of pale, straw-coloured
urine, of high specific gravity, containing more or less grape sugar;
great thirst and hunger, obstinate dyspepsia, constipation, an unpleasant
odour from the feet, or perspiration of the arm-pits, and bodily debility,
and emaciation. All these symptoms vary in intensity according to the
course and duration of the disease, which is frequently accompanied with
hectic fever, cough, and sometimes carbuncles, and generally ends in
consumption or some organic disease. The flow of urine sometimes reaches
as much as eight gallons in 24 hours; the average quantity, however, is
about two gallons. The specific gravity of the urine varies between 1030
and 1070. The quantity of sugar excreted in the twenty-four hours differs
greatly, ranging from half a pound to three pounds.

In the treatment of diabetes, great attention should be paid to diet,
which should consist principally of digestible, broiled, or roasted meat,
gluten and bran bread (these latter being substituted for ordinary bread,
which with sugar must be especially avoided), liquids in moderate
quantity, of which the most preferable are weak beef tea or mutton broth.
If the thirst is extreme, it is best assuaged by drinking water acidulated
with phosphoric acid. Spirituous liquids as well as saline aperients
should be eschewed. Claret is, however, a suitable beverage.

Small doses of laudanum, given three or four times a day, have been found
of great service.

Dr Watson recommends also the administration of creosote. The bowels must
be regulated by means of mild aperients. Warm baths are also of use, as
they augment the secretion of the skin. The disease may be kept under by
administering from twenty to forty minims of tincture of perchloride of
iron, 3 times a day. The above treatment is inserted for the guidance only
of emigrants and others unable to obtain professional aid; wherever this
can be obtained, no time should be lost in seeking it. This is the more
important, since the earlier the patient has recourse to the proper
remedies, the greater are the chances of recovery.

_Horses._ The disease occurs, although rarely, in horses. It is not known
either in cattle or dogs. The treatment consists in depriving the animal
for some weeks of food containing starch, or other matters capable of
forming sugar. He must be fed on meat soup and cooked animal diet, to
which he quickly becomes reconciled. The strength must be kept up by means
of tonic. To counteract the intense thirst, Mr Finlay Dun recommends the
following to be given three times a day in water:--A drachm of iodide of
potassium, a scruple of iodine, and four drachms of carbonate of soda.

=DIACH'YLON.= See PLASTERS.

=DIALY''SER.= In _practical chemistry_, an instrument for separating
'crystalloids' from 'colloids,' introduced by the late Prof. Graham. In
its most convenient form it consists of a hoop of gutta percha, over which
a circular piece of parchment paper is stretched. The paper is applied to
the hoop while wet, and is kept stretched by a second hoop, by an elastic
band, or by a few turns of string. The instrument, when complete,
resembles an ordinary tambourine. It is distinguished as the 'HOOP
DIALYSER,' The fluid to be 'dialysed' is poured into the hoop upon the
surface of the parchment paper, to a small depth only, such as half an
inch, and the dialyser is then floated upon water in a large glass basin.
Another form of dialyser, termed the 'BULB DIALYSER,' consists of a small
glass bell-jar, the mouth of which is covered by a piece of parchment
paper. This is suspended or otherwise supported in a large vessel of water
in such a manner that the parchment paper septum just dips below the
surface. See DIALYSIS (below), PARCHMENT PAPER.

=DIAL'YSIS.= In _practical chemistry_, the method of separating substances
by 'diffusion' through a septum of gelatinous matter. When a solution
having a sp. gr. greater is introduced into a cylindrical glass vessel,
and then water very cautiously poured upon it, in such a manner that the
two layers of liquid remain unmoved, the substance dissolved in the lower
liquid will gradually pass into the supernatant water, though the vessel
may have been left undisturbed, and the temperature remain unchanged. The
gradual passage of a dissolved substance from its original solution into
pure water taking place, notwithstanding the higher sp. gr. of the
substance which opposes this passage, is called the 'diffusion of
liquids.' From the investigation of the phenomena of this diffusion, the
late Prof. Graham derived the remarkable results upon which the method
under notice is based. Different substances, when in solution of the same
concentration, and under other similar circumstances, diffuse with very
unequal velocity. "The range in the degree of diffusive mobility," says
Prof. Graham, "exhibited by different substances, appears to be as wide as
the scale of vapour-tensions. Thus, hydrate of potassa may be said to
possess double the velocity of diffusion of sulphate of potassa, and
sulphate of potassa again double the velocity of sugar, alcohol, and
sulphate of magnesia. But the substances named belong, as regards
diffusion, to the more volatile class. The comparatively fixed class, as
regards diffusion, is represented by a different order of chemical
substances (marked out by the absence of the power to crystallise), which
are slow in the extreme. Among the latter are hydrated silicic acid,
hydrated alumina, and other metallic peroxides of the aluminous class,
when they exist in the soluble form; with starch, dextrine, and the gums,
caramel, tannin, albumen, gelatin, vegetable and animal extractive
matters. Low diffusibility is not the only property which the bodies last
enumerated possess in common. They are distinguished by the gelatinous
character of their hydrates. Although often largely soluble in water, they
are held in solution by a most feeble force. They appear singularly inert
in the capacity of acids and bases, and in all the ordinary chemical
relations. But, on the other hand, their peculiar physical aggregation,
with the chemical indifference referred to, appears to be required in
substances that can intervene in the organic processes of life. The
plastic elements of the body are found in this class. As gelatin appears
to be its type, it is proposed to designate substances of this class as
'COL'LOIDS,' and to speak of their peculiar form as the 'colloidal
condition of matter.' Opposed to the colloidal is the 'crystalline
condition.' Substances affecting the latter form will be classed as
'CRYSTAL'LOIDS,' The distinction is, no doubt, one of intimate molecular
constitution."[257] A certain property of colloidal substances comes into
play most opportunely in assisting diffusive preparations. The jelly of
starch, that of animal mucus, of pectin, of vegetable gelose, and other
solid colloidal hydrates, all of which, strictly speaking, are insoluble
in cold water, are themselves permeable when in mass, as water is, by the
more highly diffusive class of substances. But such jellies greatly resist
the passage of the less diffusible substances, and cut off entirely other
colloid substances like themselves that may be in solution. A mere film of
the jelly has the separating effect. Now, parchment-paper, when wetted,
acts just like a layer of animal mucus or other hydrated colloid, by
permitting the passage of crystalloids, but not of colloids; consequently
this substance may be used for dialytic septa (see DIALYSER, _above_). The
following experiments recorded by Graham will give some idea of the
results which may be obtained by dialysis:--

[Footnote 257: 'Philosoph. Trans.' for 1861.]

1. Half a litre of urine was placed in a hoop dialyser, which was then
floated on a considerable quantity of pure water. Dialysed for 24 hours,
the urine gave its crystalloidal constituents to the external water. The
latter, evaporated by a water bath, yielded a white saline mass. From this
mass urea was extracted by alcohol in so pure a condition as to appear in
crystalline tufts upon the evaporation of the alcohol.

2. By pouring silicate of soda into diluted hydrochloric acid (the acid
being maintained in large excess), a solution of silica is obtained. But
in addition to hydrochloric acid, such a solution contains chloride of
sodium, a salt which causes the silica to gelatinise when the solution is
heated, and otherwise modifies its properties. Now, such a solution placed
for 24 hours in a dialyser of parchment paper was found to lose 5% of its
silicic acid (silica) and 86% of its hydrochloric acid. After 4 days on
the dialyser, the liquid ceased to be disturbed by nitrate of silver. All
the chlorides were gone, with no further loss of silica. What remained was
a pure solution of silicic acid, which could be boiled in a flask, and
considerably concentrated, without change.

3. Half a litre of dark-coloured porter, with .05 gramme of arsenious acid
added (1/10000th part of arsenious acid), was placed on a hoop dialyser, 8
inches in diameter, and the whole floated in an earthenware basin
containing 2 or 3 litres of water. After 24 hours the latter fluid had
acquired a slight tinge of yellow. It yielded, when concentrated and
precipitated by sulphuretted hydrogen, upwards of one half of the original
arsenious acid in a fit state for examination.

=DIAMANTKITT--Diamond Cement.= 50 parts graphite, 15 parts litharge, 10
parts milk of lime, 5 parts slaked lime, intimately mixed with enough
linseed oil to make a firm mass. (Hager.)

=DIAMANTTROPFEN--Diamond Drops= (Dr Allinhead). A combination of the
juices of mysterious herbs of tropical climes, which has the power to make
all men transparent.

=DI'AMOND.= The diamond is pure carbon, and differs from the carbon of
charcoal and lampblack simply in being limpid, colourless, and highly
refractive of light, properties which are generally referred to its
crystalline form. The weight, and, consequently, the value of diamonds, is
estimated in carats, one of which is equal to 4 grains; and the price of
one diamond, compared to that of another of equal colour, transparency,
purity, form, &c., is as the squares of the respective weights. The
average price of ROUGH DIAMONDS that are worth working is about L2 for the
first carat; that of a CUT DIAMOND is equal to that of a rough diamond of
double weight, exclusive of the price of workmanship. "To estimate the
value of a wrought diamond, ascertain its weight in carats, double that
weight, and multiply the square of this product by L2." (Ure.) Thus, a cut
diamond of--

  1 carat is worth  L8
  2 carats     "   L32
  3   "        "   L72
  4   "        "  L128
     &c., &c. See CARBON, GEMS.

=Di'amond Dust.= Genuine diamond dust is the powder produced by the
abrasion of diamonds against each other in the process of cutting and
polishing them. It possesses the valuable property of polishing the gems,
and giving "the finest edge to every kind of cutlery." The discovery of
the latter fact, a few years since, led certain dishonest persons to
extensively advertise spurious preparations, consisting chiefly of emery
powder or powdered quartz, under the name of diamond dust. The factitious
articles acquired a very short and bad notoriety. Instead of sharpening
cutting instruments, they infallibly destroyed their edge, and were
particularly unfortunate in converting razors into saws.

=DIAPEN'TE.= _Syn._ PULVIS DIAPENTE. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. E. 1744) Bay-berries,
birth-wort, gentian, ivory dust, and myrrh, equal parts. An excellent warm
tonic, especially useful in the debility and rickets of children. The
substance sold under this name in the shops is an inferior mixture, used
principally as a tonic in veterinary practice. The following are the forms
commonly adopted in its preparation:--

2. Turmeric, 4 lbs.; laurel berries and mustard, of each 3 lbs.; gentian,
2 lbs. (all in fine powder); mix.

3. Bay-berries, gentian, mustard, and turmeric, equal parts.

4. Gentian, 6 lbs.; bay-berries, 1 lb. This is the formula generally used
by the farriers. Sometimes mustard, 1 lb., is added.

=DIAPHORET'ICS.= _Syn._ SUDORIF'ICS; DIAPHORETICA, SUDORIFICA, L.
Medicines which promote or increase the perspiration. Those that produce
this effect in a very marked degree are more particularly called
'sudorifics.' The principal diaphoretics are:--warm diluents, as
barley-water, gruel, tea, &c.; salts of the alkalies, as the citrates of
potassa and soda, acetate of potassa, acetate and carbonate of ammonia,
sal-ammoniac, nitre, &c.; preparations of antimony, as antimonial powder,
tartar emetic, &c; also alcohol, camphor, Dover's powder, ipecacuanha,
opium, wine, &c.

The use of diaphoretics is indicated in nearly all diseases accompanied by
fever and a dry skin, and particularly in febrile and pectoral affections.

=DI'APHRAGM= (fr[)a]m). A partition through or across; a dividing
substance. In _anatomy_, the term is applied to the midriff, a muscle
separating the chest or thorax from the abdomen or lower belly. In
_astronomy_ and _optics_ the term is applied to a circular ring placed in
a telescope or other instrument to cut off the marginal portions of a beam
of light. In _electricity_ the name is commonly used to denote the porous
partition, cell, or vessel, that separates the fluid containing the
positive plate from the fluid which surrounds the negative plate, in a
constant voltaic battery. Thin partitions of sycamore, or other porous
wood, are occasionally used, but cells made of thin biscuit ware are the
most convenient and durable diaphragms. Plaster of Paris, animal membrane,
coarse and tightly wove canvas, &c., are used also for the purpose.
Plaster cells are also formed by surrounding an oiled cylinder of wood
with a hoop of paper, and pouring plaster of Paris, mixed up with water,
into the space between the two. See ELECTROTYPE.

=DIARRH[OE]'A.= A purging or looseness of the bowels. The causes of
diarrh[oe]a are various, but among the most common are the presence of
irritating matter, worms, or acidity in the stomach or bowels; and
exposure to cold (especially cold to the feet) or sudden changes of
climate or temperature.

_Treatment._ In general, it will be proper to administer a mild aperient,
for which purpose rhubarb or castor oil is usually preferred. The dose of
the first may be from 20 to 30 grains in sugar, or made into a bolus; that
of the second, from 1/4 oz. to 1/2 oz., with a little mint or peppermint
water. After the due operation of this medicine, opium, astringents, and
absorbents, may be taken with advantage, but not in excessive doses, as is
commonly the practice. The first and second are indicated when great
irritability exists, and the third, in cases of diarrh[oe]a arising from
the presence of acidity. Chalk mixture, to which a few drops of laudanum
have been added, or the compound powder of chalk and opium, are excellent
medicines, and will generally quiet the bowels. A small piece of catechu
or hard extract of logwood, sucked in the same way as a lozenge, is a
pleasant method of taking either of these powerful astringents, and will
generally cure cases of simple diarrh[oe]a arising from excessive
peristaltic motion, or want of tonicity of the muscular coats of the
intestines.

In bilious diarrh[oe]a, characterised by the bright yellowish-brown colour
of the dejections, a dose of blue pill or calomel, assisted by mild
diluents and demulcents, and warmth, generally proves efficacious. Small
doses of opium are also useful in some cases.

In catarrhal diarrh[oe]a, chylous diarrh[oe]a, and the like varieties,
characterised by the dejections being nearly colourless, and consisting
chiefly of water and mucus; or white and milky, showing the entire absence
of bile; or, being entirely liquid, limpid, and serous (in some cases
resembling the washings of flesh), opinions are divided as to the
treatment. The majority of the best authorities regard purging as
injurious in these varieties, and rely chiefly on warm baths and warm
fomentations, with the internal administration of mild salines and
diaphoretics, followed by astringents, tonics, and occasional doses of
opiates. Choleraic diarrh[oe]a demands a nearly similar treatment.

The diet in every variety of diarrh[oe]a should be light and
non-irritating. Glutinous broths, beef tea, and arrow-root, are among the
best articles which can be taken. To these may be added a little dry
toast. Arrow-root (genuine), either with or without a spoonful of port
wine or brandy (preferably the former), will of itself cure all ordinary
cases of diarrh[oe]a, if accompanied with repose and a recumbent posture.

Among external remedies, warm and stimulating fomentations, liniments,
&c., to the epigastrium and abdomen, will be found useful adjuncts to
other treatment. A spoonful or two of laudanum, used as a friction, will
generally allay pain, and in many cases settle the bowels when all other
remedies have been tried in vain.

_Treatment for Animals._ If for the horse, give at the commencement of the
attack from 2 to 4 dr. of aloes, mixed with 1 oz. of bicarbonate of soda,
and the same quantity of ginger in powder; administer clysters
occasionally. Cattle may be treated by having administered to them 3/4 lb.
of Epsom or common salt, or a pint of linseed oil. Whichever of the two is
employed, it must be combined with 2 oz. each of bicarbonate of soda and
ginger, and 1/2 lb. of treacle; 1 oz. of laudanum should be added to the
above drenches whenever there is much pain and straining, whether in the
horse or cow. Should laxatives fail, aromatics and astringents are called
for, and 1 oz. each of tincture of catechu, ginger, and gentian, given in
a pint of warm ale, may be tried several times a day for a horse. For cows
a double dose is required. Sheep need only half the dose.

=DI'ASTASE.= A peculiar azotised substance contained in malt, which
effects the conversion of starch, first into dextrin, and then into grape
sugar.

_Prep._ A cold infusion of malt is heated to 158 deg. Fahr. (to coagulate in
albumen); it is then allowed to cool, and alcohol is added to the filtered
liquor, when diastase is precipitated, under the form of a tasteless white
powder, which is freely soluble in water.

_Prop., &c._ Diastase seems to resemble vegetable albumen, but very little
is known respecting it, as it has never been got in a state of purity. One
part of diastase is capable of converting 2000 parts of starch into grape
sugar. Malted barley is said to contain 1/500th part of this substance;
yet this small portion is quite sufficient to convert the starch of the
malt into sugar during the operation of mashing, in the manufacture of
beer. See BREWING, DEXTRIN, &C.

=DICTA'MIA.= A nutritious, dietetic article. _Prep._ (Beasley.) Sugar, 7
oz.; potato arrow-root, 4 oz.; flour of brent barley (_Triticum
monococcum_), 3 oz.; Trinidad and Granada chocolate, of each 1 oz.;
vanilla, 15 gr.; triturate together.

=Dictamia.= A strengthening and restorative preparation. Arrowroot, 6
parts; meal of triticum monococcum, 6 parts; chocolate, 4 parts; vanilla,
1/4 part (Richter). Sugar, 217 parts; bran extract, 92 parts; starch, 125
parts; Caracas and Maragnan cocoa, 30 parts; vanilla, 1 part.
(Chevallier.)

=DIDYM'IUM.= Di. A rare metal, found associated with cerium and lanthanium
in the Swedish mineral cerite. See CERIUM.

=DI'ET.= Food or victuals. In _medicine_ food regulated by certain rules,
or prescribed for the cure or prevention of disease. The dietetic part of
medicine is no inconsiderable branch, and deserves a much greater share of
regard than it commonly meets with. A great variety of diseases might be
removed by the observance of a proper diet and regimen, without the
assistance of medicine, were it not for the impatience of the sufferers.
On all occasions it may come in as a proper assistant to the cure, which
sometimes cannot be performed without a due observance of the
non-naturals.

Writers on dietetics (DIETETICA, L.) have taken much trouble to divide and
classify the numerous articles of food suitable to the various conditions
of the body in health and disease; but little practical advantage has
resulted from their labours. Low diet, middle diet, full diet, milk diet,
farinaceous diet, fruit diet, and vegetable diet, are terms which, under
most circumstances, are sufficiently simple to be almost self-explanatory.

=DIGES'TION.= In _chemistry_ and _pharmacy_ the operation of exposing
bodies to a gentle and continuous heat. The best digesters are thin glass
flasks and beakers, and the most convenient source of heat is the sand
bath. Digestion is often performed to soften and otherwise modify bodies
that are to be distilled. In _physiology_ the term is applied to the
conversion of food into chyme, or the process of dissolving food in the
alimentary canal, and preparing it for circulation and nourishment. In
_surgery_ digestion signifies a method of treating ulcers, wounds, &c. See
DIGESTIVES (_below_).

  DIGESTIBILITY OF DIFFERENT FOODS.

                                       Mean time of
                                       chymification
  Foods.              How cooked.      in stomach.
                                           h. m.
  Rice                  Boiled             1
  Eggs, whipped         Raw                1 30
  Trout, salmon, fresh  Boiled             1 30
  Venison, steak        Broiled            1 35
  Sago                  Boiled             1 45
  Milk                  Boiled             2
  Eggs, fresh           Raw                2
  Milk                  Raw                2 15
  Turkey                Boiled             2 25
  Gelatin               Boiled             2 30
  Goose, wild           Roasted            2 30
  Pig, sucking          Roasted            2 30
  Lamb, fresh           Broiled            2 30
  Beans, pod            Boiled             2 30
  Potatoes, Irish       Baked              2 30
  Chicken               Fricassed          2 45
  Oysters, fresh        Raw                2 55
  Eggs, fresh           Soft-boiled        3
  Beef, lean, rare      Roasted            3
  Mutton, fresh         Boiled             3
  Bread, corn           Baked              3 15
  Butter                Melted             3 30
  Cheese, old, strong   Raw                3 30
  Potatoes, Irish       Boiled             3 30
  Beef                  Fried              4
  Veal, fresh           Broiled            4
  Fowls, domestic       Roasted            4
  Ducks, Domestic       Roasted            4
  Veal, fresh           Fried              4 30
  Pork, fat, and lean   Roasted            5 15
  Cabbage               Boiled             4 30

The results recorded in the above table, giving the respective time
required for the digestion of different foods, were obtained by Dr
Beaumont, through his being enabled to watch the process of digestion
actually going on in the stomach of a man, who had received a wound in
that organ, by which part of it was laid bare, and could thus be seen
into.

The above data were controlled by a series of independent experiments,
which consisted in digesting different foods in a solution of gastric
juice, and heating the mixture to 100 deg.. The relative results of both sets
of experiments were found to agree pretty closely; and they have since, on
the whole, being confirmed by the researches of other physiologists.

=DIGES'TIVES.= In _surgery_ substances which, when applied to wounds or
tumours, induce or promote suppuration. All stimulating applications are
of this class. Heat is a most powerful digestive agent. The action of
digestives is opposed to that of DISCUTIENTS, which repel or resolve
tumours and indurations.

=DIGITA'LIN.= _Syn._ DIGITA'LIA. A vegetable principle discovered by M.
Royer in _Digitalis purpurea_, or purple foxglove.

_Prep._ 1. (Majendie.) Foxglove leaves (powdered), 1 lb., are digested in
ether, first in the cold, and then heated under pressure; when the whole
has again become cold, the liquor is filtered (rapidly), and the ether is
distilled off in a water bath; the residuum is dissolved in water, the
filtered solution treated with hydrated oxide of lead, the whole gently
evaporated to dryness, and the dry residuum again digested in hot ether;
from this solution the alkali is obtained, by evaporation and repeated
resolutions, in a crystalline form.

2. (Homolle and Henry.) Foxglove leaves (carefully dried and powdered),
2-1/2 lbs., are digested in rectified spirit, and the tincture expressed
in a tincture press; the spirit is then distilled off, and the residual
extract treated with distilled water, 1/2 pint, acidulated with about 2
fl. dr. of acetic acid, a gentle heat being employed; some animal charcoal
is then added, and the whole filtered; the filtrate is then diluted with
water, and partly neutralised with ammonia; a fresh-made, strong decoction
of galls is next added; a copious precipitation of tannate of digitalin
ensues; the precipitate is washed with water, and mixed with a little
alcohol, after which it is triturated with litharge (in fine powder) and
exposed to a gentle heat; the whole is now digested in alcohol, the
tincture treated with animal charcoal, and evaporated; the dry residuum
is, lastly, treated with cold sulphuric ether, which takes up some foreign
matter, and leaves the digitalin. 2 lbs. 8 oz. of the dried leaves yield
140 to 150 gr. of the digitalin.

_Prop., &c._ White, inodorous, porous masses, or small scales; it
crystallises with difficulty, is intensely bitter, and excites violent
sneezing when smelled to; dissolves freely in alcohol; scarcely soluble in
cold ether; and takes 2000 parts of water for its solution; it is neither
basic nor alkaline; concentrated colourless hydrochloric acid dissolves
it, forming a characteristic solution which passes from yellow to a fine
green. (Homolle.) It is one of the most powerful of known poisons, being
fully 100 times stronger than the powdered leaves of the dried plant. It
is used in the same cases.--_Dose_, 1/60 to 1/30 gr.; either made into
pills or dissolved in alcohol and formed into a mixture. Owing to the
difficulty and uncertainty connected with dispensing such small
quantities, it is now seldom employed in this country.

=Digitalin, Crystallised.= Digitalis leaves from the Vosges, in rather
fine powder, 1000 grams; neutral lead acetate, 250 grams; distilled water,
1000 grams. The digitalis should be collected in its second year just when
the first flowers appear. With respect to the lead acetate, it is very
important that it should not have an alkaline reaction; a slight acidity
would be preferable. The lead salt is dissolved in the cold water, the
powder added and thoroughly mixed, the whole passed through a sieve and
left in contact twenty-four hours, taking care to mix it from time to
time. The mixture is then packed sufficiently in a displacement apparatus,
and exhausted with 50 deg. alcohol, until it no longer yields any bitterness.
About six parts of liquor are thus obtained, and this is neutralised
exactly with sodium bicarbonate dissolved to saturation in cold water;
about 25 to 30 grams will be required. When effervescence ceases, the
alcohol is distilled, and the liquor remaining is evaporated in a water
bath down to 2000 grams; it is then left to cool and diluted with its
weight of water. Two or three days afterwards the clear liquor is decanted
off, by means of a syphon, and the precipitate drained upon a linen
filter. When freed from the extractive liquor the precipitate weighs about
100 grams. It is suspended in 1000 grams of 80 deg. alcohol, and the whole
passed through a metal sieve or a fine cloth; the turbid liquor obtained
is heated to ebullition, and to it is added a solution containing 10 grams
of neutral lead acetate; the heating is continued a few moments, and the
liquor is then left to cool and filtered. The deposit in the filter is
washed with alcohol to remove any liquor it may retain, and then pressed.
To this liquor is added 50 grams of finely powdered vegetable charcoal
that has been washed with acid and afterwards with water until quite
neutral, and it is then distilled, the residue being heated for some time
in a water bath, it being very important that all the alcohol should be
driven off. A little water is added to replace what may evaporate; the
residue is allowed to cool, then drained upon the cloth that was used to
separate the precipitate, and the carbonaceous mass is washed with a
little water to remove the last portion of the coloured liquor. The
carbonaceous residue is then dried completely in a stove at a temperature
not exceeding 100 deg. C., and exhausted by displacement with pure chloroform
until it passes colourless. This liquid is distilled to dryness, and a few
grams of 95 deg. alcohol are placed in the retort, and evaporated to drive off
the last traces of chloroform.

The residue is crude digitalin with viscous and oily matter. It is
dissolved with heat in 100 grams of 90 deg. alcohol, and 1 gram of neutral
lead acetate dissolved in a little water added, together with 10 grams of
animal charcoal in fine granules without powder that has been treated with
hydrochloric acid, and washed until the washings are no longer acid. After
boiling for ten minutes it is allowed to cool and settle, and then
filtered in a glass cylinder furnished with a tight cotton plug, through
which it passes quickly and clear. The black deposit is added last, and
exhausted of all bitterness with alcohol. After distillation the digitalin
remains as a grumous crystalline mass, now only contaminated with the
coloured oil. A little aqueous liquor that occurs with it is separated and
the weight of the impure digitalin is taken in the previously tarred
vessel. The digitalin is then dissolved with heat in exactly sufficient
90 deg. alcohol for its solution (from 6 to 12 grams). Any alcohol evaporated
is replaced, and then to the cooled solution is added, sulphuric ether
rectified at 65 deg., to half the weight of the alcohol employed; after
mixing, distilled water equal to the weight of the alcohol and ether
combined is added, and the flask is closed and shaken. Two layers are
formed: the upper is coloured, and consists of the ether which has taken
up the fat oil; the lower is colourless, and contains the digitalin, which
being now free quickly crystallises. The flask is placed in a cool place.
Two days afterwards the whole is thrown into a small cylinder furnished
with a moderately tight cotton plug; the mother liquor runs off, and then
the coloured layer, and the small quantity that remains adherent to the
crystals, is removed by a little ether. Thus obtained, this first
crystallisation of digitalin is slightly coloured; it is sufficiently
pure, however, for its weight to be taken in an analysis; one tenth being
deducted for the digitalin it still contains. To obtain it perfectly
white, two purifications are necessary, but first a treatment with
chloroform is indispensable to separate the remainder of the digitalin
which injures its purity.

The digitalin, well dried and reduced to a fine powder, is dissolved in 20
parts of chloroform, and the solution is filtered in a cylinder through a
tight cotton plug. The liquor passes limpid; it is distilled to dryness,
and a little alcohol is poured into the retort, and evaporated to remove
the last traces of chloroform.

The digitalin is dissolved in 30 grams of 90 deg. alcohol, 5 grams of washed
granular animal black added, and the whole boiled for 10 minutes; the
liquor is filtered and the charcoal exhausted as before indicated; and,
lastly, it is distilled, the digitalin in dry crystals is found on the
sides of the vessel, but it is still slightly coloured. To obtain it
perfectly white it is dissolved with heat in exactly sufficient 90 deg.
alcohol (about 6 to 8 grams); to the solution is added ether equal to half
the weight of alcohol employed, and double the quantity of distilled
water, and the flask is closed and agitated; the crystallisation commences
quickly. The ether does not separate. It is exposed to the coolness of the
night, and by the next day nearly the whole of the digitalin is deposited
in small groups of white needles, that which retains colouring matter
remaining in the mother liquor. The whole is thrown into a cylinder and
the crystals washed with ether as before described. 1000 grams of Vosges
digitalis of good quality yields about 1 gram of crystallised digitalin.
Digitalin occurs under the form of very white light crystals, consisting
of short slender needles, grouped around the same axis. It is very bitter
and scarcely soluble in water. 90 deg. alcohol dissolves it well, anhydrous
alcohol dissolves it less freely. Pure ether dissolves only traces.
Chloroform is its best solvent. Brought into contact with a small quantity
of hydrochloric acid, digitalin is coloured emerald green, and this
reaction is favoured by a very slight heat. From 'Formulae for New
Medicaments, adopted by the Paris Pharmaceutical Society.'

=DILL.= _Syn._ ANETHUM (Ph. L. & E.), L. The fruit (seed) of _Anethum
graveolens_, or garden dill, _Anethi fructus_, B. P. Dill is an aromatic
stimulant and carminative. The Cossacks employ it as a condiment; and in
this country it is frequently employed to heighten the relish of soups and
pickles, especially cucumbers. DILL WATER is a favorite remedy of nurses
to promote the secretion of milk, and to relieve the flatulence and
griping of infants.--_Dose_, of the powder, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr., or more.
Oil of dill (OLEUM ANETHI) and dill water (AQUA ANETHI) are officinal in
the pharmacop[oe]ias.

=DIL'UENTS.= _Syn._ DILUENTIA, D. _Aqueous liquors_; so named because they
increase the fluid portion of the blood. Tea, barley-water, water-gruel,
and similar articles, are the most common diluents, after pure water. The
copious use of diluents is recommended in all acute inflammatory diseases
not of a congestive character, and to promote the action of diuretics and
sudorifics.

=DINNER PILLS.= See PILLS.

=DIOS'MA.= _Syn._ BOOKOO, BUKU; FOLIA BAROSMAE, F. DIOSMAE, L.; BUCHU (Ph.
L.), BUCKU (Ph. E.), DIOSMA (Ph. L. 1836). "The leaves of _Barosma
serratifolia_, _B. crenulata_, and _B. crenata_." (Ph. L.) These species
were all included by De Candolle in the genus _Diosma_. Buchu is
principally employed in chronic affections of the urino-genital organs,
especially that of the mucous membrane of the bladder, attended with
copious discharge of mucus.--_Dose_, 20 gr. to 1/2 dr. of the powder,
taken in wine; or made into an infusion or decoction.

The officinal buchu leaves are "glabrous, glandular; either
linear-lanceolate with small serrations, or ovato-oblong, obtuse,
crenated, ovate or obovate, serrated." (Ph. L.) Their odour somewhat
resembles that of rue, and their taste is warm and mint-like.

=DIOS'MINE.= A bitter extractive matter, obtained by Brande from buchu
leaves. It is very soluble in water, but not in alcohol and ether.

=DIPHTHERIA.= A contagious disease affecting the throat and adjoining
parts. A false membrane forms on the mucous lining of the several parts of
the throat. This alarming malady generally commences with a little
soreness of throat attended with fever; sometimes, however, the fever may
not come on for some days after the sore throat has shown itself. An
ash-coloured spot makes its appearance on one or both tonsils. This
spreads to other parts, extending in doing so, over the soft palate and
uvula, inclosing the latter in a sheath. Sometimes a thin red line
surrounds the opaque membrane thus formed. As the disease proceeds this
opaque and false membrane tends to enlarge itself, and may spread down the
gullet into the stomach, or, what is more dangerous still, it may involve
the mucous membrane of the larynx, and thence extend along the windpipe
into the bronchial tubes. When this is the case the disease is accompanied
with cough, and the peculiar noise of croup; harsh, noisy breathing. There
also frequently runs from the nostrils a thin acrid secretion, smelling
very offensively, and often tainting the whole atmosphere of the room.

By the inexperienced diphtheria is almost always mistaken for ulcerated
sore throat.

As in croup, part of the exudation or false membrane is often coughed up;
sometimes it peels off from the tonsils. Some pathologists think that
minute particles of this membrane, loosely adhering to drinking vessels,
linen, sheets, the night-dress, &c., of the patient, may be the means of
communicating the disease; by others, however, this surmise is not
accepted. The absence of certainty on this point does not remove the
stringent necessity of thoroughly cleansing and disinfecting everything
with which the secretions of the patient come into contact.

The foregoing has been written with the object of enabling the reader to
detect the only symptoms by which this dangerous disease manifests itself,
in order that he may seek medical assistance with which to combat the
complaint as promptly as possible.

After stating thus much, it is needless to say that we only recommend the
adoption of the following treatment, in the extreme case of emigrants and
others unable to obtain the services of a medical practitioner. A
saturated solution of borax in the form of a gargle should be first used,
and used without stint. Should this fail to arrest the formation of the
membrane, then a strong solution of alum should be employed instead; or
alum in powder should be applied to the throat every half hour or hour.
When children are to be submitted to this treatment, the alum instead of
being used as a gargle may be mixed with honey, and in this condition laid
on the parts with a feather; or the powdered alum may be blown on the
affected parts with a tube. Tincture of perchloride of iron, diluted
hydrochloric acid, and chlorate of potash are also said to have been used
successfully as topical applications. The diet should consist of rich
nourishing food, such as strong beef tea and mutton broth, aided by port
wine. The internal remedies embrace quinine or bark, tincture of
perchloride of iron, pernitrate of iron, chlorate of potash, and small,
but repeated doses of the mineral acids. Dr Gardner, in his useful work
'Household Medicine,' says, "a definite plan said to have been successful
is to employ as a gargle a solution of chlorinated soda half an ounce,
syrup half an ounce, water six ounces, mixed. At the same time give
internally four drops of the solution every two hours, for two days, then
add quinine. We may add that if this latter prescription be used the diet
before indicated should be adopted."

=DISCU'TIENTS.= In _surgery_, substances or agents which disperse or
resolve tumours, &c. See DIGESTIVES.

=DISH-COVERS.= As these are made of various materials they must be
cleaned and polished with the substances best adapted for each. All kinds
of dish-covers directly they come from table should be washed free from
grease and wiped dry.

Plated and silver dish-covers should be polished with plate powder; that
free from mercury should be preferred. When dish-covers (as is usually the
case) are made of block tin, they should be polished, by first rubbing
them with sweet oil, and then dusting over the oil finely powdered
whiting; finishing off the polishing with soft rags. All the best covers
are provided with movable handles, which must be removed during the
process of cleaning.

=DISINFECT'ANT.= An agent which absorbs, neutralises, or destroys,
putrescent effluvia, miasmata, or specific contagia, and thus removes the
causes of infection. The principal disinfectants are chlorine, iodine,
bromine, the so-called chlorides of lime and soda, chloride of zinc,
ozone, carbolic acid, the alkaline manganates and permanganates, peat
charcoal, the fumes of nitric and nitrous acid, sulphurous acids, heat,
and ventilation. The last two are the most efficient and easily applied.
The clothing, bedding, &c., of patients labouring under contagious
diseases may be effectually (?) disinfected by exposure to a temperature a
little higher than that of boiling water, for about an hour. Neither the
texture nor colour of textile fabrics is injured by a heat of even 250 deg.
Fahr. (Dr Henry.) See DISINFECTING CHAMBERS.

It is a practice at some of the workhouses to bake the clothes of the
paupers who have the itch, or who are infested with vermin. The soaking
and boiling of clothes in the absence of being able to bake them is by no
means a bad method for disinfecting them. The process is rendered the more
effective by adding to the water in which they are immersed or boiled 1
part of strong solution of chloride of lime to 20 or 30 parts of water; or
carbolic acid in the proportion of 1 part of the pure acid to 100 parts of
water. In the German army, if the clothes cannot be baked they are soaked
for 24 hours in water containing 1 part of sulphate of zinc to 120 of
water, or 1 part of chloride of zinc to 240 of water, after which they are
washed in soap and water and dried.

Quicklime rapidly absorbs carbonic acid, sulphuretted hydrogen, and
several other noxious gases, and is therefore commonly used as a wash for
the walls of buildings. Acetic acid, camphor, fragrant pastilles,
cascarilla, brown paper, and other similar substances, are frequently
burnt or volatilised by heat, for the purpose of disguising unpleasant
odours, but are of little value as disinfectants. The sulphates of iron
and zinc have the property of rapidly destroying noxious effluvia. A
quantity of either of these sulphates thrown into a cesspool, for
instance, will in a few hours render the matter therein quite scentless.
Of gaseous disinfectants, "sulphurous acid gas (obtained by burning
sulphur) is preferable, on theoretical grounds, to chlorine. No agent
checks so effectually the first development of animal and vegetable life.
All animal odours and emanations are immediately and most effectually
destroyed by it." (Graham.) See ANTISEPTIC, DEODORISER, FUMIGATION,
INFECTION, OZONE, CARBOLIC ACID, SALICYLIC ACID, BACTERIA as originators
of disease, LIME, CHLORIDE, CHARCOAL, also the DISINFECTING COMPOUNDS
given _below_.

Dr Wynter Blyth divides disinfectants into two great classes:--Gaseous,
and solid or liquid.

        I. _Volatile, in the form of Gas or Vapour._

1. Substances which, like the halogens, appear to form substitution
compounds, _e.g._

  Chlorine,
  Bromine,
  Iodine.

2. Substances which probably combine chemically, and thus destroy
contagion:

  Sulphurous acid,
  Nitrous acid,
  Fumes of other acids.

3. Oxidising substances, such as--

  Pure air,
  Oxygen,
  Ozone.

4. The volatile oils, &c. Feeble disinfectants, supposed, however, to
oxidise--

  Camphor,
  Oil of hops,
  Oil of rue,
  Oil of rosemary,
  Oil of chamomile.

        II. _Solid or Liquid Disinfectants._

1. The chlorides of different metals, earths, or bases:

  Chlorides of the alkalies,
  Chlorides of iron,
  Chlorides of copper,
  Chlorides of manganese,
  Chlorides of zinc,
  Chlorides of aluminium,
  Chlorides of lime,
  Chlorides of mercury,
  and, in fact, all chlorides which are soluble.

2. All soluble sulphates, especially sulphates of iron and aluminium.

3. All soluble sulphites.

4. Some acetates, as acetate of iron.

5. Some nitrates, such as the nitrates of potash and soda.

6. Certain agents which appear to arrest putrefaction or condense certain
gases, &c., without either destruction or oxidation:

  Carbolic acid,
  Tar acids,
  Charcoal,
  Great cold,
  Heat sufficient to dry organic substances, but not to char them.

7. Preservative liquids and solutions. Many of these act by coagulating
the albumen of organised bodies:

  Antiseptics,
  Alcohol,
  Solutions of corrosive sublimate,
  Solutions of common salt,
  Solutions of saltpetre.

8. Destructive agents. Not true disinfectants, they act not by
disinfection, but by destruction:

  A dry heat of 200 deg. to 400 deg. F.,
  The strong undiluted acids and alkalies.

9. Agents which act in many ways, partly by condensing gases, partly by
absorbing moisture, and partly by a peculiar action on organic matter
analogous to tannin:

  Dry earths,
  Clays,
  The natural and artificial compounds of aluminium.

The table on the next page is a summary by the late Dr Letheby of some
experiments made by Drs Dougall and Calvert, with the view of determining
the relative powers possessed by certain substances of arresting
putrefaction, as measured by their action in preventing the germination of
animalcules and fungi, and the development of vaccine lymph.[258]

[Footnote 258: 'On the Relative Power of various Substances in Preventing
the Germination of Animalculae,' by John Dougall, 1871. Calvert,
'Proceedings of the Royal Society,' vol. xx, p. 185.]

=Disinfecting Compounds.= 1. (Sir WM. BURNETT'S DISINFECTING LIQUID.) A
concentrated solution of chloride of zinc. See ZINC.

2. (COLLINS' DISINFECTING POWDER.) A mixture of dry chloride of lime, 2
parts, and burnt alum, 1 part. Used either dry or moistened with water.
See LIME.

3. (CONDY'S DISINFECTING FLUIDS.) Solutions of the alkaline manganates and
permanganates. Although this is an excellent and rapid deodoriser, and
makes a most serviceable dressing for fetid sores, it must be borne in
mind that it is in no sense an aerial disinfectant, its action being
limited to the solid or liquid matters only with which it is brought into
immediate contact. It exercises no corrosive action, but it is open to the
objection that it leaves a brown stain upon linen. See MANGANESE.

4. (ELLERMAN'S DEODORISING FLUID.) This is said to consist chiefly of the
perchlorides and chlorides of iron and manganese.

"In a report addressed to the Metropolitan Board of Works in 1859, Drs
Hoffmann and Frankland stated that the perchloride of iron was the
cheapest and most efficient deodoriser that could be applied to sewage."
(Beasley.)

5. (LABARRAQUE'S DISINFECTING SOLUTION; LIQUOR SODAE CHLORINATAE, Ph. L. &
D.) A solution of chlorinated soda, or, as it is commonly called,
'chloride of soda.' M. Labarraque made known this valuable disinfectant in
1822, and obtained the prize of the French 'Society for Encouraging
National Industry' for its introduction.

6. (LEDOYEN'S DISINFECTING FLUID.) A solution of nitrate of lead, 1 part,
in about 8 parts of water; or, of litharge, 13-1/2 oz., in nitric acid
(sp. gr. 1.38), 12 oz., previously diluted with water, 6 pints. Sp. gr.
1.40.

7. (SIRET'S DISINFECTING COMPOUNDS.)--_a._ A mixture of sulphate of lime,
53 lbs., sulphate of iron, 40 lbs., sulphate of zinc, 7 lbs., and peat
charcoal, 2 lbs., made into balls.

_b._ Sulphate of iron, 20 parts; sulphate of zinc, 10 parts; tan or waste
oak-bark (in powder), 4 parts; tar and oil, of each 1 part; as before.
Used for deodorising cesspools, &c.

8. (BISULPHIDE OF CARBON.) This generates, when burnt, sulphurous acid,
and is, therefore, a very valuable disinfectant. Its highly inflammable
nature, however, renders the adoption of certain precautions necessary in
its use. A method of employing it in the form of fumigation will be found
under the article "Fumigation."

9. Dry salicylic acid volatilised from a hot plate purifies the air, and
perfectly disinfects the walls of a closed room. (VON HEYDEN.)

10. "SANITAS" is the name given by Mr Kingzett, its discoverer, to a new
liquid antiseptic and disinfectant, containing peroxide of hydrogen and
camphoric acid, and obtained by the atmospheric oxidation of turpentine.
Sanitas is said by its inventor to possess the great advantages of being
non-poisonous, and to exercise no injurious effects either on clothing or
furniture. It is stated that its antiseptic power is distributed between
the peroxide of hydrogen and camphoric acid, the peroxide of hydrogen
being able to evolve large quantities of oxygen, which in this state is
nascent, and of a powerful and oxidising character.

11. COOPER'S UNIVERSAL DISINFECTING POWDER. According to Professor Wanklyn
this powder contains 70 per cent. of mixed chloride of sodium and chloride
of calcium, and about 6 per cent. of anhydrous sulphate of zinc (equal to
about 12 per cent. of hydrated sulphate), a little insoluble matter, and
15 per cent. of moisture.

12. DR BOND'S CUPRALUM AND FERRALUM. The first of these disinfectants is
stated to be a mixture of the sulphates of copper and aluminium, with
potassic dichromate and turpentine. Its inventor claims for it that it
possesses great power of coagulating albumen and high value both as an
antiseptic and deodorant. FERRALUM is a mixture of ferrous and aluminic
sulphates, turpentine, and carbolic acid. Its chief use is for flushing
sewers and in deodorising cesspools, urinals, &c.

13. BAYARD'S DISINFECTANT. A mixture of sulphate of iron, clay, lime, and
coal tar.

        _Summary of the Experiments made by_ DR J. DOUGALL,
        _and by_ DR CRACE CALVERT, _on the action of various
        Antiseptics on Protoplasmic and Fungus Life, and on
        Vaccine Lymph._

  KEY:
  A - Quantity required to prevent Animalcules in six days.
  B - Number of Days before Life appeared in a solution containing 1 of
      substance in 500 water and 1/2 drachm of following--
  C - Number of Days before Vibrio Life appeared in a solution of Albumen
      containing 1 of substance in 1000 of solution.
  D - Beef Juice.
  E - Sol. of Egg Albumen.
  F - Reaction of the Solution.
  G - Infusion of Hay.
  H - Human Urine.
  I - Beef Juice and Egg Albumen.
  J - Average of all.
  K - Effect on Animalcules in Putrid Beef Juice and Egg Albumen, when
      added in proportion in third column.
  L - Animalcules.
  M - Fungi.
  N - Animalcules.
  O - Fungi.
  P - Effect of the Vapour or Gas during 24 hrs. on Vaccine Lymph.
  Q - Animalcules.
  R - Putrid Odour.
  S - Fungi.
  T - Mouldy Odour.

  -------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------
                     |                                                                                       |EXPERIMENTS BY DR CRACE
                     |                   EXPERIMENTS MADE BY DR JOHN DOUGALL, OF GLASGOW.                    |       CALVERT.
                     +--------+-------------------+------+-----------------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                     |        |         A         |      |                 B                 |       |               C
                     |        |----+----+----+----+      +-----------------+--------+--------+       |-------+-------+-------+-------
                     |        |    |    |    |    |      |        D        |        E        |       |       |       |       |
                     |        |    |    |    |    |      |--------+--------+--------+--------+       |       |       |       |
   Substances used.  |   F    | G  | H  | I  | J  |  K   |    L   |   M    |   N    |   O    |   P   |   Q   |   R   |   S   |   T
  -------------------+--------+----+----+----+----+------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                     |        |1 in|1 in|1 in|1 in|      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
  Acids.             |        |    |    |    |    |      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
   Mineral.          |        |    |    |    |    |      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
    Sulphurous       | Acid.  | 250|  50|  50| 117|Death.|   24   |   4 P. |    8   |Over 100|Killed.|  11   |Over 40|  21   |Over 40
    Nitric           |   "    | 400| 400| 200| 333|  "   |   18   |   4 P. |   15   |  5 T.  |  "    |  10   |   50  |  10   |  23
    Hydrochloric     |   "    | 500| 400| 100| 333|  "   |   28   |   4 P. |    9   |Over 100|  "    |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
    Sulphuric        |   "    | 800| 500| 100| 467|  "   |Over 100|Over 100|   30   | 10 T.  |  --   |   9   |   --  |   9   |  11
    Chromic          |   "    |4000|1400|1200|2200|  --  |   78   |  38 P. |Over 100|Over 100|  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
   Organic.          |        |    |    |    |    |      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
    Carbolic         |Neutral.| 300| 300| 200| 267| None.|   12   |  50 T. |   38   | 36 P.  | None. |Over 40|Over 40|Over 40|Over 40
    Cresylic         |   "    | -- | -- | -- | -- |  "   |   --   |  --    |   --   |  --    |  "    |  "    |   "   |  "    |  "
    Acetic           | Acid.  | 350|  25|  10| 125|  --  |   --   |  --    |   --   |  --    |Killed.|  30   |   --  |   9   |  50
    Picric           |   "    | 350| 350| 350| 350|Death.|   44   |  11 P. |Over 100| 44 P.  |  --   |  17   |Over 40|  19   |Over 40
    Benzoic          |   "    | 700| 700| 200| 533|  "   |Over 100|Over 100|   "    |Over 100|  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
  -------------------+--------+----+----+----+----+------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
  Alkalies.          |        |    |    |    |    |      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
    Lime             |  Alk.  | -- | -- | -- | -- |  --  |   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |  --   |  13   |   19  |Over 40|Over 40
    Potash           |   "    | 300|  50|  10| 120|Death.|   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |  --   |  16   |   --  |  --   |  --
    Soda             |   "    | -- | -- | -- | -- |  --  |   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |  --   |  23   |   31  |  18   |  29
    Ammonia          |   "    | -- | -- | -- | -- |  --  |   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |  --   |  24   |   50  |  20   |Over 40
  -------------------+--------+----+----+----+----+------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
  Haloids.           |        |    |    |    |    |      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
    Iodine tincture  |Neutral.| 400| 400|  50| 283|Death.|    1   |   80 T.|   15   |Over 100|  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
    Chlorine gas     | Acid.  | -- | -- | -- | -- |  --  |   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |Killed.|   7   |   21  |  21   |  --
    Chloride lime    |  Alk.  | 200| 200|  25| 142|Death.|   27   |   27 T.|   40   |Over 100|  "    |   7   |   18  |  16   |  --
    Chloride zinc    | Acid.  | 300| 300| 300| 300|  "   |    4   |Over 100|   18   |  "     |  --   |Over 40|Over 40|  50   |Over 40
    Chloride aluminum|   "    |2000| 500| 300| 933|  --  |   19   |    4 P.|Over 100|  8 P.  |  --   |  10   |   "   |  21   |  50
  -------------------+--------+----+----+----+----+------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
  Sulphates, &c.     |        |    |    |    |    |      |        |        |        |        |       |       |       |       |
    Bisulphite lime  | Acid.  | 100|  50|  25|  58|Death.|    4   |   92 T.|    9   |Over 100|  --   |  11   |   21  |  14   |Over 40
    Sulphate zinc    |   "    | 300| 300| 200| 267|  "   |   30   |    4 P.|   90   | 70 P.  |  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
    Sulphate iron    |   "    | 500| 500| 100| 367|  ?   |   14   |    5 T.|   35   | 40 T.  |  --   |   7   |Over 40|  15   |  --
    Common alum      |   "    | 800| 500| 100| 467|  --  |   14   |    3 P.|   38   | 15 T.  |  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
    Sulphate copper  |   "    |1000|1000| 800| 933|Death.|   86   |   20 P.|Over 100|Over 100|  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
  -------------------+--------+----+----+----+----+------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
  Permanganate potash|Neutral.| 500| 200| 125| 275| None.|   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |  --   |   9   |   50  |  22   |Over 40
  Alcohol            |   "    | 350|  50|  20| 140|Death.|    4   |    4 T.|   10   |Over 100|  --   |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
  Camphor            |   "    | 300| 150|  50| 167| None.|   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    | None. |  --   |   --  |  --   |  --
  Turpentine         |   "    | -- | -- | -- | -- |  --  |   --   |   --   |   --   |  --    |  --   |  14   |Over 40|  42   |Over 40
  -------------------+--------+----+----+----+----+------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------

Note.--In the _first_ set of Dr John Dougall's experiments 3 drachms of a
solution of the strength mentioned were treated with 1 drachm of a
filtered infusion of hay, or with half a drachm of urine or half a drachm
of the mixture of beef juice and egg-albumen. In the _second_ set of
experiments equal parts of a putrid solution of beef juice and
egg-albumen, full of living animalcules, and of the solution of the
various substances of the strength known to be preventive of life (as in
third column), were mixed together, and the results immediately noted. In
the _third_ set of experiments 3-1/2 drachms of distilled water,
containing 1 in 500 of the substances named, were treated with half a
drachm of filtered beef juice, or half a drachm of a solution consisting
of 1 part white of egg to 4 parts water. In the _last_ set of experiments,
separate minims of vaccine lymph were exposed to the several vapours for
24 hours, and the dried spot in each case was moistened with glycerin and
water, and sealed in a capillary tube until an opportunity for vaccination
occurred, when the whole of the diluted lymph was used in one insertion so
as to ensure its full effect.

In Dr Crace Calvert's experiments, 0.026 of a gramme of the substance was
added to 26 grammes (1 to 1000) of a solution of albumen containing 1 part
white of egg to 4 parts _pure_ distilled water.

The Animalcules observed were Monads (microphymes), Vibrios, and their
cell segments (microerphymes), Bacteria (microzymes), Am[oe]ba, &c.; and
the Fungi were Torula, Mycelium, Penicilium, &c., indicated in Table by
letters T and P. Putrefaction was always characterised by a putrid odour,
an alkaline reaction, and the presence of animalcules; whereas Mouldiness
and Fermentation were distinguished by a mouldy or musty odour, an acid
reaction, and the presence of Fungi.

14. LARMANDE'S ANTIMEPHETIC LIQUOR. A solution of the sulphates of zinc
and copper.

15. THYMOL. From experiments made with this substance it appears to be a
very powerful and valuable antiseptic, and likely, because of its
non-poisonous and non-irritant qualities, to supplant carbolic acid in
various branches of surgical practice, in which this latter agent has
hitherto been employed; such, for example, as a dressing for wounds,
ulcers, and as a topical application for certain skin eruptions, &c. Its
difficult solubility and price (spite of its much greater antiseptic
power), however, for the present at any rate, preclude it from being made
available as an ordinary common disinfectant, as this term is generally
understood. See THYMOL.

16. SILICATE OF SODA. It is stated that this salt has considerable
anti-putrefactive powers.

17. Aluminised CHARCOAL. This is recommended by Dr Stenhouse as a cheap
and very efficient decolorising agent. It is made by dissolving in water
54 parts of the sulphate of alumina of commerce in water, and mix it with
92-1/2 parts of finely powdered wood charcoal. When the charcoal is
saturated it is evaporated to dryness, and heated to redness in covered
Hessian crucibles till the water and acid are dissipated. The charcoal
contains 7-1/2 per cent. of anhydrous alumina.

The natural disinfectants are air and water.

Air, when in violent motion, as is the case during a hurricane, has in
many instances been known to arrest the course of certain epidemics;
whilst in the form of ordinary ventilation, although inadequate alone to
destroy the causes (whatever they may be) of contagion or infection, it is
nevertheless found to supplement, to a considerable extent, the
application of artificial and specific disinfectants. Hence the paramount
necessity of perfect ventilation in all apartments in which the sick are
placed, and hence also the measures taken in all hospitals to ensure by
this means an increasing supply of fresh air to the wards in which the
patients are lying.

The diminution in the amount of sickness prevailing in an army caused by
the removal of the soldiers from barracks and placing them in sheds or
under canvas is another illustration, tending to show the disinfectant
properties possessed by an atmosphere in a state of circulation, when, of
course, other hygienic precautions are not neglected.

In Hammond's 'Hygiene' for 1863 the author, who was surgeon-general in the
United States army, says that he only met with one instance of hospital
gangrene in a wooden pavilion hospital, and not a single one in a tent;
and the same result is recorded by Kraus, of the Austrian army in 1859,
who says he never discovered that gangrene originated in a tent; that, on
the contrary, cases of gangrene at once began to improve when those
suffering from the disease were sent from hospital wards into tents. In
his work on 'Practical Hygiene' Dr Parkes advises all cases of typhus
occurring in barracks, whenever practicable, to be sent to tents or wooden
huts having badly-jointed walls.

The great solvent power of water, superadded to its being able to hold
matters in suspension, renders it a most important disinfectant, and thus
enables it in the form of rain to remove from the atmosphere many noxious
and pestilential bodies that would doubtless, if allowed to increase,
become a source of disease. The air-current which constitutes the
ventilation of the House of Commons, before entering the Commons' chamber,
is made to pass over a fine spray of water, by which means it has any dust
or other organisms washed out of it. The beneficial effect of rain also in
flushing drains and canals, and sweetening the superincumbent air, and of
washing out of it many solid as well as gaseous objectionable impurities,
is well known. The year 1860 was one of the wettest on record, as it was
also one of the healthiest. Dr W. Budd recommends that when a room is to
be disinfected, a short time before the process is commenced a tub of
boiling water should be placed in the apartment, so that the steam may
become condensed on the walls, and diffused throughout the air, as he
believes there is a greater chance of ensuring the destruction of the
disease germs by the aerial disinfectants than if these latter were
allowed to act on the germs in the dry state.

We have already enforced in these pages the importance of the habit of
personal cleanliness as being one of the greatest aids to the preservation
of health; and although the unstinted use of soap and water will alone
fail to effect the removal of any infectious or contagious maladies, their
use will be found important auxiliaries in assisting recovery. But
personal ablution is not the _sine qua non_. The frequent cleansing of our
dwellings, streets,[259] alleys (more particularly culs-de-sac), lanes,
and the sheds and habitations of animals, by soap and water, or water
alone, as well as the removal of all decaying or refuse materials from our
midst, is of equal importance, and must not be disregarded, if we desire
to make our sanitary surroundings such as they ought to be.

[Footnote 259: In streets where there is much traffic the air above has
been found to contain large quantities of dust composed, amongst other
matters, of the remains of horse droppings; hence the great importance of
assiduously watering and cleansing the thoroughfares of all large cities
and towns. A plan for laying the dust of streets has been suggested by Mr
Cooper, and consists in watering them with waste chlorides of calcium and
magnesium. Carbolic acid has been employed for the same purpose by many
urban authorities for some years past.]

We extract the following from Dr Parkes' valuable and standard
work--'Practical Hygiene,'

"_Disinfection of Various Diseases._

"EXANTHEMATA, SCARLET FEVER, AND ROTHELN. The points to attack are the
skin and throat. The skin should be rubbed from the very commencement of
the rash until complete desquamation, with camphorated oil, or oil with a
little weak carbolic acid. The throat should be washed with Condy's fluid,
or weak solution of sulphurous acid.

"Clothes to be baked, or to be placed at once in boiling water, as
directed further back. The clothes should not be washed at a common
laundry. Chlorine or euchlorine should be diffused in the air, the saucer
being put some little distance above the head of the patient. Carbolic
acid and ether or carbolic-acid spray may be used instead.

"_Smallpox._--In this, as in all cases, there can be no use in employing
aerial disinfectants, unless they are constantly in the air, so as to act
on any particle of poison which may pass into the atmosphere.

"The skin and the discharges from the mouth, nose, and eyes are to be
attacked. There is much greater difficulty with the skin, as inunction
cannot be so well performed. By smearing with oil and a little carbolic
acid and glycerin, or, in difficult cases, applying carbolised glycerin to
the papules and commencing pustules, might be tried. The permanganate and
sulphurious acid solutions should be used for the mouth, nose, and eyes.
The clothing should always be baked before washing, if it can be done.

"The particles which pass into the air are enclosed in small dry pieces of
pus and epithelial scales; and Bakewell, who has lately examined them,
expresses great doubts whether any air purifier would touch them. Still it
must be proper to use euchlorine or carbolic acid. Iodine has been
recommended by Richardson and Hoffmann.

"_Measles._--Oily applications to the skin and air purifiers, and
chlorides of zinc and aluminium in the vessels receiving the
expectoration, appear to be the proper measures.

"_Typhus (Exanthematicus)._--Two measures seem sufficient to prevent the
spread of typhus, viz. most complete ventilation and immediate
disinfection and cleansing of clothes. But there is also more evidence of
use from air purifiers than in the exanthemata. The nitrous acid fumes
were tried very largely towards the close of last century and the
beginning of this in the hulks and prisons where Spanish, French, and
Russian prisoners of war were confined. At that time so rapidly did the
disease spread in the confined spaces where so many men were kept, that
the efficacy even of ventilation was doubted, though there can be no
question that the amount of ventilation which was necessary was very much
underrated. Both at Windsor and Sheerness the circumstances were most
difficult. At the latter place (in 1785), in the hulk, 200 men, 150 of
whom had typhus, were closely crowded together; 10 attendants and 24 men
of the crew were attacked; 3 medical officers had died when the
experiments commenced. After the fumigations one attendant only was
attacked, and it appeared as if the disease in those already suffering
became milder. In 1797 it was again tried with success, and many reports
were made on the subject by army and naval surgeons. It was subsequently
largely employed on the Continent, and everywhere seems to have been
useful.

"These facts lead to the inference that the evolutions of nitrous acid
should be practised in typhus-fever wards, proper precautions being taken
to diffuse it equally through the room, and in a highly dilute form.

"Hydrochloric acid was employed for the same purpose by Guyton de Morveau
in 1773, but it is doubtless much inferior to nitrous acid. Chlorine has
also been employed, and apparently with good results.

"In typhus it would seem probable that the contagia pass off entirely by
the skin, at least the effect of ventilation, and the way in which the
agent coheres to the body linen seems to show this.

"The agent is not also enclosed in quantities of dry discharges and
epidemics, as in the exanthemata, and is therefore less persistent and
more easily destroyed than in those cases. Hence possibly the greater
benefit of fumigations, and the reason of the arrest by ventilation. The
clothes should be baked, steeped, and washed, as in the exanthemata.

"_Bubo Plague._ The measures would probably be the same as for typhus.

"_Enteric (typhoid fever)._ The bowels' discharges are believed to be the
chief, if not the sole agents in spreading the disease; the effluvia from
them escape into the air, and will adhere to walls and retain power for
some time, or the discharges themselves may get into drinking-water. Every
discharge should be at once mixed with a powerful chemical agent; of
these, chloride and sulphate of zinc have been chiefly used, but sulphate
of copper (which Dougall found so useful in stopping the growth of
animalculae), chloride of aluminium, or strong solution of ferrous sulphate
(1 ounce to a pint of water), or carbolic acid. After complete mixing the
stools must be thrown into sewers in towns; but this should never be done
without previous complete disinfection. In country places they should be
deeply buried at a place far removed from any water supply; they should
never be thrown on to manure heaps or on to middens, nor into earth
closets, if it can be possibly avoided. As the bedclothes and beds are so
constantly soiled with the discharges, they should be baked, or, if this
cannot be done, boiled immediately after removal with sulphate or chloride
of zinc. It would be less necessary to employ air purifiers in this case
than in others.

"_Cholera._ There can be little doubt that the discharges are here also
the active media of the conveyance of the disease, and their complete
disinfection is a matter of the highest importance. It is, however, so
difficult to do this with the immense discharges of cholera, especially
when there are many patients, that the evidence of the use of the plan in
the last European epidemic is very disappointing.

"The ferrous sulphate (green vitriol), which has been strongly recommended
by Pettenkofer as an addition to the cholera evacuations, was fully tried
in 1866 at Frankfurt, Halle, Leipzig, in Germany, and at Pill, near
Bristol, and in those cases without any good result. In other places, as
at Baden, the benefit was doubtful. It seemed to answer better with Dr
Budd and Mr Davies at Bristol; but other substances were also used, viz.
chlorine gas in the rooms, and chloride of lime and Condy's fluid for the
linen. On the whole it seems to have been a failure. Ferric sulphate, with
or without potassium permanganate, has been recommended by Kuehne instead
of ferrous sulphate, but I am not aware of any evidence on the point.
Carbolic acid was largely used in England in 1866, and appeared in some
cases to be of use, as at Pill, near Bristol, and, perhaps, at
Southampton. It failed at Erfurt, but, as it is believed the wells were
contaminated by soakage, this is perhaps no certain case. Chloride of lime
and lime were used at Stettin without any good result, and, on the whole,
it may be said that the so-called disinfection of the discharges of
cholera does not seem to have been attended with very marked results. At
the same time it cannot be for a moment contended that the plan has had a
fair trial, and we can easily believe that unless there is a full
understanding on the part of both medical men and the public of what is to
be accomplished by this system, and a conscientious carrying out of the
plan to its minutest details, no safe opinions of its efficacy or
otherwise can be arrived at. It would be desirable to try the effect of
chromic acid or bichromate of potash.

"With regard to air purifiers little evidence exists. Chlorine gas
diffused in the air was tried very largely in Austria and Hungary in 1832,
but without any good results. Nitrous-acid gas was used in Malta in 1865,
but apparently did not have any decided influences, although Ramon da Luna
has asserted that it has a decided preservative effect, and that no one
was attacked in Madrid who used fumigations of nitrous acid. But negative
evidence of this kind is always doubtful. Charcoal in bulk appears to have
no effect. Dr Sutherland saw a ship's crew severely attacked, although the
ship was loaded with charcoal.

"Carbolic-acid vapour diffused in the atmosphere was largely used in 1866
in England; the liquid was sprinkled about with water, and sawdust
moistened with it was laid on the floors and under the patients. The
effect in preventing the spread of the disease was very uncertain.

"_Yellow Fever._ In this case the discharges, especially from the stomach,
probably spread the disease, and disinfectants must be mixed with them.

"Fumigations of nitrous acid were employed by Ramon da Luna, and it is
asserted that no agent was so effectual in arresting the spread of the
disease.

"_Dysentery._ It is well known that dysentery, and especially the putrid
dysentery, may spread through an hospital from the practice of the same
close stool or latrines being used. As long ago as 1807, fumigations of
chlorine were used by Mojon to destroy the emanations from the stools, and
with the best effects. The chlorine was diffused in the air, and the
stools were not disinfected; but this ought to be done as in enteric
fever, and especially in the sloughing form. It is probable that carbolic
acid in large quantity would be efficacious.

"With respect to _Erysipelas_, _Diphtheria_, _Syphilis_, _Gonorrh[oe]a_,
_Glanders_, and _Farcy_, local applications are evidently required, and
carbolic acid in various degrees of strength, and the metallic salts, are
evidently the best measures.

"_Cattle Plague._ The experiments made by Mr Crookes on the disinfectant
treatment of cattle plague with carbolic acid vapour have an important
bearing on human disease. Although the observations fall short of
demonstration there are grounds for thinking that when the air was kept
constantly filled with carbolic acid vapour, the disease did not spread.

"So also euchlorine was employed in Lancashire by Professor Stone of
Manchester, with apparent benefit. Dr Moffat employed ozone (developed by
exposing phosphorus to the air), and he believes with benefit. As such
experiments are very much more easily carried out on the diseases of
animals than on those of men, it is much to be wished that the precise
effect of the so-called disinfectants should be tested by continuing the
experiments commenced by Mr Crookes, not only in cattle plague in the
countries where it prevails, but in epizootic diseases generally.

"It may be said, in conclusion, that although positive evidence is so
deficient, yet, taking into consideration the decidedly great and known
effect of many so-called disinfectants, and air-purifiers on organic
matters, and the fact that the infectious organic agencies are certainly
easily destroyed in most cases (since free ventilation renders many of
them inert, and few of them retain their power very long), it is highly
probable that the specific poisons of the so-called zymotic diseases are
destroyed by some of these chemical methods, and at any rate the careful
and constant use of chemical agents for the destruction of the specific
poisons in the excreta and discharges from the body, and when they pass
into the air, is not only warranted, but should be considered
comparative.

"_Purification of rooms after infectious diseases._ In addition to
thorough cleansing of all woodwork with soft soap and water, to which a
little carbolic acid has been added (1 pint of the common liquid to 3 or 4
gallons of water), and to removal and washing of all fabrics which can be
removed, the brushing of the walls, the room should be fumigated for 3
hours with either the fumes of sulphurous or nitrous acids. Both of these
are believed to be superior to chlorine, especially in smallpox. All doors
and windows, and the chimney being closed, and curtains taken down, the
sulphur is ignited as directed in our article FUMIGATION.

"In white-washed rooms the walls should be scraped, and then washed with
hot lime to which carbolic acid is added.

"Mortuaries and dead-houses are best purified with nitrous acid."

These directions may be supplemented by the following:--The towels,
sheets, articles of clothing, &c., should be boiled in water, or plunged
in boiling water containing one to two handfuls of soda to the gallon,
before being taken from the room, after which treatment they should be
steeped in water containing 4 fluid ounces of carbolic acid to a gallon of
water.

Fabrics soiled by the discharges, &c., such as rags, bandages, and
dressings, if of little value should be immediately consigned to the
flames; but if this be not convenient, they may be treated with carbolic
acid and water, in the same manner as directed for towels, sheets, &c.

As soon as any infectious disease sets in, the room of the patient should
be at once stripped of curtains, carpet, bed-curtains, valances, and all
unnecessary garments, whether in a wardrobe or drawers, as well as of all
superfluous furniture, especially chairs stuffed with wool or covered with
fabric of any kind.

Disinfections of the apartment by fumigations must be postponed until it
is vacated; as before such a time thorough disinfection is impossible.

Infected bedding, &c., should be removed in the boxes made for the
purpose, and subjected to the heating process. In most towns provision is
made by the Board of Guardians, and under the directions of the medical
officer of health, for the disinfection process to be efficiently carried
out. See DISINFECTING CHAMBERS.

The disinfection of articles of food is accomplished by thorough cooking,
boiling in the case of milk, boiling and filtration in the case of water,
and complete roasting, stewing, and frying of meat.

The experiments of Mr Crookes (to which reference has been made in the
extract taken from Dr Parkes' 'Practical Hygiene') with carbolic acid
during the cattle plague possess great practical interest both for the
chemist and physiologist.

Of the use of carbolic acid as a disinfectant Mr Crookes, in the Appendix
to the Report of the Cattle Plague Commissioners, writes as follows:

"According to the principles laid down, the air must be treated, and where
there is no disease there is only a secondary use in treating anything
besides the air. Several cowhouses have been treated with carbolic acid
with very excellent results. The mode has been, first, to remove from the
floor the mass of manure, which too often adheres to it; secondly, to
sprinkle the floor with strong carbolic or cresylic acid; next, to wash
the walls, beams, and rafters, and all that is visible in the cowhouse,
with lime, in which is put some carbolic acid, 1 to 50 of the water used,
or with strong carbolic acid alone. Next, to make a solution containing 1
of carbolic or cresylic acid to 100 of water, or, perhaps still better, 60
of water, and to water the yard and fold until the whole place smells
strongly of the acid. Only a few farms have been treated in this way, so
far as I know, but in each it has been successful. It may be well to give
the cattle a little of the weak solution of carbolic acid, but this has
not been so fully tried as the external use. The washing of the mouth and
of the entire animal with the weak solution may be attended with good
results, especially in the early stage of disease; but I know nothing of
cure, and speak only hopefully of prevention.

"The animals seem to have an instinct for disinfection, and lick
substances touched with this acid. They must not be allowed to drink it,
as when strong it blisters the skin, and especially the mouth and tongue."

Mr Crookes also tried the effect of the acid by injecting it into the
veins of the animals, and thus details the results of his
experiments:--"It appeared evident that if harm were to follow the
injection of carbolic acid, the mischievous effect would be immediate; but
that if the fluid could pass through the heart without exerting its
paralysing action on that organ, and could get into the circulation, no
present ill effects need be anticipated. I therefore determined to push
these experiments as far as possible, increasing the quantity of carbolic
acid, until it produced a fatal result.

The next operation was on cow No. 11, in which 3 oz. of solution
(containing 52-1/2 gr. of pure carbolic acid) were very slowly injected;
no bad effect followed. Increasing the dose, cow No. 12 had injected into
her vein 4-1/2 oz. of solution (equal to 78-3/4 gr. of carbolic acid);
this also was followed by no immediate ill effect. Cow No. 13 was then
treated with 6 oz. of solution (containing 105 gr. of pure carbolic acid),
in two portions of 3 oz. each, five minutes' interval elapsing between
each injection. The first 3 oz. produced a slight trembling, but not so
severe as in the case of cow No. 10, as she seemed better in a few
minutes. The second dose of 3 oz. was injected. This proved too much, or
was pumped in too hurriedly, for almost before I had finished the animal
trembled violently, its eyes projected, its breathing became laborious, it
fell down and expired. The result could scarcely be attributed to the
accidental injection of air into the vein, for the distress began with the
injection of the first syringeful, and was only increased by the second;
nor is it likely that this accident would happen twice consecutively. I
was particularly careful on this point, and the construction of the
instrument rendered such an occurrence scarcely possible with ordinary
precaution. It is probable that the injection was performed too rapidly,
or that the vital powers were lower than usual. In the case of the
remaining animal, No. 14, I decided to inject as large a dose as it would
bear, stopping the operation at the first sign of trembling, and
delivering the liquid very gradually. The first syringeful caused no bad
symptoms, and I had just finished injecting the second dose when trembling
commenced. It was rather violent for a short time, but soon went off, and
in five minutes the animal appeared as well as before.

This cow, therefore, bore without inconvenience the injection of 6 oz. of
a 4 per cent. solution, containing 105 gr. of pure carbolic acid. Careful
observations with the thermometer were taken before each operation. There
were no more diseased beasts on the farm, or I should have carried my
experiments still further. On visiting the farm the next day I was told
that all the animals seemed better, and on testing them with the
thermometer that statement was confirmed. I gave directions that each
animal was to be drenched with half a wine-glassful (1 oz.) of carbolic
acid in a quart of warm water every morning, but in other respects they
might be treated as Mr Tomlinson, a skilful cow doctor, should direct.

"Business now calling me to London, I was unable to watch the further
progress of these cases.

"This is to be regretted, as a series of daily thermometric observations
would have been of great value in suggesting further experiments. I had,
however, frequent accounts sent me. Cow No. 14 continued to improve slowly
until convalescent; she is now quite well. Nos. 10, 11, and 12 remained
apparently in the same state for four days; they then changed for the
worse, and died. It is not improbable that had I been able to inject a
further quantity of carbolic acid during the four days in which they were
thus hovering between recovery and relapse, it would have turned the
scale, and some of them at all events would be now alive and well.

The following table gives the thermometric observations;--

        _Table showing the results of injecting carbolic acid
        into the blood of animals suffering from the cattle
        plague._

  +-----+------------+-------------+---------+--------+-----------+
  |     | Grains of  | Temperature |         |        |           |
  | No. | Carbolic   | before      | Second  | Third  |           |
  |     | Acid       | Injection   | Day.    | Day.   |           |
  |     | Injected.  |             |         |        |           |
  +-----+------------+-------------+---------+--------+-----------+
  |     |            |     F.      |   F.    |        |           |
  | 10  | 26-1/2     | 105.4       | 103.8   | Better.| Died on   |
  |     |            |             |         |        | 6th day.  |
  | 11  | 52-1/2     | 103.8       | 102.8   |  "     | Died on   |
  |     |            |             |         |        | 6th day.  |
  | 12  | 78-3/4     | 104.8       | 104.4   |  "     | Died on   |
  |     |            |             |         |        | 6th day.  |
  | 14  | 105        | 103.7       | 103.1   |  "     | Recovered.|
  +-----+------------+-------------+---------+--------+-----------+

If future experiments prove that injection of carbolic acid or other
antiseptic will do good, it is an operation very easily performed. I have
injected five animals, and taken thermometric observations within an hour.
Sulphite or bisulphite of soda apparently occasions some pain, as the
animals struggle very much; with carbolic acid I found them tolerably
quiet. I have calculated the proportion which the carbolic acid bore to
the whole quantity of blood in these operations. Taking the whole amount
of blood in the animal at 150 lbs., there were injected into--

  No. 10, 1 part of carb. acid, in 40,000 of blood.
   "  11,     "         "          20,000     "
   "  12,     "         "          13,300     "
   "  14,     "         "          10,000     "

It is worth mentioning incidentally, that in the case of cow No. 14 (which
recovered) the proportion of carbolic acid injected into the blood would
have been enough to keep from decomposition the whole quantity of that
liquid for a considerable time. In Nos. 10, 11, and 12 the proportion of
carbolic acid would probably not have been sufficient for that purpose. I
am informed by Dr Calvert that cresylic acid has much less coagulating
power on albumen than carbolic acid, and my own experiments entirely
confirm this statement."

We have described under "CHARCOAL" the disinfecting properties of that
substance. These properties have been turned to excellent account by Dr
Stenhouse, who has invented a charcoal respirator, which, causing the
wearer to breathe air drawn through a layer of that substance, and by thus
depriving the air so inspired of any noxious gases or exhalations, if
present, becomes, if worn in an infected atmosphere, a great safeguard
against disease. Dr Letheby was accustomed to use a charcoal respirator
when analysing dead bodies and other putrid matters of suspected
poisoning, and by so doing never experienced any ill effects, nor was he
conscious of the offensive odour which but for its adoption he must have
encountered.

Professor Tyndall has suggested for the same purpose a respirator of
cotton wool, by means of which the air, being filtered before it enters
the lungs, becomes deprived of minute particles of various substances
suspended in it, as well as of the germs, which so many pathologists
believe to be always present during the prevalence of epidemic maladies,
and the cause, when inhaled, of the maladies themselves.

=DISINFECTING CHAMBERS.= The sanitary authorities of most large cities
have made provision for the purification of mattresses, linen, wearing
apparel, &c., by means of disinfecting chambers or ovens, in which
receptacles the infected articles are subjected for a certain time to hot
air. The simplest form of apparatus for this purpose, and one that could
be used on an emergency, provided the articles to be disinfected were not
too bulky, is a baker's oven. The drying closet of a good laundry would be
so far unsafe, because it would occasionally fail to give a heat
sufficient for the destruction of the noxious principles.

The disinfecting chambers employed in Liverpool are arched ovens of solid
brickwork, having a depth of 7 feet from front to back, a width of 5 feet
from side to side, and a height of 6-1/2 feet from the floor to the crown
of the arch. The doors are made of wrought iron, tightly fitting into
cast-iron framework. The floors are made of double iron gratings, having
alternate openings, so arranged as to admit at pleasure hot air into the
chamber. At the top of the arch there is an opening fitted with an iron
valve, by which the air of the chamber escapes into an exhausting shaft
which is connected with the chimney. The heating is accomplished by means
of a cast-iron cockle, the smoke from which escapes by two cast-iron smoke
flues, which, after forming a coil for the purpose of affording as great a
heating surface as possible, pass along the hot-air passage under the
chamber, into a chimney situated at the opposite end.

The cold air is drawn into a brick flue placed underneath the floor of the
stokehole into a cavity on each side of the cockle, and thence into a
space underneath the chamber, whence it becomes heated by the radiation
from the surface of the two cast iron flues. From this cavity or passage
it is conveyed at will through the gratings as already described. At the
entrance of the cold air flue there is a damper, by which the temperature
of the air may be regulated. A heat equal to 280 deg. F. has been registered
in this chamber, and as high as 380 deg. in a drying closet over the cockle.
Dr French, the medical officer of health for Liverpool, says "that, if
necessary, a temperature reaching 500 deg. F. can be attained in these
chambers; but this temperature is of course never employed. Experience has
proved that from 220 deg. to 250 deg. F. is the most suitable. Instances have been
known where fabrics, after being exposed for some length of time to a
temperature above 212 deg. F., have sustained injury from being scorched.

In some of the chambers, carbolic acid powder is sprinkled on the floor.

We have taken the liberty of transcribing the following description and
plates illustrative of the disinfecting stove used in the Royal Victoria
Yard, Deptford, from that very useful publication, 'Chemistry,
Theoretical, Practical, and Analytical,' published by Mr W. Mackenzie.

"This stove consists of a brick chamber with a slightly arched roof, and
an iron movable floor in two pieces. The chamber is 7 feet deep, 6 feet 9
inches wide, and 5 feet 8-1/2 inches high in the centre of the arch. It is
heated by a flue below the iron floor passing round 3 sides of the chamber
and up a chimney. There is an opening in the upper part of the chamber in
its centre, which passes along in the roof to the side, from thence down
in the wall entering beneath the fire; this carries away any of the foul
air of the clothes from the chamber through the fire and up the flue. This
proceeding takes place after the clothes have been in the chamber say an
hour and a half in the following manner:--The damper in the foul air shaft
is withdrawn, and the furnace door is shut; any draught that gets to the
fire comes to the chamber. Over the opening into the furnace is a square
opening, fitted with a glass, inside of which is a fixed thermometer. When
this shows a temperature of 200 deg. F., the interior of the chamber is at
250 deg. F., the highest point at which it is allowed to be. In the interior
of the chamber at the sides there are little movable cranes, three rows of
three supporting rods of iron on which wooden trays rest, and on which the
clothes are placed when the iron cart is not used. The cranes move fore
and aft to be out of the way when the cart is used. The cart is of iron on
wheels, and runs into the chamber on tramways to keep it in position; in
the interior of the cart are three iron trays for laying the clothes on.
The lowest tray is always the hottest, so that it is prudent to use the
cart, the iron bottom of which prevents burning. The iron ends of the cart
are removed when it is placed in the chamber; so is the handle. It is
usual to keep the clothes at the temperature of 250 deg. F. for two hours.

There is a trap door 8 inches square about 14 inches above the upper edge
of the furnace, and on a level with the iron floor of the chamber, for
disinfectants. Carbolic acid and sulphur are used; the former is placed on
a flat plate, the latter is sprinkled over the floor. These are used as
the last, and after that has been the clothes are fit to be used without
danger to any one.

_Elevation plan_ (fig. 5) shows the front of the chamber with the doors
closed; the openings (Nos. 1, 2, and 3) are for inserting the long
thermometer, which is pushed into the clothing to be disinfected; they
correspond with the three trays. The thermometer can be withdrawn and
examined without allowing much cold air to enter; plugs fit into these
three openings when not used for the thermometer.

[Illustration]

_Section._--The chamber is shown about the centre of its depth; the
foul-air shaft (B) passes along the roof down the side wall, and beneath
the fire (C); the opening where the fixed thermometer is placed is marked
with dotted lines. The damper for the foul-air shaft (E) is represented as
shut, and the damper for the chimney (F) is also shut.

[Illustration]

_The ground plan_ shows the flue beneath the iron plates, which form the
floor of the chamber, the dotted lines showing the foul-air flue (B), as
it passes beneath the fire. In the flue (C) there are openings at D, D, D,
for the purpose of cleaning it.

[Illustration]

Another form of disinfecting chamber is that invented by Dr Esse, of
Berlin, and employed in that city. The apparatus consists of two iron
cylinders, one fitted within the other, with a space between, into which
steam under pressure is introduced. The outer cylinder is surrounded with
wood and the top with felt, to prevent the escape of heat. The articles to
be disinfected are put in at the top of the inner cylinder, the inside of
which soon becomes heated up by the surrounding steam. A pulley is used to
lift the lid of the inner cylinder, around which the clothes are hung on
pegs, not being allowed to touch the side of the cylinder. At the top of
the inside cylinder is a brass box pierced with holes at the bottom, which
dips a little way down, through which the air from the interior can rise.
In this box the bulb of a thermometer being placed, the temperature of the
inner chamber can be registered.

When the steam condenses in the space between the cylinders it is carried
off by means of a valve, which is lifted when the water reaches a certain
point in the condenser. In an hour's time the temperature of the interior
cylinder can be raised to 235 deg. Fahr.

For heating mattresses another apparatus has been devised by Dr Esse. It
consists of an iron case with a spiral steam pipe in the centre, the steam
inside the pipe being compressed to two atmospheres.

Dr Ransome has invented, for the use of the Nottingham hospital, a gas
stove in the form of an iron box, well packed with a non-conducting
material, which surrounds the outside. A channel leads to the interior of
the box, and inside this channel gas is kept burning in such a manner by a
modification of Kemp's regulator, that the temperature of the box shall
range day and night between 235 deg. and 255 deg. Fahr.

An apparatus put to great use by the Holborn District Board during the
epidemic of smallpox in 1871 was one made by Fraser's patent. Mr Fraser's
disinfecting chamber consists of an oven or receptacle made of brick, with
doors in front. Situated on the lower portion of this chamber is a covered
furnace connected with flues, by means of which the interior space is
heated to the desired temperature. By a particular arrangement the air
laden with the noxious vapours given off by the tainted clothing is
conveyed into the furnace, and so consumed. Belonging to the apparatus is
a covered truck or cart, fitted with doors and dampers, and provided
inside with racks and shelves for holding the materials to be purified,
which are thus brought from the infected dwelling and placed, truck and
all, inside the chamber. The infected materials, as well as the truck
containing them, are then heated to the necessary point, disinfection
being assisted by sulphurous acid gas, or some other material adapted for
the purpose. When the process is finished the carriage with its contents
is drawn back to the house from which they were originally taken, and the
purified articles are restored to the owners. It will be seen that by this
arrangement the vehicle is disinfected as well as the clothes it contains.

=DISLOCA'TION.= _Syn._ LUXATION; DISLOCATIO, L. The forcible displacement
of a bone from its socket, either by violence or disease. The latter
happens when the textures forming the joint have been destroyed by some
independent organic affection. "A considerable share of anatomical
knowledge is required to detect the nature of these accidents; and it is
much to be lamented that students neglect to inform themselves
sufficiently on the subject." (Sir A. Cooper.) In common cases the bones
may be frequently replaced by forcibly extending the limb. This should be
done as early as possible, and before inflammation sets in. The latter
should be combated by aperients, local bleeding, refrigerant lotions, &c.
Dislocations frequently exist without the fact being suspected, the
swelling and inflammation being referred to other causes.

=DISPLACE'MENT.= See PERCOLATION.

=DISTEM'PER.= A disease among dogs, usually characterised by a running
from the nose and eyes, and a short dry cough; followed by wasting of the
flesh, and loss of strength and spirits. At length the brain suffers, and
fits, paralysis of the extremities, or convulsions come on. Laxatives and
emetics are the best remedies. If there is much diarrh[oe]a, astringents
may be afterwards given. The violence of the fits may be mitigated by the
administration of antispasmodics, and by the warm bath. The distemper is a
contagious disease, and is generally fatal to weakly and very young dogs.
Fits in the advanced stages of the disease are seldom followed by
recovery. Impatience of light, red eyes, obstinate diarrh[oe]a, spasmodic
twitchings, a yellow colour of the skin, and a pustular eruption, are also
bad symptoms.

=Distemper Powders (Blane's).= The basis of these is said to be '_aurum
musivum_,' or bisulphide of tin. That of another advertised nostrum is a
mixture of mercury and chalk, with a little rhubarb and ipecacuanha.

=DISTILLA'TION.= The evaporation and subsequent condensation of the vapour
of fluids, by means of a still and refrigerator, or other similar
apparatus. DRY DISTILLATION is a term applied to the distillation of
substances _per se_, or without the addition of water or other volatile
fluid. DESTRUCTIVE DISTILLATION is the distillation of substances at
temperatures sufficiently high to decompose them, by which their elements
are separated, or evolved in new combinations. FRACTIONAL DISTILLATION is
the separation of substances having different boiling-points, by
distilling the mixture with a gradually increasing heat, and collecting
the products which come over at different temperatures in separate
receivers. See HYDROCARBON, STILL, &c.

=Distillation.= The art of the distiller; the manufacture of spirituous
liquors as practised on the large scale.

The process of distillation, as carried on in the distilleries of Great
Britain, may be divided into four general operations, viz.--1. The
mashing, or formation of a saccharine infusion from certain vegetable
matters, as malt, barley, oats, rye, &c. 2. The cooling of this wort or
liquor. 3. The fermentation, or process by which the sugar of the cooled
wort is converted into alcohol. 4. The separation of the spirit so formed
by means of a still and refrigerator. By the first operation the materials
for the formation of the alcohol are obtained; by the second, they are
brought to a temperature most favorable to the transformation that takes
place in the third, after which it only remains to free the product of the
last operation from the foreign matter with which it is associated; this
is done in the fourth, which, correctly speaking, constitutes the only
part of the process which can be called distillation.

The general principles of the first three of the preceding operations are
noticed in the articles BREWING, FERMENTATION, &c. It will there be seen
that the amylaceous or starchy matter of the grain is first
'saccharified,' and afterwards converted into alcohol, and that certain
precautions are necessary to render the process successful and economical.
In many of the distilleries of Great Britain molasses and analogous
saccharine substances are employed, in which case the vegetable principle
(sugar) essential to the formation of alcohol is already present, and
merely requires simple solution in water of a proper temperature, to be
ready to be subjected to immediate fermentation. In general, however, the
sources of spirit in England are the various kinds of grain; barley, rye,
maize, and rice are those commonly employed. These are ground and mixed
with bruised malt, in various proportions, and are mashed in a similar
manner to malted grain. The fermentation is carried on until the density
of the liquor ceases to lessen or 'attenuate,' which is determined by an
instrument called a saccharometer. When this point is arrived at, the
'wash' is submitted to distillation, to prevent the access of the acetous
fermentation, which would lessen its alcoholic value.

During the process of distilling off the spirit of the fermented 'wash' or
'wort' a hydrometer is employed to ascertain the 'strength' of the liquor
that passes over. As soon as this has fallen to a certain point, the
operation is stopped, and the 'spent wash' removed. The spirits obtained
by the first distillation are generally called 'low wines,' and have a
specific gravity of about .975. By rectification or 'doubling,' a crude
milky spirit, abounding in oil, at first comes over, followed by clear
spirit, which is received in a separate vessel. The process is continued
until the alcoholic content of the distilled liquor has considerably
diminished, when the remaining weak spirit that distils over, called
'faints,' is caught separately, and mixed with the low wines preparatory
to another distillation. The strongest spirit passes over first, and the
condensed liquor gradually becomes weaker, until it ceases to contain
alcohol. By receiving in separate vessels any given portion of the
product, spirit of any required strength, within certain limits, may be
obtained. The same object is more conveniently effected by surrounding the
top of the capital of the still with a water bath, of a temperature
corresponding to that of alcoholic vapour of the strength it is desired to
obtain. Thus, if we keep the temperature of the water at about 198 deg. Fahr.,
we shall obtain proof spirit; if at 192 deg., a spirit 20 o. p.; and so on for
other strengths.

It is found from experience, and is readily accounted for by theory, that
the lower the temperature at which the distillation is conducted, the
stronger will be the product, and the less quantity of oil or other
volatile matter will come over along with it. To promote this, it has been
proposed to carry on the process _in vacuo_, but on the large scale this
has never been adopted. The distillation of the wash is usually performed
in a separate set of stills to those employed for the rectification of the
low wines. For very strong and tasteless spirit, a third and even a fourth
rectification is employed, conjointly with other methods, to abstract the
water and to remove any foreign matter that vitiates its odour or flavour.
A portion of soap is generally put into the still with the wash, to
prevent excessive frothing.

We have said that the processes of mashing, &c., in the distillery are
similar to those adopted in brewing beer. We may add that, as richness in
alcohol, and not flavour, is the object aimed at in the distiller's wash,
not only is a large quantity of unmalted grain employed, but the process
of boiling the wort with hops is omitted altogether. The wort is commonly
'set' at 70 deg. Fahr., and the fermentation and attenuation of the liquor
pushed as far as possible by large and repeated doses of the best
'top-yeast' of the porter brewers.

It often happens that raw spirit prepared from damaged grain is
contaminated with a highly acrid and volatile fatty substance, which is
powerfully intoxicating and irritating to the eyes and nostrils, and
possesses an odour very similar to that of an alcoholic solution of
cyanogen. This may be got rid of by dilution with water and skilful
rectification, when most of it passes over with the first and last
'runnings,' the intermediate portion being less loaded with it. Another
plan is to filter the spirit successively through 6 or 7 separate vessels
containing pine or willow charcoal before rectifying it. In some
distilleries the contaminated spirit is well agitated with a considerable
quantity of olive oil, and after repose decanted, diluted with water, and
rectified as before. The ordinary corn oil or fusel oil of raw spirit is
generally, for the most part, intercepted by a self-regulating bath
arranged between the still-head and the refrigeratory.

The quantity of spirit obtained from various substances, and even from
pure sugar, depends upon the skill with which the several operations are
conducted. By theory, pure sugar should yield 51% of alcohol; but in
practice 11.925 galls. of proof spirit is the largest quantity which has
yet been obtained from 112 lbs. of sugar. By the revenue authorities this
weight of sugar is estimated to afford 11-1/2 galls. of proof spirit. The
average product is, perhaps, about 1 gall. of spirit of this strength for
every 10 lbs. of sugar. According to Harmstaedt, 100 lbs. of starch yield
35 lbs. of alcohol, or 7.8 galls. of proof spirit; and 100 lbs. of the
following grains produce the accompanying quantities by weight of spirit
of sp. gr. .9427, or containing 45% of pure alcohol:--wheat, 40 to 45%;
rye, 36 to 42%; barley, 40%; oats, 36%; buckwheat, 40%; maize, 40%; the
mean being 3.47 galls. of proof spirit. It is found that a bushel of good
malt yields 2 galls. of proof spirit, and that the largest quantity of
proof spirit obtained from raw grain, mashed with 1/5 or 1/6 of malt, does
not exceed 22 galls. per quarter.

The distiller is allowed to produce worts from any substance, and at any
specific gravity, provided such gravity can be correctly ascertained by
the saccharometer approved of by the Board of Inland Revenue. He is not,
however, allowed to mash and distil at the same time. See ALCOHOL, BRANDY,
FERMENTATION, FUSEL OIL, GIN, STILL, &c.

=DISTOMATA.= A genus of fluke-like parasites infesting men and the higher
vertebrate animals. The egg is about the 1/280th of an inch long and
1/270th inch wide.

[Illustration]

The embryo is frequently met with in sewage water, from which, if it be
removed and placed in pure or distilled water, it soon dies. The embryo
which does not become a distoma gives rise to a progeny (gradually formed
from germ-cells within it) consisting sometimes of one, but much more
often of a number of bodies of various forms and structures, each of which
possesses powers of movement and locomotion. But the creatures of this
second development are not distomata; neither are the offspring to which
they in their turn give rise. Like their immediate progenitors, this
offspring produce in their interior germ-cells which develop into minute
worms having tails, and displaying great vivacity when placed in water.
These latter alone exhibit the characters of true distomata. "These
cercaria now either become enclosed, like a chrysalis in a pupa state, or
they penetrate into the bodies of soft animals, become encysted and
parasitic. It appears probable that the distomata enter the human
intestinal canal as cercaria, and then pass into the biliary
passages."[260]

[Footnote 260: Blyth.]

A case is on record of two distomata having been extracted from the foot
of a woman, into which it has been surmised they gained an entrance as
cercaria whilst the woman was bathing.

It is thought that shell-fish, as well as uncooked fish when eaten, may be
the means of introducing these parasites into the human system. The
embryos of the _Distomata hepaticum_ swim about and live in water, which
may probably, when drunk, be the means of conveying them into the bodies
of men and sheep. The ailments and symptoms to which these pests give rise
depend upon the particular organ or portion of the body in which they
establish themselves.

In man they are a frequent cause of haematuria and dysentery. In sheep they
occasion fearful mortality, giving rise to the disease known as 'the rot,'
and killing thousands of flocks annually.

"The number of species affecting men are usually enumerated as nine--viz.
_Fasciola hepatica_, _Distoma crassum_, _D. lanceolatum_, _D.
ophthalmobium_, _D. heterophyes_, _Bilharzia haematopia_, _Tetrastoma
renale, Hexathrydium renarum_, and _H. pinguicola_."[261]

[Footnote 261: Blyth.]

=DISTORTIONS.= In treating of this subject we shall confine ourselves to
those distortions which are preventable--or rather, we may say, of two out
of the three which will be discussed, which are voluntary.

One very common form of bodily distortion is crooked or curved spine. It
is mostly met with in young girls of from ten to sixteen years of age; and
first shows itself either in the elevation of one shoulder above the
other, or in a growing out of one of the shoulder blades, or of one side
of the bosom beyond the other. The elevated shoulder is generally the
right one. At the same time the right side of the chest is unnaturally
high, and rounded; whilst the opposite or left shoulder and chest are on
the contrary depressed and concave. Very frequently these conditions are
accompanied by a projection of the left hip, and a curving inwards of the
loins on the right side. With persons so afflicted the spine presents an
appearance that has not inaptly been compared to a long italic _f_.

Spinal curvature arises from a weakened state of the muscles, ligaments,
and bones of the backbone. It is most frequently met with in those whose
occupation compels them to stand the greater part of the day; as well as
in persons who pass many hours at the desk or at needlework. Spinal
curvature is also common in young fragile girls acting as nursemaids, and
as such unduly subjected to carrying heavy infants on one side. Amongst
the children of the poor, those of tender years are much too frequently
put to this objectionable form of drudgery. Any one's recollections of a
walk through a poor neighbourhood will enable them to call to mind many
instances they must have seen of smaller babes being nursed by larger
ones. Those subjected to too long standing, no doubt because the posture
affords them relief, unconsciously contract the habit of frequently
standing on the right leg--of _standing at ease_ on it, as it is
called--and at the same time of bending the left knee a little; and since
this position causes the right shoulder to be raised, and the left side of
the pelvis to be thrown out of its place, it will be evident from what has
been already said that, if persisted in, it will end in distorting the
spine in the manner above indicated.

[Illustration]

The same results will also follow in those other cases, such for instance
as in too long an application at the desk or at the needle, as well as the
carrying for an undue length of time a heavy child in the arms; these all
being occupations in which one side of the body is subjected to an undue
and unequal strain over the other.

"Why one-sided postures should cause distortion must be evident, when it
is considered that the intervertebral substance is compressible to such an
extent that an adult man of middle stature loses about an inch of his
height after having been in the erect posture during the day, and does not
regain it till after some hours of rest. Since the united thickness of the
intervertebral substance in an adult man is about 3.875 inches, we see
that they lose nearly one fourth by compression, which they do not recover
till after some hours of rest. But if the weight of the body falls
unequally on the spine day after day, it must be evident that they will
become compressed on one side more than the other; and that if their
elasticity be impaired, and the muscles and ligaments be weak, and the
bones soft, as they are in young persons who have not a sufficiency of
fresh air, wholesome food and active exercise, this lateral distortion
will become permanent.[262]

[Footnote 262: Dr Druitt.]

Another cause tending to distortion of the spine is the foolish habit of
using corsets, a practice which contributes to weaken the dorsal muscles.
When the shoulders are continually supported by a corset, the dorsal
muscles upon which the support ought to fall have their functions usurped
by the corset, and hence fail to receive their proper development, and
consequently lose their power; the result being an inability on the part
of the body to support itself without the corset, and a sinking and
bending of the spine when it is removed. In boys, who never wear corsets,
spinal curvature is rarely met with. In girls, who do, it is constantly to
be found. To guard against spinal distortions, bad and awkward positions
of the body should, wherever possible, be prohibited. Amongst the
prejudicial postures indulged in by the young, we have already mentioned
the habit of standing on one leg and of carrying heavy loads on one side
of the body.

To these may be added the habit of lying crooked in bed, and that of young
girls spending a long time in a constrained position in dressing their own
hair. Every one-sided motion may lead to distortion if it be frequently
repeated, and the tendency once existing, the evil grows day by day. The
use of corsets should be strenuously discountenanced. The early detection
of spinal distortion is a matter of considerable importance. Hence the
advisability of mothers, nurses, governesses, and other guardians of
children or young girls, frequently examining the bodies of their charges
to note if they present any of the peculiarities we have indicated at the
commencement of this article. Should any of these develop themselves, aid
should immediately be sought of a skilful medical practitioner.

Dr Lewis Sayre, in his work 'Spinal Disease and Spinal Curvature'
says:--"The great object in the treatment of Pott's disease is to maintain
_rest of the affected part_ by such means as will not debar the patient
from the benefits of fresh air, sunlight, and change of scene. The patient
should not be permitted to assume the upright position before he has been
fitted with some artificial support capable of removing all pressure from
the bodies of the diseased vertebrae. This object may be obtained by
straightening the spinal column in such a manner that the weight of the
body is borne by _the transverse_ processes and not by the bodies of the
vertebrae." Acting on these principles, Dr Sayre partially envelopes the
patient in a jacket of plaster of Paris, surrounding the body from the
pelvis to the axillae.

Although Dr Sayre's work is almost entirely devoted to a much more serious
affection of spinal curvature than that treated of here--viz. posterior
angular curvature, in which actual disease of the bones of the vertebrae is
concerned--his treatment is no less applicable to the milder form of
distortion to which our remarks have been directed. Dr Sayre himself
states that 300 cases have been treated by his method with very signal
success, and very many eminent surgeons bear testimony to the soundness of
the principles concerned in it. For the details of its application consult
the author's work before alluded to.

Serious as are the effects very frequently arising from spinal curvature,
amongst which may be included lameness, lung disease, and inability to
perform the functions of maternity; still worse results in addition to the
two last of these ensue in the case of a persistence in another form of
distortion, which is none the less dangerous because it is voluntary. The
distortion to which we refer is that caused by the practice of
tightlacing.

Foremost among the conditions absolutely essential for the preservation of
health and bodily well-being, is the due performance of the function of
the lungs, heart, liver, kidneys, stomach and other important organs. The
object of the ribs within which most of these organs are more or less
wholly contained is to protect these latter from external pressure, and
therefore injury; as well as to allow them unimpeded and unrestricted
action. To ensure this freedom of movement for the parts and organs within
the ribs, it will be evident that every possible obstacle tending in any
degree to compress them, or circumscribe their limits should be especially
avoided.

Instead of the avoidance of such dangers, however, what course do the
silly votaries and dupes of that most senseless and remorseless of all
tyrants--Fashion--pursue? One the very reverse; and which is opposed, not
only to personal comfort and common sense, but, since it mars nature's
outlines, to symmetry and our proper canons of the grace of the female
figure. By means of corsets, tight stays, and other implements of torture
the ribs are pressed _inwards_ to such an extent that all the conditions
we have insisted on as essential to health are imperilled, and eventually
become overthrown. Now, this mischievous and unnatural pressure exerted on
the stomach pushes that organ out of its proper position, and in doing so
forces the diaphragm also out of its place; a disturbance which so
curtails the space in which the movements of the lungs and the heart are
performed, that if the pernicious custom be persevered in these latter
organs become seriously and incurably diseased. The liver also shares in
the damage inflicted, and frequently becomes incapable of discharging its
office. The very much larger number of young women than of young men who
die of consumption is undoubtedly referable to the fact that a large
proportion of the majority are the victims of tightlacing. Nor is it
difficult to understand why this should be, since we know that if the
lungs are prevented exercising their full powers of expansion, unnaturally
diminished function will set up disease in them, which, if there be a
predisposition, will probably be consumption. This cause also, by
preventing the blood becoming properly oxygenated, gives rise to a large
class of disorders due to impurity of the vital fluid. Organic disease of
the heart is by no means an uncommon contingency if tightlacing be
persevered in; for that organ is not allowed room to beat, nor the blood
to circulate. One effect of this is seen in frequent fainting fits.

Again, tightlacing not infrequently stops the growth and arrests the
development of a young girl's _mammae_, thus seriously incapacitating her
from suckling her babe when she becomes a mother. It also indirectly has a
very prejudicial effect upon health by preventing its votaries from taking
sufficient walking exercise; free bodily movement with accompanying
expansion of the lungs becomes impossible with those encased in a vice of
unyielding armour, such as constitutes pestilent stays and corsets.
Amongst the minor evils wrought by the baleful custom, we may mention
indigestion (for the pressure of the stays weakens the stomach, and sets
up this troublesome complaint), with its accompaniments of flatulence,
heartburn, pain in the chest, &c. Constipation is also another of its
attendant ills; so also are bad breath and a red nose.

"I recollect Dr A. Todd Thomson, in his excellent lectures, relating a
case he had attended where a young lady appeared to be dying from the evil
effects of tightlacing. He cut open her stays and she gradually came to
herself. If the worthy doctor had not quickly done what he did, she would
soon have been a corpse! Dr Thomson has kindly favoured me with the
following interesting particulars of the case for publication:[263]--'Some
years since I was requested to hasten to a house not far from my own to
see a lady who had fallen from her chair in a fit whilst eating her
dinner. On being ushered to the drawing room of the house where the
circumstance had taken place, I saw a lady lying upon a sofa, apparently
dead, and several ladies hanging over the couch in great distress. I found
little appearance of life except that the temperature of the body was
natural; the pulse had ceased to beat, and no respiratory action could be
detected. On laying my hand over the region of the heart, I felt that the
stays were extremely tightly laced; and conceiving that the suspension of
animation arose from that cause, I requested a penknife to be given me,
with which I instantly ripped down the stays and gown. In an instant the
chest dilated, on the binding matter giving way, which was almost like
splitting an overbraced drum; and in a few seconds respiration recommenced
and animation returned. In this case the waist was drawn in to a degree
that gave a complete hour-glass appearance to the figure, and prevented
the descent of the diaphragm, whilst the blood could not circulate, or be
renewed in the lungs from the general obstruction of many of the cells and
smaller tubes. The quantity of residual air also in the lungs was too
small; and this was still diminished by the warmth of some soup, which the
lady was eating when she fell from the chair, dilating the gas in her
stomach, and consequently pressing that enlarged organ upwards on the
lungs. Had I not lived close by, the time necessary to get medical aid
from a greater distance might have rendered it unavailable.' The above
narrative by Dr Thomson is valuable not only as illustrating the dangers
arising from tightlacing, but also as emphasizing the rationale of its
action as stated by ourselves. In the present article we have explained
why it is the use of corsets is to be deprecated. We hope we have
succeeded in showing how imperatively the abandonment of stays is called
for.

[Footnote 263: Dr Chavasse, 'Counsels to a Mother.']

Another variety of distortion is that brought about by wearing tight boots
and shoes, or boots and shoes constructed upon false principles; for, a
boot or shoe may be productive of considerable inconvenience to the
wearer, as well as the cause of a certain amount of twisting out of place
of the bones of the foot, without necessarily being too small. Amongst the
consequences arising from the adoption of tightly fitting or badly
constructed boots or shoes may be mentioned the following:--Considerable
bodily discomfort, and pain in walking; corns and bunions; growing in of
the nails; chronic enlargement of the base of the great toe; caries or
ulceration of the bones of the feet; and flat feet. That these are not
altogether minor evils may be inferred when it is stated that, in order to
obtain relief from the effects of a bunion, partial amputation of the foot
has been sometimes found necessary; that the first attacks of gout mostly
seize the joint of the ball of the great toe when that joint has become
weakened by displacement following the use of faulty boots and shoes; and
that a flat foot interferes with the proper performance of walking.

[Illustration]

The above figure (No. 1) represents the skeleton of the foot with the
bones which form it in their natural position, and in which they are
admirably adapted for executing the various movements required of them.

It will be seen to consist of twenty-six bones, fourteen of which
constitute the toes; the remaining twelve bones enter into the formation
of what are termed the _tarsus_ and _metatarsus_.

The five long bones (_a_) are the _metatarsal_ bones. The toes form joints
with the fore part of these _metatarsal_ bones. The remaining seven are
the _tarsal_ bones; _b_, which is one of these, is named the _astragalus_,
and being gripped on each side by a continuation from the bones of the leg
called the _malleolus_, thus forms the ankle-joint.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Fig. 2 gives a representation of the inner aspect and side view of the
foot. It will be seen that it is an arch resting in front on the anterior
heads of the five metatarsal bones, _a_, but chiefly on that of the great
toe, and on the _calcaneum_ or heel (_b_) behind.

The astragalus, _c_, forms the key-stone of the arch. This arch, which
supports the superincumbent weight of the body, retains its curved form by
means of strong ligaments or bands, which unite the bones which compose it
into a compact but withal flexible mass. The arch, owing to the pressure
thrown upon it from above, becomes flattened when the foot is resting on
the ground; but when this pressure is removed and the foot hangs free, the
curvature of the arch increases. In front of the metatarsal bones are
placed the toes, which are connected with the metatarsal bones by joints.
The great toe has one joint; each of the smaller ones has two.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

Fig. 3 depicts the skeleton of a foot with the bones thrown out of their
natural position, the contortion being the result of wearing tightly
fitting or unscientifically constructed boots or shoes. The following
extracts from Dr Hermann Meyer will best illustrate how nature's simple
mechanical arrangements must be thwarted when coverings for the feet are
permitted to be constructed which can give rise to distortions such as
those represented in Figure 3. Dr Meyer says "the great toe plays by far
the most important part in walking; because when the foot is raised from
the ground with the intention of throwing it forwards, we first raise the
heel, then rest for a second on the great toe, and in lifting this from
the ground the point of it receives a pressure which impels the body
forwards. Thus, in raising the foot the whole of the sole is gradually, as
it were, 'unrolled' up to the point of the great toe, which again receives
an impetus by contact with the ground.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

The great toe ought, therefore, to have such a position as will admit of
its being unrolled in the manner described; that is to say, it must so lie
_that the line of its axis, when, carried backwards, will emerge at the
centre of the heel; and this is its position in the healthy foot_. The
sole of an almost sound foot is given in Fig. 4, and the true position of
the great toe is indicated by the dotted line. This relation is still
better brought out in Fig. 5, which represents the well-preserved foot of
a child about two years old. The line drawn through both figures is that
in which the foot _unrolls_ itself from the ground. The smaller toes,
however, are by no means without their uses. In standing they rest on the
ground and give lateral support to the foot; while in walking they are
bent in a peculiar manner, so that they are firmly pressed against the
ground; and here too they support the foot laterally. The first joint is
strongly bent upwards, while the second is hollow above. This peculiar
curvature enables the toe in a measure to lay hold of the ground as with
bird's claws."

Dr Meyer then proceeds to show how the application of these principles is
entirely disregarded in the manufacture of our boots and shoes, and to
demonstrate that their neglect gives rise to the objectionable
consequences we have before alluded to. As boots and shoes are at present
constructed, the foot is made to adapt itself to the sole, not the sole to
the foot. This pernicious system must be abandoned if we wish to preserve
our feet, as well as our personal comfort.

"A sole," says Dr Meyer, "is of the proper construction when a line (see
Fig. 6, _c d_) drawn at half the breadth of the great toe distant from,
and parallel to, the inner margin of that toe shall, when carried
backwards, pass through the centre of the heel. In the usual form of a
sole this line passes out of the inner margin of the heel (see Fig. 7).
If, then, the preservation of the primary straight line is, as has been
already shown, the principal point in the formation of a proper sole, it
follows that, if it be thought desirable to have pointed shoes, the
pointing must be effected from the outer side, as indicated in the annexed
Fig. 8. In a pair of shoes made on these principles, placed side by side
with the heels in contact, the inner margins of the front part of the foot
are also brought close together" (Fig. 9).

Dr Meyer's pamphlet contains the following strictures on 'High heels' to
boots and shoes: "It is usual, in all shoes of even moderate strength, to
make the heel a little higher by means of what is called the _heel-piece_.
These heel-pieces are generally of some little use, especially in dirty
weather, and we cannot wholly deny their right to existence. But at the
same time they ought to be as low as possible, and heels an inch thick, as
is at present very commonly the case, have very serious disadvantages
indeed.

"The weight of the body is by this means thrown in a disproportionate
ratio on the toes, the joints of which are consequently overstrained.
Moreover, with a high heel the sole is so oblique in its direction that
the foot must be constantly gliding forwards and forcibly pressing the
toes into the point of the shoe. The toes, therefore, even when the shoe
is sufficiently long, are subjected to the same injuries and
disfigurations as if it were too short, and the effects are doubly hurtful
when the form of the sole is also incorrect. High heels, especially if
they are also very small; are peculiarly liable to wear obliquely, and so
the shoe gets trodden on one side; they must, therefore, be peculiarly
favorable to origin of flat-foot.

[Illustration: FIG. 6. and FIG. 7.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8. and FIG. 9.]

High and small heels are therefore quite unsuitable. The heel-piece ought
to be as low and broad as possible."

Further and more explicit knowledge on this subject may be obtained from
Dr Meyer's excellent little pamphlet entitled 'Procrustes ante portas,'
very ably translated into English by Mr J. T. Craig, L.R.C.E., under the
title of 'Why the Shoe Pinches.'

=DIURE'SIS.= See URINE.

=DIURET'ICS.= _Syn._ DIURETICA. Medicines which promote the secretion of
urine. The principal diuretics are--aqueous fluids, which act by
increasing the watery portion of the blood, and--substances which promote
the action of the kidneys. Most of the first produce copious diuresis if
the skin is kept cool. Among the last are acetate, bitartrate, and nitrate
of potassa; oils of juniper, turpentine, cajeput, and copaiba; dilute
spirit, and sweet spirits of nitre; decoction of common broom, &c.

=DIVIDIVI.= An astringent substance imported from Jamaica. It contains
above 5% of tannin; whilst gall-nuts contain less than 3.5%, and the best
oak-bark only 1.35%. Hence its value in tanning.

=DOBEREINER'S LAMP.= A portable apparatus for obtaining instantaneous
light by the action of a jet of hydrogen on a small piece of spongy
platinum.

=DOCHMIUS DUODENALIS.= An intestinal parasitic worm. Its length is from
1/3 to 1/2 an inch and its breadth about 1/60th of an inch. It is
furnished with hooklets. It is found in the duodenum, the ileum, and the
jejunum of man, and Greisinger seems to have pretty conclusively
established that it is the cause of the disease so prevalent in Egypt, and
known as the Egyptian chlorosis. Anemia, dysentery, and hemorrhoids and
liver diseases are also frequently caused by it amongst the natives of
Arabia, Brazil, and Northern Italy. In India it is also stated to give
rise to some very alarming maladies. Leuchart affirms that it obtains an
entrance into the system through drinking impure water.

=DOC'IMACY or DOCIMAS'TIC ART.= See ASSAYING.

=DOG.= The effect of medicines on dogs is much the same as on man; but
there are some striking exceptions to this rule. Thus, whilst the dog can
take a dose of aloes six or eight times as large as that given to man, the
administration of half as much calomel or oil of turpentine would be
productive of serious injury to the animal. The idea usually entertained,
therefore, that medicines may be given to dogs in doses equalling those
taken by man requires considerable modification. Dogs have a short and
straight alimentary canal, in consequence of which purgative medicines act
more quickly upon them than they do on other veterinary subjects. The
facility with which dogs can be made to vomit is also another peculiarity
possessed by them. Vomiting may be produced by their swallowing nauseous
or unpalatable matters, as well as from their eating various sorts of
grass. A good plan to prevent dogs vomiting their medicines is to keep the
head well raised for an hour after the administration; and this may be
easily accomplished by attaching a chain or cord to the collar, and fixing
it at the requisite height, to any object. The kidneys are acted upon with
much more difficulty than with the horse, whilst the skin seems nearly, if
not altogether incapable of being affected. We give below a list of
medicines for dogs; premising that the doses required vary considerably
according to the strength, size, and age of the dog, all of which should
always be duly taken into account. The doses prescribed in the following
formulae are for moderately large dogs:--

PHYSIC BALLS AND OTHER PURGATIVE MEDICINES:--

1. Barbadoes aloes, 8 oz., antimonial powder, 1 oz., ginger, 1 oz., palm
oil, 5 oz.; beat together into a mass.--_Dose._ From 1/2 dr. to 2 dr.
every 4 or 6 hours, till the bowels are relieved. (Youatt.)

2. The same, with the addition of 1 oz. of calomel. He directs from 45 gr.
to 2 dr. for a dose. (Clater.)

3. Aloes, 1/2 dr. to 2 dr. made into a ball with syrup of ginger.

4. Aloes, 1/2 dr. to 1-1/2 dr., calomel, 2 to 5 gr., syrup to form a ball;
in inflammation of the bowels, and in worms. (Blaine.)

5. Cape aloes, 1/2 dr. to 1 dr., calomel, 2 to 3 gr., oil of caraway, 6
drops, syrup to form a ball. (M'Ewen.)

6. Calomel, 12 gr., aloes, 3 dr., opium, 1 gr., syrup q. s. to form a
mass, for 4, 6, or 8 balls; one every 4 or 5 hours till the bowels are
relieved. (Blaine.)

7. Croton oil, 1 drop, Castile soap, 20 gr., conserve to form a ball.

8. Castor oil, 3 parts, syrup of buckthorn, 2 parts, syrup of poppies, 1
part.--_Dose._ From 1 to 2 tablespoonfuls.--Mr Youatt's purge. [Mr Clark
says syrup of buckthorn for dogs should be made with treacle, and the
spices omitted.]

9. Epsom salts, from 1 to 4 dr., wrapped in tissue paper, dividing the
doses into convenient-sized packets.

10. In costiveness with inflammation: 1/2 oz. to 2 oz. castor oil. (Mr
Spooner.)

ALTERATIVE BALLS AND POWDERS:--

1. Sulphur, 2-1/2 lb.; nitre, 1/2 lb.; AEthiops mineral, 4 oz.; linseed
meal, 1/2 lb.; palm oil, 1 lb., or as much as may be required; beat
together, and keep in a jar for use.--_Dose_, from 2 scruples to 1-1/2 or
2 dr. (Clater.)

2. Ethiops mineral, 20 to 40 gr.; cream of tartar, 20 to 40 gr.; nitre, 5
to 10 gr.; night and morning, made into a ball with butter. (Spooner.)

3. _Tonic Alterative._ Mercurial pill, 1 dr.; aloes 2 dr.; myrrh, benzoin,
balsam of Peru, of each 1-1/2 dr.; to be divided into 10, 15, or 20
pills: one every evening, for the yellows, after aloes and calomel.
(Blaine.)

4. _Alterative Powder._ AEthiops mineral, 2 to 5 gr.; cream of tartar, 4 to
10 gr., tartarised iron, 1 to 3 gr., once a day. (Clater.)

5. _To give a fine skin._ Give a table-spoonful of tar made up with
oatmeal. (Mayer.)

ASTRINGENT BALLS, &c.:--

1. Catechu, 1-1/2 dr.; sulphate of quinine, 20 gr.; opium, 5 gr.; ginger,
1 dr.; conserve of roses, q. s. to form a mass, to be divided into 8, 6,
or 4 balls. (Blaine.)

2. Prepared chalk, 2 oz.; powdered gum Arabic, 1/2 oz.; powdered catechu,
1/2 oz.; powdered oak bark, 1/2 oz.; powdered ginger, 1/4 oz.; opium, 15
gr.; palm oil, 1 oz.; beat well together.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 2 dr.,
morning, noon, and night, in the advanced stage of distemper. (Clater.)

3. Opium, 5 gr.; catechu, 2 dr.; gum Arabic, 2 dr.; ginger, 1/2 dr.; syrup
of poppies, q. s.; divide into 12, 9, or 6 balls: in diarrh[oe]a.
(Blaine.)

4. Myrrh, 1 dr.; ipecacuanha, 1 scruple; opium, 3 gr.; chalk, 2 dr.;
carbonate of iron, 1 dr.; as No. 3. (Blaine.)

5. In obstinate cases: Alum, 1 dr.; chalk, 2 dr.; opium, 6 gr.; resin, 3
dr.; into 4, 6, or 8 balls.

6. In diarrh[oe]a, after 1 to 4 dr. of Epsom salts; prepared chalk, 1 to 3
scruples; catechu, 5 to 10 gr.; opium, 1/4 to 2 gr.; twice a day.
(Spooner.)

COUGH BALLS IN ASTHMA, &c.:--

1. _After a few emetics._ Calomel, 3 gr.; foxglove, 3 gr.; cream of
tartar, 1 dr.; antimonial powder, 12 gr.; honey to form 6 boluses. One
twice a day. (Blaine.)

2. Digitalis, 20 gr.; antimonial powder, 40 gr.; nitre, 2 dr.; sulphur, 3
dr.; palm oil, 3 dr., or q. s. Divide into 10, 15, or 20 balls, according
to the size of the dog, morning and night, interposing an emetic every
third or fourth day. (Clater.)

3. _In old cases._ P. squill, 1/2 gr. to 1 gr.; gum ammoniac, 5 gr.;
balsam of Peru, 8 gr.; benzoic acid, 1 gr.; balsam of sulphur to form a
ball.

4. Extract of hemlock, 1/2 dr.; extract of henbane, 10 gr.; p. digitalis,
20 gr.; conserve of roses to form a mass. Divide into 8, 10, or 6 balls.
One night and morning. (Blaine.)

DISTEMPER MEDICINES:--

1. Turbeth mineral, 1 to 3 gr.; assaf[oe]tida, 1/2 dr.; aloes, 20 gr.;
soap, 10 gr.; syrup of poppies to form a ball. To be preceded by an
emetic, and given every third day.

2. After an emetic, give a physic ball; and afterwards the following, two
or three times a day:--Antimonial powder, 2, 3, or 4 gr.; nitre, 5, 10, or
15 gr.; ipecacuanha, 2, 3, or 4 gr.; form a ball. If the disease proceed
to the debilitating stage, give the _Tonic Ball_ No. 2; in the putrid or
malignant stage give the _Astringent Ball_ No. 1. (Blaine.)

3. After the Emetic Powder No. 1 (which should be repeated every 3rd or
4th day) give the _Cough Ball_ No. 2, from 1/2 dr. to 2 dr. in weight. And
if the dog lose flesh, give equal parts of the cough ball and the Tonic
Ball (No. 1). In the more advanced stages give the tonic alone; or the
_astringent ball_ if diarrh[oe]a comes on. (Clater.)

4. Give a third of a paper of James's powder mixed with butter, and
afterwards warm broth or milk. In 2 hours, another third; and if this
neither vomit nor purge, give the other third at the end of 4 hours.
(Daniel.)

5. Blaine's distemper powders, which are sold in packets, with directions
for use.

6. Camphor, 3 to 5 gr.; charcoal, 10 gr.; opium, 1 gr.; aromatic
confection, q. s. to form a ball.--In the malignant stage, with
diarrh[oe]a.

7. Antimomal powder, 2 to 4 gr.; nitre, 5 to 10 gr.; digitalis, 1/4 to 2
gr. Afterwards the Tonic Pills No. 4. (Spooner.)

_Poudre Kusique_: a French nostrum. Mix 45 gr. of nitre, 45 of sulphur,
and 1 charcoal. Divide into 3 doses. Give 1 for 2 successive mornings, and
the third on the 4th morning, mixed with lard or butter, or in milk. For a
large dog a second packet (of 3 powders) may be required. (Habert.)

Another French nostrum. Hemel's Powder is of a similar kind.

8. A strong solution of salt, to the amount of 1/2 pint daily.

9. Powdered tin, sulphur, gunpowder, of each 1 oz.; lard sufficient to
form a mass. The size of a nutmeg to be given twice or thrice a week.

10. Physic Ball No. 11.

11. 1/4 oz. to 1 fl. oz. of cod-liver oil twice a day, according to size.

12. Emetics, gentle laxatives, milk diet, and from 5 to 15 gr. of chlorate
of potash twice a day. (Finlay Dun.)

WORM MEDICINES:--

1. Carbonate of iron, 1/2 oz.; AEthiops mineral, 1 dr.; gentian, 1 oz.;
ginger, 1/2 oz.; levigated glass, 1 oz.; palm oil, 9 dr.; beat well
together.--_Dose_, from 3/4 to 2 dr. (Clater.)

2. As much very finely-powdered glass as will lie on a sixpence, mixed
with butter (Blaine). Mr Youatt says from 1/2 dr. to 1 dr.; powdered
glass, with a little ginger, made into a ball with lard.

3. Aloes, sulphur, prepared hartshorn, and juice of wormwood, made into a
mass; the size of a hazel nut to be given three times a week, fasting,
wrapped in butter. (Daniel.)

4. Tin filings, or pewter filings, 1/2 dr. to 1 dr., with butter or lard.

5. Jalap, 10 to 15 gr.; calomel, 2 to 3 gr. mixed with butter; no cold
liquid should be allowed. (White.)

6. Cowhage, 1/2 dr.; iron filings, 4 dr.; conserve q. s. to form a mass,
to be divided into 4, 6, or 8 balls; one every night and morning; and
afterwards the purgative No. 4. (Blaine.)

7. Epsom salts, 1 oz.; common salt, 1 dr.; give a small or large
teaspoonful daily.

8. Give green walnut leaves boiled in milk. (Mayer.)

9. From 1/2 dr. to 2 dr., according to size. Betel nut in coarse powder,
made into a ball.

10. _For Tapeworm._--Oil of turpentine, 1/2 dr., mixed with yolk of egg;
for very large dogs, 2 scruples. Some writers prescribe larger doses (1 to
2 dr.), but these sometimes prove fatal. (Blaine.) 2 to 6 dr. of cusso
according to size.

11. _For Tapeworm._--Oil of turpentine and olive oil, of each 1/2 oz.;
mix, and give carefully; 3 or 4 hours after give 1 oz. castor oil. But see
No. 9. (White.)

12. _For Stomach Worms._--Give the emetic powder (see further back) and
afterwards a physic ball.

13. _Threadworms._--These are destroyed by an aloetic clyster.

OINTMENTS AND LOTIONS FOR THE MANGE:--

N.B.--An alterative ball should be given daily and a physic ball
occasionally. Bleeding is sometimes prescribed.

_For Scabby Mange._--Sulphur, 4 oz.; sal ammoniac, 1/2 oz.; aloes, 1 dr.;
Venice turpentine, 1/2 oz.; lard, 6 oz.; mix. After four applications,
wash well with soap and water. (Blaine.)

2. Horse turpentine and palm oil, each 1/2 lb.; train oil, 1/2 pint. Melt
together, and while cooling, stir in 3 lbs. of flowers of sulphur.
(Clater.)

3. Aloes, 2 dr.; hellebore, 1/2 oz.; sulphur, 4 oz.; lard or train oil, 6
oz. (McEwen.)

4. Sulphate of zinc, 1 dr.; snuff, 1/2 oz.; white hellebore, 1/2 oz.;
sulphur, 4 oz.; aloes, 1/4 oz.; soft soap, 6 oz. (Blaine.)

5. Charcoal powder, 2 oz.; sulphur, 4 oz.; salt of tartar, 1 dr.; Venice
turpentine, 1/2 oz.; lard, 6 oz.

6. _For Red Mange._--Add 1 oz. of strong mercurial ointment to 6 oz. of
either of the above.

7. Charcoal, 1 oz.; chalk, 1 oz.; sugar of lead, 1 dr.; white precipitate,
2 dr.; sulphur, 2 oz.; lard, 5 oz. (Blaine.)

8. _Wash for Red Mange._--Corrosive sublimate, 20 gr.; spirit of wine, 2
dr.; dissolve and add milk of sulphur, 1/2 oz.; lime-water, 1/2 pint.
Apply by means of a sponge. (Clater.)

9. _For Ulcerated Mange._--Ointment of nitrated quicksilver, 2 dr.; sugar
of lead, 20 gr.; flowers of sulphur, 1/2 oz.; lard, 1 oz.; mix. (Blaine.)

FLEAS:--

1. Rub the skin with the powdered resin and bran.

2. Let the dog sleep on deal shavings.

3. Scotch snuff steeped in gin. (Meyer.) (This requires caution.)

4. Oil of aniseed. (Finlay Dun.)

5. Persian insect powder.

=DOG-BALLS= (A. H. Boldt, Genf). Hard pills, weighing 15 grammes, of
irregular shape and unequal size, composed of aloes with 1/3 of gentian,
and covered with a brown powder containing liquorice root. (Hager.)

=DOORS.= Much annoyance is sometimes experienced from the creaking of
doors. This may be prevented by rubbing a little soap or a mixture of
tallow and black-lead on the hinges; or by applying to them with a feather
a little sweet oil once or twice a year. The trifling trouble and expense
(a penny or two a twelvemonth) will be amply repaid by their noiselessness
and greater durability. To prevent the noise of doors slamming, a small
piece of vulcanised india rubber, cork, or leather may be placed so as to
receive the shock.

=DOSE.= In medicine the quantity taken or prescribed at one time. The
doses of medicaments vary with the sex, age, temperament, constitutional
strength, habituation, and idiosyncrasies of individuals. Different
circumstances, especially of climate, exercise an important influence on
the activity of medicines. Thus, the inhabitants of England and the
northern countries of Europe bear much larger doses in their own climates
than when they remove to warmer latitudes. Warmth, indeed, appears to
promote the action of most medicaments, whilst cold acts in a contrary
way. Nor does the same rule apply to all medicines. Calomel, for instance,
is generally borne better by children than by adults; while opium affects
them more powerfully, and requires the dose to be diminished considerably
below that indicated by mere calculation or analogy with other medicines.

Prescribers ought not to forget that the action of medicines is not simply
proportioned to the amount, but that each remedy has a dose below which it
either produces no effect or one contrary to that which we desire it to
produce. Dr Paris remarks, "that powerful doses are disposed to produce
local rather than general effects;" and Dr Barlow gives it as his opinion
that "practitioners often err, especially in the treatment of chronic
maladies, from requiring an obvious effect from each dose administered."
Adult women are said to require only three fourths the full dose for men.
The following rules and tables have been framed chiefly with reference to
age; but, as Dr R. E. Griffith correctly observes, "no scheme can be
devised, founded on age alone, to which there are not many exceptions."

        I. _Formula of_ Dr YOUNG.

_For children under 12 years, the doses of most medicines must be
diminished in the proportion of the age to the age increased by 12._ Thus,
at 2 years, the dose will be 1-7th of that for an adult.

            2
  for  ------------- = 1-7th.
          2 + 12

        II. _Posological Table of_ GAUBIUS.

For an adult, suppose the dose to be 1, or 1 drachm (60 grains).

  Under 1 year will require  1/12 or 5 grains.
     "  2 years  "            1/8 or 8 grains.
     "  3  "     "            1/6 or 10 grains.
     "  4  "     "            1/4 or 15 grains.
     "  7  "     "            1/3 or 1 scruple.
     " 14  "     "            1/2 or 1/2 drachm.
     " 20  "     "            2/3 or 2 scruples.
     " 21 to 60, the full dose, or 1 or 1 drachm.
  Above this age an inverse gradation must be
  observed.

        III. _Posological Table of_ PHOEBUS.

  Age--_Years_ 80   65   50  25-40 20   16   12   8    5    2
       _Doses_ 5/8  3/4  7/8   1   7/8  3/4  5/8 1/2  3/8  1/4

   "   _Months_ 12    6    2     1
       _Doses_  1/5  1/8  1/15  1/24

=DOUCHE.= [Fr.] _Syn._ DOUCHE BATH. A species of bath much employed by
hydropathists, both for the relief of local affections, and to give a
healthy stimulus to the whole system. The douche consists of a single jet
of cold water, varying in size from the thickness of a quill to that of a
man's arm; it is projected with great force, either from above, below, or
on one side, upon a particular part of the body. See BATH (Shower).

=DOUGLAS' DISINFECTING POWDER.= A mixture of sulphite of calcium, chalk,
and carbolic acid, or of sulphite and carbonate of lime.

=DOVER'S POWDERS.= See POWDER.

=DRAB DYE.= 1. (FOR COTTON.) For 40 lbs. Boil 6 lbs. of fustic; scald
2-1/2 lbs. of Lima wood and 2 lbs. of sumach. Decant into a wooden vessel,
capable of containing 100 gallons; reduce with cold water to handling
heat; enter, 6 turns; wring out; sadden with 8 ounces of copperas; 4
turns; wring out again, and give 4 ounces of bluestone.

2. (FOR SILK.) For 100 yards. Boil 4 lbs. of fustic and 6 ounces of
logwood, 2-1/2 ounces of cudbear, 1-1/4 ounce of copperas. Cool to 200 deg.
Fahr.; enter, winch 20 minutes; air out; repeat; then take a little of the
liquor out of the boiler, dissolve the copperas, reduce it to handling
heat with water, and give one or two shots through it, as the pattern
requires; one water out of the saddening; then give a warm but weak sour
to clear the colour, wash in two waters, and dry.

3. (FOR WOOL.) _Dark drab._ For 50 lbs. 7 lbs. of fustic, 8 ounces of
madder, 4 ounces of cudbear, 2 lbs. of alum, 8 ounces of tartar. Enter
between the cold and 160 deg. Fahr.; after heating up boil from 10 to 30
minutes; wash in two waters. All dark shades of this may be slightly
prepared with chrome; wash in two waters.

4. (FOR WOOL.) _Light drab._ For 56 lbs. 4 lbs. of fustic, 1-3/4 lb. of
alum, 4 ounces of madder, 4 ounces of tartar, 3-1/2 ounces of cudbear.
Work as for dark drab.

=DRACONINE.= _Syn._ DRA'CINE, RED RESIN OF DRAGON'S BLOOD. A peculiar
vegetable principle discovered by M. Melandre in dragon's blood.

_Prep._ Dragon's blood is dissolved in alcohol, the solution filtered,
concentrated, and precipitated with cold water; the red, spongy
precipitate is well washed, neutralised with dilute sulphuric acid, again
liberated by means of an alkali, and well washed with water.

_Prop., &c._ Draconine has a fine red colour; is tasteless, inodorous, and
flexible; it fuses at 131 deg. Fahr. The smallest quantity of carbonate of
lime in filtering paper may be detected by sulphate of draconine, the
yellow colour instantly turning red.

="DRAGEES AU LACTATE DE FER."= (Gelis & Conte.) 100 grammes of lactate of
iron made into 2,000 very small pills with powder and mucilage of
marshmallow, and coated with eleosaccharate of anise. (Reveil.)

=DRAGEES DE COPAHU DE FORTIN.= 30 grammes balsam of copaiba made into 72
dragees, with 1.2 grammes calcined magnesia, and coated first with gum
arabic and then with sugar. (Reveil.)

=DRAGEES DE CUBEBE AU COPAHU.= Cubebines (Labelonye). 2 parts balsam of
copaiba, 2 parts extract of cubebs, 1 part yolk of egg, with sufficient
liquorice powder to make a mass, which is divided into oblong pills, each
weighing 7 decigrammes. These are dried and coated with white or raw
sugar. (Hager.)

=DRAGEES DE POUGUES.= (Garnier.) Chloride of calcium, 50 parts; chloride
of magnesium, 50 parts; chloride of iron, 10 parts; dissolved in water and
precipitated with sodium carbonate. The precipitate is washed, pressed,
and mixed with 100 parts bicarbonate of soda. Of this mixture 25 parts are
made into a mass with 475 parts of a paste of sugar, peppermint, oil, and
mucilage. The mass is then divided into dragees weighing 5 decigrammes,
which are coated with gum and sugar. (Reveil.)

=DRAGON'S BLOOD.= _Syn._ SANGUIS DRACONIS, L. A rich red-coloured resin,
obtained from various species of the genus _Calamus_. Its colour, in the
lump, is a dark brownish-red; in powder, bright red. It is friable, breaks
with a shining fracture, and has a sp. gr. not higher than 1.196 or 1.197.
When pure, it readily dissolves in alcohol, ether, and oils, yielding rich
red, transparent solutions. Adulterated and factitious dragon's blood is
only partly soluble, and lacks the rich colour of the genuine article.
Dragon's blood is chiefly used to tinge varnishes and lacquers.

=Dragon's Blood, Factitious.= _Prep._ 1. Shell-lac, 4 lbs.; melt, remove
from the fire, and add, Canada balsam, 6 oz., and gum benzoin, 2 oz.;
mix well, stir in red sanders wood, 1-1/2 lb., and Venetian red, 3/4 lb.
(both in fine powder); and form the mass into sticks.

2. As the last, omitting the red Venetian.

=DRAINS.= The salubrity of a dwelling-house is largely dependent upon the
sound condition, the unimpeded outlet from, and the proper construction
and position of, its drains, supplemented by like conditions in the
various house-pipes which run from the sinks and closets into them.

The sense in which we shall use the term "drain" is that defined by the
Public Health Act of 1875:--"'Drain' means any drain of, and used for the
drainage of one building only, or premises within the same curtilage, and
made merely for the purpose of communicating therefrom with a cesspool or
other like receptacle for drainage, or with a sewer into which the
drainage of two or more buildings or premises occupied by different
persons is conveyed."

There can be no doubt that the almost universal system pursued with regard
to house drainage is radically irrational and dangerous. As the drains
lead into the main sewer or cesspool it is most important that the
house-pipes which communicate with the drains should be so connected with
them and arranged, as to remove all risk of the foul air of the sewers
passing into them through the drains, and thus (should the pipes be
imperfect) escaping into and defiling the atmosphere of the house--a very
possible contingency for two reasons, first, because the traps connecting
the pipes with the drains may be defective, and, second, because the
aspiratory power of the warm house is constantly tending to draw air (the
sewer air) through the water in the water trap. Instead of making the
connection, as is now so universally done, between the sink and closet and
other pipes and the drain, by means of a water trap, _underneath the
basement_, this junction should be effected _outside the house_. The
drains should, therefore, always terminate outside, and not under the
house; and wherever practicable all house-pipes should be carried outside,
and not inside, or between the walls of any dwelling, the objections to
which have been already stated. In cases, however, in which this
arrangement is impossible of execution, and a pipe can only be carried
through the house from the front to the rear, it is far better to take it
above the basement than underneath.

The interposition of the water in the trap at the point of union between
the house-pipe and the drain is not alone sufficient to effect the
necessary amount of disconnection between them. There must be thorough
ventilation and communication with the outer air at the point of junction,
otherwise there is danger that the emanations from the sewer may find
their way into the house, as in the former case.

A great number of methods have been devised for disconnecting the
house-pipes and the outside drains, the simplest of which consists in
placing the trap just outside the house, in opening the drain on the side
of the trap the furthest from the house, and in carrying up from it a
four-inch pipe to as great a height as is convenient. By this means any
noxious gas that might escape from the drain is diverted from the house,
and ascends into and diffuses into the superincumbent atmosphere.

In the arrangement of the house-pipes it is desirable not to carry the
pipes which convey away the sink water and the waste water into the
closet-soil pipes, but, wherever it can be managed, to let them discharge
over a grating into the drain trap. Where we have to deal with soil or
water-closet pipes, or with a pipe formed by the junction of these with
the waste-water pipe (if such an arrangement is unavoidable), it is most
important that there should be complete disconnection between the pipe and
the drain by means of one of the many ventilating contrivances so well
known to sanitary engineers.

The best material for the manufacture of drain pipes is hard, well-burnt,
smooth, and glazed earthenware; bricks and porous earthenware are
particularly ill adapted for the purpose; so also are iron pipes, unless
they are thoroughly cemented inside.

In the laying of drain pipes care should be taken to place them on
concrete, in loose soils, and on well-worked puddled clay, in the case of
clay soils. When they are laid in very loose soils it is sometimes
necessary, besides employing concrete, to additionally use even piling for
the depth of a foot. Leakage and consequent soakage of the soil are sure
to take place sooner or later if the drain pipes are not laid on a good
foundation, as they are when the drains are badly and carelessly joined.

[Illustration]

Messrs Brooke, of Huddersfield, have invented a combined drain and subsoil
pipe, the latter, on which the drain pipe rests, being perforated, carries
off the subsoil water. This contrivance is adapted for wet soils.

When junction pipes are required for uniting the drain pipes those known
as "oblique junctions" only should be used. The junctions known as "square
junctions" should be avoided, as they are always sure to become blocked
up.

With respect to the fall of drain pipes Dr Parkes says, "one in
forty-eight is frequently given, or three quarters of an inch in every
yard; a fall of one in sixty-five in drains of six inches diameter, and
one in eighty-seven in drains of eight inches diameter, will give a
velocity of 220 feet per minute.

In order that drain pipes may be properly cleaned it is desirable to have
them so made that they can be opened at intervals by means of lids or
caps. The following cuts represent a few of the many kinds of pipes
adapted for this purpose.

[Illustration]

In addition to this method of cleansing them, drain pipes should be
regularly flushed out at least once a month. House pipes are usually
cleaned out by means of a flexible bamboo, or by jointed rods fitted with
screws and rollers, which serve to loosen sediment. A frequent examination
of all house pipes and traps should be made, and every joint and bend of
the former well looked to. Unfortunately, however, they are so frequently
covered in, that this is impossible.

Where it can be done all skirting boards and covers under which the pipes
and traps are concealed should be removed. When, however, this cannot be
managed the following plan of examination into their condition may be
followed:--Pour water down the pipe, and observe if there be any smell; if
there be, the pipe is full of foul air, and requires ventilation; or else
the trap is defective, and the bad smell is due to sewer gas. Or, instead
of pouring down water, a lighted candle or a piece of smouldering brown
paper may be held over the entrance of the pipe, or the grating over a
trap, when the air will be driven back. If the condition of the pipe be
tested by throwing water down it, it should be noticed whether the water
runs away at once or whether it is checked in its progress. This is all
that, under the circumstances, can be done inside the house; but though an
examination of the pipe is precluded inside, it may be possible to remove
the earth on the outside, and so to get down to and open the drain with
which the pipe communicates. Under these circumstances water mixed with
lime should be poured down the house pipe; if the milky-looking water is
long in making its appearance, and runs only in driblets, the drain
requires flushing; if the milky-looking water is much coloured and mixed
with dirt, then the pipes and trap are foul, or there is a sinking or
depression in some part of the drain where the water is lodging.

Afterwards a pailful of lime and water should be poured down the pipe,
which should be afterwards flushed by pouring water down it until the
water flows off nearly clear.

Referring to the construction and position of the pipes which carry off
the waste water, soil, &c., from our houses into the drains, Dr Parkes
writes--"Builders are always anxious to conceal tubes, and thus carry them
inside the walls, or in the case of hollow walls, between the two. The
consequence is that any escape of air must be into the house. I have known
a case in which the leakage of a closet pipe carried down in a hollow wall
constantly contaminated the air of a house. It would be infinitely better
to run the pipes at once through the wall to the outside. Few persons have
any idea of the carelessness of plumbers' work--of the bad junctions, and
of the rapidity with which pipes get out of order and decay. When a leaden
pipe carrying water is led into a water-closet discharge pipe, it is
frequently simply puttied in, and very soon the dried putty breaks away,
and there is a complete leakage of gas into the house. Even if well joined
the lead pipe will, it is said, contract and expand, and thus openings are
at last formed. Dr Fergus, of Glasgow, has directed particular attention
to this in the case of lead closet pipes, which become easily perforated,
and which have only a limited duration of wear." See TRAPS, SEWERS.

=DRAUGHT.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS, L. A single dose of liquid medicine, usually
dispensed in one-and-a-half-ounce or two-ounce phials. Draughts are almost
exclusively extemporaneous compounds, and differ from 'mixtures' only in
containing one dose; whereas mixtures contain several. The latter have now
very generally superseded draughts among all but the higher classes, when
the dose is to be frequently repeated. Draughts possess the advantages of
extreme convenience, and, from only one phial being opened at a time, of
preserving the preparation better than when it is exposed to the air by
the frequent removal of the cork. They are usually taken from a
wine-glass, which they about 2/3rds fill.

In the preparation of draughts the same precautions are observed as are
pointed out under MIXTURE; regard being had to the increased volume of
the dose. The ingredients of a six-ounce mixture, for example, containing
(say) 12 doses, may be equally distributed among a dozen draught phials,
after which each may be filled up with distilled water, or any other
simple vehicle. In most cases a little syrup may be advantageously added.
In many instances no addition will be required, the doses of each form of
preparation being the same.

The following are useful formulae, which will serve as examples for others
of the class. The number might be easily multiplied, and, indeed, might be
extended so as to include 3/4ths of the whole materia medica; but such a
plan would lead to useless repetitions, and occupy much space. See
MIXTURE, PRESCRIBING, &c.

=Draught, Abernethy's.= See ABERNETHY MEDICINES and MIXTURE.

=Draught, Ace'tate of Ammo''nia.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS AMMONIAE ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (St. B. Hosp.) Solution of acetate of ammonia, 4 fl. dr.; water
to make 1-1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Dr Paris.) Camphor mixture, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; liquor of acetate of
ammonia, 4 fl. dr.; antimonial wine, 20 drops; mix. As a refrigerant and
diaphoretic in febrile affections; taken late in the evening.

=Draught, Ac'etate of Potas'sa.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS POTASSAE ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ (Mid. Hosp.) Acetate of potassa, 30 gr.; bicarbonate of potassa,
20 gr.; peppermint water, 1 fl. oz. Diuretic, antacid, and laxative.

=Draught, Ammoni'acal.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS AMMONIACALIS, H. AMMONIAE, L.
_Prep._ (Brande.) Liquor of ammonia, 20 to 30 drops; compound tincture of
cardamoms and tincture of gentian, of each 1/2 fl. dr.; campho-mixture,
1-1/2 fl. oz. An aromatic absorbent and stomachic; in heartburn, acidity,
low spirits, &c.

=Draught, An'odyne.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANODYNUS, L. _Prep._ 1. Tincture of
opium, 15 drops; pimento water and syrup of poppies, of each 2 dr.; water,
1 fl. oz.

2. (Copland.) Nitre, 6 gr.; laudanum, 12 drops; compound spirit of ether,
1 fl. dr.; syrup of poppies, 2 fl. dr.; camphor mixture, 9 fl. dr.

3. (Ellis.) Tincture of opium, 15 to 25 drops; syrup of poppies, 2 fl.
dr.; spirit of cinnamon, 1 fl. dr.; distilled water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.

4. As the above, but substituting a like quantity of solution of either
acetate or hydrochlorate of morphia in lieu of the laudanum. All the above
are given as soothing draughts to allay pain and produce sleep, especially
the last thing at night. No. 4 is to be preferred if there are febrile
symptoms present.

=Draught, Antac'id.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTACIDUS, L. _Prep._ 1. Bicarbonate
of soda, 20 gr.; tincture of calumba, 3 fl. dr.; tincture of hops, 1 fl.
dr.; syrup of orange peel, 2 fl. dr.; water, 6 fl. dr. To improve the
appetite in heartburn and dyspepsia; taken 1 hour before a meal.

2. Liquor of ammonia, 16 drops; syrup of saffron, 2 fl. dr.; infusion of
gentian, 3 fl. dr.; water, 7 fl. dr. As the last, taken occasionally,
especially in debility, low spirits, &c.

3. (Collier.) Compound tincture of cardamoms, 1 fl. dr.; solution of
bicarbonate of magnesia (fluid magnesia), 9 fl. dr.; simple syrup, 2 fl.
dr. Twice a day; in dyspepsia, heartburn, &c., especially in gouty
patients.

4. (A. T. Thomson.) Magnesia, 1 dr.; peppermint water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.;
tincture of orange peel, 1 fl. dr. In dyspepsia, &c., with acidity or
diarrh[oe]a.

5. As No. 1, but using bicarbonate of potassa for bicarbonate of soda. In
acidity, diarrh[oe]a, &c., accompanied by great irritability of the coats
of the stomach.

6. Prepared chalk, 30 gr.; spirit of nutmeg and tincture of opium, of each
12 to 20 drops; syrup of saffron, 3 dr.; cinnamon water, 1 fl. oz. In
acidity, with extreme looseness of the bowels.

=Draught, Anti-arthrit'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTI-ARTHRITICUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Tincture of colchicum seeds (L.), 1/2 fl. dr.; syrup of orange peel, 2-1/2
fl. dr.; water, 1 fl. oz. In gout; taken over-night, followed by another
in the morning.

2. (Brande.) Wine of colchicum, 1/2 fl. dr.; carbonate of magnesia, 15
gr.; cinnamon water, 1/2 fl. oz.; water, 1 fl. oz. As the last.

3. (Sir C. Scudamore.) Magnesia, 18 gr.; Epsom salts, 1-1/2 dr.; vinegar
of colchicum, 1 fl. dr.; simple syrup, 1 fl. dr.; cinnamon water, 9 fl.
dr. As the last.

4. (Sir H. Halford's GOUT PREVENTIVE.) Compound infusion of gentian, 1-1/2
fl. oz.; tincture of rhubarb, 1 fl. dr.; bicarbonate of potassa, 15 gr.

=Draught, Anti-asthmat'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTI-ASTHMATICUS, L. _Prep._
Vinegar of squills, 1/2 fl. dr.; ipecacuanha wine, 15 drops; cinnamon
water, 1-1/2 fl. oz. Expectorant. One to be taken three times daily during
the attack.

=Draught, Anti-emet'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTI-EMETICUS, L. _Prep._ 1. Juice
of 1 lemon; liquor opii sedativus, 10 drops (or laudanum, 15 drops);
ether, 20 drops; simple syrup, 2 dr.; water, q. s.

2. (HAUSTUS ANTI-EMETICUS RIVERII,--P. C.) Bicarbonate of potassa, 30 gr.;
lemon juice, 4 dr.; syrup of lemon, 1 oz.; water, 3 oz.; mix quickly, and
tie down the cork. To check nausea and vomiting. This is best given
effervescing.

=Draught, Anti-hyster'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTI-HYSTERICUS, L. _Prep._
Cyanide of potassium, 1 gr.; lettuce water (distilled), 2 fl. oz.; syrup
of orange flowers, 1-1/2 oz.; water, 5-1/2 fl. oz.; for 6 draughts. One
to be taken when the fit is expected, and a second in half an hour. Should
the fit come on, the dose may be repeated at intervals of about 15 minutes
until 3 or 4 have been altogether administered. The symptoms, however
intense, are generally either at once arrested, or greatly alleviated by
this treatment.

=Draught, Antilith'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTI-LITHICUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Venables.) Borax, 8 gr.; bicarbonate of soda, 10 gr.; aerated water, 8
fl. oz. For a draught; in red gravel.

2. (Dr Paris.) Carbonate of soda, 12 gr.; tincture of calumba, 1 fl. dr.;
infusion of quassia, 1 fl. oz.; water, 3 fl. dr. In dyspepsia and gravel,
attended with the lithic-acid diathesis.

=Draught, Anti-neural'gic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTI-NEURALGICUS, H. NARCOTINAE,
L. _Prep._ (Jeston.) Narcotine, 2 gr.; diluted sulphuric acid, 20 drops;
infusion of roses, 1-1/2 fl. oz. One every 2 hours in the intermissions of
neuralgia.

=Draught, Antisep'tic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTISEPTICUS, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Collier.) Decoction of yellow bark, 1 fl. oz.; tincture of opium, 5 drops;
spirit of pimento and water, of each 2 fl. dr. In putrid fevers, gangrene,
&c.

=Draught, Antispasmod'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ANTISPASMODICUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Dr Collier.) Tincture of castor, 1 fl. dr.; sulphuric ether, 10 drops;
peppermint water, 11 fl. dr.; mix. In hysteria, and that species of
irregular muscular action dependent on debility.

2. (Dr Gregory.) Fetid spirit of ammonia, 1/2 to 1 fl. dr.; camphor
mixture, 10 fl. dr.; syrup of saffron, 1 fl. dr. In cases complicated with
low spirits, debility, &c.

3. (A. T. Thomson.) Musk mixture, 14 fl. dr.; liquor of ammonia, 16 drops;
tincture of castor, 1 fl. dr.; syrup of poppies, 1/2 fl. dr.; mix. Three
or four times daily, in hysteria and convulsive affections, after the
bowels have been well cleared by some aperient.

4. (A. T. Thomson.) Oil of aniseed, 10 drops; magnesia, 20 gr.; tincture
of senna, 2 fl. dr.; peppermint water, 10 fl. dr.; mix. In flatulence and
spasms of the stomach.

=Draught, Ape''rient.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS APERIENS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Paris.)
Infusion of senna, 1 fl. oz.; tincture of senna, tincture of jalap, and
syrup of senna, of each 1 fl. dr.; tartrate of potassa, 1 dr.; mix.

2. (Ryan.) Epsom salts, 4 dr.; tincture of senna, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; syrup of
ginger, 1 fl. dr.; spirit of sal-volatile, 20 drops; infusion of senna,
1-1/2 fl. oz.

3. (Thomson.) Tartrate of potassa, 3 dr.; tincture of senna and syrup of
saffron, of each 1 dr.; infusion of senna, 1-1/2 oz. The above are good
aperients, and in their composition and action resemble the ordinary
"black draught."

4. (EFFERVESCING A. D.)--_a._ (Dr Barker.) Bisulphate of potassa, 73 grs.;
carbonate of soda, 72 gr.; water, q. s.; dissolve the two in separate
glasses, mix the solutions, and drink whilst effervescing, in the same way
as soda water.

_b._ (W. Cooley.) Bicarbonate of soda, 1 dr.; potassio-tartrate of soda, 2
drs.; dissolve in about 1-3rd of a glassful of cold water; and pour it on
another like quantity of water, holding in solution tartaric acid, 40
grs., and syrup of orange peel, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; and drink it instantly.

_c._ (Paris.) Potassio-tartrate of soda, 2 dr.; bicarbonate of soda, 40
grs.; dissolve, and add lemon juice, 1 or 2 tablespoonfuls.

_d._ (Young.) Cream of tartar, 3 dr.; carbonate of soda, 2-1/2 dr.; throw
them into a soda-water bottle three parts filled with cold water, cork
immediately, and wire down the cork. The last three are examples of
FACTITIOUS EFFERVESCING SEIDLITZ WATER, and are good saline aperients. The
method of taking them may be varied by mixing the dry ingredients (in fine
powder) on a piece of paper, and throwing the mixture suddenly into a
tumbler 2-3rds filled with water, and drinking the liquid whilst
effervescing. See CATHARTIC D. (_below._)

=Draught, Ap'petite.= See DRAUGHT, DINNER.

=Draught, Aromat'ic.= _Syn._ AROMATIC ANTACID, DRAUGHT; HAUSTUS
AROMATICUS, L. _Prep._ 1. Aromatic confection, 1 dr.; spirit of
sal-volatile, 1/2 dr.; syrup of saffron, 2 drs.; pimento water, 9 fl. dr.
Excellent in dyspepsia, with acidity, and in diarrh[oe]a, preceded by an
aperient.

2. (H. AROM. CUM RHEO.--St. B. Hosp.) Aromatic confection, 1 dr.; infusion
of rhubarb and cinnamon water, of each, 6 fl. dr. In diarrh[oe]a and
dyspepsia, especially when there is acidity and deficiency of bile.

=Draught, Astrin''gent.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS ASTRINGENS, L. _Prep._ 1. Tannin,
3 gr.; rectified spirit, 1 fl. dr.; simple syrup, 2 fl. dr.; water, 6 fl.
dr.

2. (Dr Paris.) Chalk mixture, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; tincture of catechu, 1 fl.
dr.; laudanum, 15 drops.

3. (Thomson.) Extract of logwood, 12 gr.; tincture of catechu, 1 fl. dr.;
cinnamon water, 15 fl. dr. The above are excellent remedies in diarrh[oe]a
(preceded by a purgative), and in dysentery, &c. One may be taken after
each motion.

=Draught, Black.= See MIXTURE.

=Draught, Cam'phor.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS CAMPHORAE, L. _Prep._ (Guy's Hosp.)
Camphor, 6 gr.; rectified spirit, q. s. to powder; white sugar, 1 dr.;
mucilage, 3 dr.; water, 1-1/2 fl. oz. Anodyne and diaphoretic, &c.

=Draught, Cas'tor Oil.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS OLEI RICINI, L. _Prep._ (Guy's
Hosp.) Castor oil, 4 dr.; yelk of egg, q. s. (2 in no.); simple syrup, 1
fl. dr.; cassia or cinnamon water, 1 fl. oz. Aperient.

=Draught, Cathar'tic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS CATHARTICUS, L. The following are
given as additions to those under APERIENT D., and other heads:--_Prep._
1. (Dr Thomson.) Tartrate of potassa, 5 dr.; tincture of senna, 1 fl. dr.;
infusion of senna, 14-1/2 fl. dr.; syrup of saffron, 1/2 fl. dr.; mix. In
acute diseases, taken early in the morning.

2. (Thomson.) Epsom salts and manna, of each 2 dr.; infusion of roses, 14
fl. dr.; dilute sulphuric acid, 10 drops. In inflammatory affections, and
to check vomiting in low fevers.

3. (Thomson.) Carbonate of magnesia, 1 dr.; powdered rhubarb, 20 gr.;
peppermint water, 12 fl. dr. In dyspepsia, attended with costiveness and
acidity, taken an hour before dinner.

4. (Thomson.) Castor oil, 5 fl. dr.; powdered gum, 20 gr.; rose water, 1
fl. oz.; compound tincture of lavender, 8 drops; syrup of poppies, 1 fl.
dr. In colic and calculus. The above differ from aperient draughts simply
in their greater strength.

=Draught, Chalk.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS CRETAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Powdered gum, chalk,
and simple syrup, of each 1 dr.; aromatic water (as that of caraway,
cinnamon, nutmeg, pimento, or peppermint), 1-1/2 fl. oz.

2. CHALYBEATED C. D.; HAUSTUS CRETAE ET FERRI, L.--Paris.) Chalk mixture, 7
fl. dr.; compound mixture of iron, 3 fl. dr.; sesquicarbonate of ammonia,
5 or 6 gr. In diarrh[oe]a, particularly in that arising from debility and
anaemia.

3. (C. D. WITH RHUBARB; HAUSTUS CRETAE CUM RHEO, L.)--_a._ Chalk mixture
(see _above_), 1-1/2 fl. oz.; powdered rhubarb, 12 gr.

_b._ (Lond. Hosp.) Powder of chalk with opium, 12 gr.; rhubarb, 15 gr.;
syrup of saffron and compound tincture of cardamoms, of each 1 fl. dr.;
caraway water, 10 fl. dr. In heartburn, dyspepsia, and certain forms of
diarrh[oe]a.

=Draught, Chlo''rine.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS CHLORINII, L. _Prep._ (Copland.)
Chlorine water, 1/2 fl. dr.; water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; mix, and add of syrup
of poppies, 1/2 fl. dr. One every 6 hours; in the worst form of typhus
fever, and other putrid diseases, &c.

=Draught, Cit'rate of Ammo''nia.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS AMMONIAE CITRATIS, H. A.
SESQUICARBONATIS EFFERVESCENS, L. _Prep._ (Guy's Hosp.) Sesquicarbonate of
ammonia, 20 gr.; water, 1 fl. oz.; dissolve, and add of lemon juice, 1/2
fl. oz. An agreeable, cooling, saline draught in febrile cases.

=Draught, Cit'rate of Potas'sa.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS POTASSAE CITRATIS, L.
_Prep._ From carbonate of potassa, 24 gr. (or bicarbonate, 29 gr.); water,
1 fl. oz.; dissolve, and add of lemon juice, 5 fl. dr. As the last. 20 gr.
of citric acid may be used instead of the lemon juice.

=Draught, Col'chicum.= See DRAUGHT ANTI-ARTHRITIC.

=Draught, Copai'ba.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS COPAIBAE, L. _Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.)
Balsam of copaiba, 1/2 fl. dr.; mucilage (thick), 4 fl. dr.; pimento
water, 3 fl. dr.; water, 5 fl. dr. In gonorrh[oe]a, &c.

=Draught, Cough.= See MIXTURE.

=Draught, Diaphoret'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS DIAPHORETICUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Collier.) Infusion of serpentary, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; tincture of serpentary,
1 fl. dr. Tonic and diaphoretic.

2. (Thomson.) Sesquicarbonate of potassa, 20 gr.; fresh lemon juice, 4 fl.
dr.; tartrate of antimony, 1/6 gr.; water, 11 fl. dr.; syrup of poppies, 1
fl. dr. Antifebrile and diaphoretic.

3. (Thomson.) Liquor of acetate of ammonia, 6 fl. dr.; camphor mixture, 10
fl. dr.; nitrate of potassa, 10 gr.; syrup of tolu, 1/2 fl. oz. Anodyne
and diaphoretic. All the above are used in inflammatory affections.

=Draught, Din'ner.= _Syn._ APPETITE DRAUGHT; HAUSTUS DICTUS ANTE CIBUM.
_Prep._ 1. Tinctures of cascarilla, hops, and rhubarb, of each 1 fl. dr.;
spirit of sal-volatile, 1/2 fl. dr.; tincture of capsicum, 20 drops; syrup
of orange peel, 2 dr.; water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.

2. Compound tincture of gentian, 1/2 fl. oz.; sal-volatile, 1/2 a
teaspoonful; cinnamon water, 1 fl. oz.; compound tincture of cardamoms, 1
teaspoonful. Either of the above to be taken an hour before a meal.

=Draught, Diuret'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS DIURETICUS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Collier.)
Tincture of jalap, 2 fl. dr.; vinegar of squills, 1 fl. dr.; peppermint
water, 10 fl. dr.; mix.

2. (Copland.) Acetate of potassa, 1/2 dr.; infusion of quassia and
cinnamon water, of each 6 fl. dr.; vinegar of squills and sweet spirits of
nitre, of each 1/2 fl. dr.

3. (Thomson.) Nitre, 8 gr.; tincture of digitalis, 16 drops; infusion of
roses, 13 fl. dr.; syrup of roses, 1 fl. dr.

4. (Turner.) Nitre and powdered gum, of each 15 gr.; almond mixture, 1-1/2
fl. oz. The above are used as diuretics in dropsy; the last, also in
scurvy, and in the incontinence of urine of children.

=Draught, Donovan's.= _Syn._ DRAUGHT OF HYDRIODATE OF ARSENIC AND MERCURY;
HAUSTUS HYDRIODATIS ARSENICI ET HYDRARGYRI, L. _Prep._ (Donovan.) Liquor
of hydriodate of arsenic and mercury (Donovan's), 2 fl. dr.; distilled
water, 3-1/2 fl. oz.; syrup of ginger, 1/2 fl. oz.; mix for 4 draughts.
One, night and morning; in lepra, lupus, psoriasis, and some other
obstinate cutaneous affections. It must not be allowed to touch anything
metallic.

=Draught, Efferves'cing.= _Prep._ (Lond. Hosp.) Sesquicarbonate of soda,
30 gr.; water, or peppermint water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; syrup of orange peel, 2
fl. dr.; tincture of calumba, 1/2 fl. dr.; tartaric or citric acid, 25
gr.; add the acid last, and drink whilst effervescing. Stomachic, tonic,
and anti-emetic; in acidity, dyspepsia, &c. (See _ante_.)

=Draught, Emet'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS EMETICUS, L. _Prep._ 1. Sulphate of
zinc, 15 gr. to 30 gr.; water, 9 fl. dr.; dissolve. In cases of
poisoning, and at the commencement of an attack of ague.

2. (Copland.) Ipecacuanha, 30 gr.; sesquicarbonate of ammonia, 20 gr.;
tincture of capsicum, 30 drops; oil of chamomile, 10 drops; mint water, 2
fl. oz. As a stimulant emetic in cases of poisoning by laudanum or other
narcotics.

3. (Guy's Hosp.) Antimonial wine, 2 fl. dr.; ipecacuanha wine, 6 fl. dr.;
water, 4 fl. dr. For unloading the stomach in ordinary cases.

4. (Mid. Hosp.) Tartar emetic, 1 gr.; ipecacuanha, 20 gr.; syrup, 2 fl.
dr.; water, 10 fl. dr. As the last.

5. (Dr Pickford.) Sulphate of zinc, 20 gr.; sulphate of magnesia, 4 dr.;
water, 1-3/4 oz. When it is also desired to act rapidly on the bowels.

6. (Rodier.) Sulphate of copper, 10 gr.; water, 2 fl. oz. In poisoning by
laudanum.

7. (Sprague.) Ipecacuanha, 30 gr.; sesquicarbonate of ammonia, 20 gr.;
tincture of capsicum, 1 fl. dr.; peppermint water, 3 fl. oz. In poisoning
by narcotics.

8. (A. T. Thomson.) Ipecacuanha, 20 gr,; ipecacuanha wine, 2 fl. dr.;
water, 10 fl. dr. For unloading the stomach, in ordinary cases.

9. (Trousseau.) Ipecacuanha, 8 gr.; syrup of ipecacuanha, 1 fl. oz.;
water, q. s. for 4 draughts. One every 10 minutes, until vomiting occurs.

=Draught, E'ther.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS AETHEREUS, L. _Prep._ (Neligan.)
Sulphuric ether, 1 fl. dr.; spermaceti, 3 gr.; rub together (expertly),
and add of peppermint water, 10 fl. dr. An excellent stimulant and
antispasmodic, febrile symptoms being absent.

=Draught, Expec'torant.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS EXPECTORANS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Collier.) Mixtures of ammoniacum and almonds, of each 6 fl. dr.; tincture
of squills, 12 drops. In hoarseness, chronic coughs, &c.

=Draught, Hen'bane.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS HYOSCYAMI, L. _Prep._ 1. Tincture of
henbane, 30 to 60 drops; syrup of saffron, 1 fl. dr.; water, 10 fl. dr.
Anodyne and soporific. Used to allay nervous excitement, and induce sleep,
when laudanum is inadmissible.

2. (HENBANE AND SQUILLS D.; HAUSTUS HYOSCYAMI CUM SCILLA, L.--Dr Bree.)
Extract of henbane, 3 gr.; tincture of squills, 10 drops; dilute nitric
acid, 6 drops; water, 1-1/2 fl. oz. Anodyne and expectorant; in asthmas,
chronic coughs, &c.

=Draught, Hydrocyan'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS HYDROCYANICUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Donovan.) Cyanide of potassium, 1 gr.; syrup of lemons, 1/2 fl. oz.;
distilled water, 7-1/2 fl. oz. For 8 draughts. One for a dose.

2. (Dr S. Dickson.) Medicinal Hydrocyanic acid (L.), 15 drops; liquor of
ammonia, 20 drops; syrup of orange flowers (or simple syrup), 3 fl. dr.;
water, 8-1/2 fl. oz.; mix, and divide into 6 draughts. One--2 or 3 times a
day; in gastrodynia, and all those nameless nervous and hysterical
affections arising from excessive irritability, mental anxiety, &c. In a
case that came under our notice, in which life was an absolute burden to
the patient, relief was afforded by the first draught, and 4 or 5 effected
a comparative cure, although almost every other remedy had been tried in
vain.

=Draught, Laennec's.= _Syn._ LAENNEC'S CONTRA-STIMULANT DRAUGHT; HAUSTUS
CONTRASTIMULANS, L. _Prep._ From tartar emetic, 2 grs.; syrup of poppies,
2 fl. drs.; orange-flower water, 1-1/2 fl. oz. Every two hours in
pneumonia, &c.

=Draught, Lax'ative.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS LAXANS, L. _Prep._ 1. See DRAUGHTS,
APERIENT.

2. (Dr Copeland.) Infusion of senna and compound infusion of gentian, of
each 6 fl. dr.; sulphate of potassa, 20 to 30 gr.; extract of taraxacum,
30 to 40 gr.; compound tincture of cardamoms, 1-1/2 fl. dr. Aperient,
stomachic, and alterative.

=Draught, Mor'phia.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS MORPHIAE, L. _Prep._ (Brera.) Morphia,
1/4 gr.; syrup of poppies, 1 fl. dr.; water, 11 fl. dr. Two or three drops
of acetic acid may be advantageously added. At bed-time, as a soporific.

=Draught, Narcot'ic.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS NARCOTICUS, H. OPIATUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(St. B. Hosp.) Laudanum, 12 to 20 drops; syrup of red poppies, 1 fl. dr.;
pimento water, 3 fl. dr; water, 1 fl. oz. To induce sleep in slight cases,
when fever is absent.

2. (A. T. Thomson.) Camphor mixture, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; laudanum, 35 drops;
sulphuric ether and syrup of saffron, of each 1 fl. dr. In intermittent
headache.

3. (Thomson.) Carbonate of ammonia, 15 gr.; fresh lemon juice, 1/2 fl.
oz.; water, 1 fl. oz.; spirit of nutmeg, 1 fl. dr.; syrup of orange peel,
1/2 fl. dr.; tincture of hemlock, 10 drops. In diseases of increased
irritability.

4. (Thomson.) Carbonate of potassa, 20 gr.; fresh lemon juice, 1/2 fl.
oz.; peppermint water, 1 fl. oz.; laudanum, 25 drops; syrup of tolu, 1/2
fl. dr. To procure sleep in the majority of diseases. (See _above_.)

=Draught, Nux Vom'ica.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS NUCIS VOMICAE, L. _Prep._ (Dr Joy.)
Nux vomica (in fine powder), 3 gr.; powdered gum, 2 dr; compound tincture
of cardamoms, 1 fl. dr.; cinnamon water, 10 fl. dr. Diuretic, narcotic,
stimulant, and tonic; in paralysis, impotence, debility, &c.,
unaccompanied by inflammation of the nervous centres. See STRYCHNINE.

=Draught, Refri''gerant.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS REFRIGERANS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Carbonate of potassa, 20 grs.; syrup of orange peel, 1 fl. dr.; spirit of
nutmeg, 1/2 fl. dr.; water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Thomson.) Nitre, 12 gr.; almond mixture, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; syrup of tolu,
1 fl. oz.

3. (Collier.) Carbonate of potassa, 20 gr.; antimonial wine, 20 drops;
syrup of orange peel, 1 fl. dr.; tincture of orange peel, 1/2 fl. dr.;
water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; mix, and add a large table-spoonful of lemon juice.
In inflammatory diseases, &c.

=Draught, Saline'.= See DRAUGHT, EFFERVESCING, &c.

=Draught, Stomach'ic.= See DRAUGHT, DINNER, &c.

=Draught, Ton'ic.= _Syn._ STRENGTHENING DRAUGHT; HAUSTUS TONICUS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Collier.) Disulphate of quinine, 2 gr.; tincture of orange
peel, 1 fl. dr.; diluted sulphuric acid, 5 drops; laudanum, 10 drops;
infusion of cascarilla, 1-1/2 fl, oz. In pyrosis, &c., 1 hour before
dinner.

2. (A. T. Thomson.) Infusion of yellow bark, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; compound
tincture of cinchona, 1 fl. dr.; powdered cinchona, 40 gr.; syrup of
orange peel, 1 fl. dr. In intermittents and acute rheumatisms.

3. (Thomson.) Infusion of cascarilla, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; tincture of
cascarilla and ginger, of each 1 fl. dr. In dyspepsia, arising from
intemperance.

4. (Walton.) Infusion of cascarilla, 9 fl. dr.; tinctures of rhubarb and
ginger, of each 1 fl. dr.; syrup of saffron, 1/2 fl. dr.; ammonio-citrate
of iron, 6 gr.; tincture of capsicum, 5 drops. In anaemia, and debility
accompanied by paleness and relaxation.

=Draught, Ver'mifuge.= _Syn._ HAUSTUS VERMIFUGUS, H. ANTHELMINTHICUS, L.
_Prep._ (M. Levacher.) Castor oil, 4 dr.; oil of turpentine, 2 dr.; mint
water, 2 fl. oz.; syrup, 1 fl. oz.; powdered gum, 2 dr.; for an emulsion.
In tapeworm.

=DRAW'INGS.= Chalk and pencil drawings may be fixed so as not to suffer
from slight abrasion, by washing them with skimmed milk, or with water
holding in solution a little isinglass or gum. When the first is used,
great care must be taken to deprive it of the whole of the cream, as the
latter substance would cause the drawing to look streaky. An easy way of
applying these fluids is to pour them into a shallow vessel, and to lay
the drawing flat upon the surface of the liquid; after which it should be
gently removed and placed on white blotting paper, in an inclined
position, to drain and dry.

=DRENCHES.= _Syn._ DRINKS. In _veterinary practice_, these terms are
applied to liquid medicines or mixtures which are administered to horses
and neat cattle, and chiefly to the latter. A drench for a HORSE should
not be less than half a pint, nor more than a quart; about a pint is,
perhaps, the best quantity; that for a COW or OX should measure about a
quart, and not more than about 5 half pints. See VETERINARY MEDICINE.

=DRES'SING.= In the _industrial arts_, a preparation of gum, starch, size,
&c., employed in stiffening or "finishing off" textile fabrics and paper.
In _surgery_, the term is appropriated to any application to a wound or
sore, made by means of lint, linen, or leather. SIMPLE DRESSING is simple
cerate or spermaceti cerate. Among _cooks_, the stuffing of fowls, pork,
veal, &c., is commonly called 'dressing.'

=DRIERS.= Driers are substances employed to facilitate the drying of
paints. The driers most commonly employed are sugar of lead, litharge, and
white copperas. Either of these when well ground, and mixed in small
proportion with paints, very materially hastens their drying. Indeed, some
colours will not dry without them. Red lead is also well adapted for a
drying agent, and in cases where its colour does not preclude it, is much
used. The best drier is sugar of lead. Its cost, however, is somewhat
higher than that of the other driers. It is important to bear in mind that
in the finishing coats of delicate colours driers are not generally had
recourse to, as they have a slight tendency to injure the colour. A drying
property may be imparted to linseed oil by boiling it with drying
substances; it then becomes a very useful vehicle for some purposes. See
OILS, DRYING.

=DRIFFIELD OILS.=--For the prevention of gangrene and for healing incised
and other wounds, bruises, sprains, swellings, and external inflammations.
A dusky brownish-green clear oil, consisting of olive oil, digested with
wormwood, savin, and arnica, and afterwards perfumed with a mixture of
oils of rosemary, thyme, and juniper, 1 pint (474 grammes). (Hager.)

=DRINKS (Summer).= See BEER, GINGER, LEMONADE, SHERBET, &c.

=DRINK, CORDIAL= (Dr Cherwy). A herbal lemonade to heal all chronic and
scrofulous diseases. It contains 115 grammes water, 15 grammes spirit, 2
grammes potassium iodide, 5 grammes bitter almond water, 10 grammes sugar,
and 3 grammes burnt sugar. (Hager.)

=DRIPPING TO CLARIFY.= Put the dripping into a stewpan over the fire, and
let it boil, and as it does so, skim it carefully. When it boils pour it
into a basin, in which you have previously put a little cold water. It
must stand till cold. It is then to be taken out of the water. The
dripping will now be in the form of a cake, at the bottom of which will be
found adhering little pieces of meat, skin, &c. These must be scraped off,
and the dripping will have been purified. Another method is to mix boiling
water with the dripping, to stir well, let it get cold, and then to take
it out and scrape it as above.

=DROP.= See MEASURES.

=DROPS, CHOLERA--CHOLERATROPFEN= (A. Bastler, Vienna). Oils of anise,
cajeput, and juniper berries, of each 20 parts; spirit of ether, 60 parts;
tincture of cinnamon, 120 parts; Haller's acid elixir, 5 parts.--_Dose_,
30 to 50 drops. (Wittstein.)

=DROPS (Confectionery).= These are confections of which the principal
basis is sugar. They differ from lozenges chiefly in the ingredients being
combined by the aid of heat. Occasionally they are medicated.

_Prep._ Double refined sugar is reduced to powder, and passed through a
hair sieve (not too fine), and afterwards through a gauze sieve, to take
out the fine dust, which would destroy the beauty of the drop. It is then
put into a clean pan, and moistened with any favorite aromatic, as rose or
orange-flower water, added slowly, stirring it with a paddle all the time,
from which the sugar will fall as soon as it is moist enough, without
sticking. The colouring (if any) is next added, in the liquid state, or in
very fine powder. A small, polished copper, or tinned-copper pan,
furnished with a lip, is now one half or three parts filled with the
paste, and placed over the fire, or over the hole of a stove, or
preferably on a sand bath, and the mixture stirred with a little bone or
glass spatula until it becomes liquid. As soon as it almost boils, it is
taken from the fire, and if it is too moist, a little more powdered sugar
is added, and the whole stirred, until it is of such a consistence as to
run without too much extension. A tin plate, very clean and smooth, and
very slightly oiled, being now ready, the pan is taken in the left hand,
and a bit of bright iron, copper, or silver wire, about 4 inches long, in
the right. The melted sugar is next allowed to fall regularly on the tin
plate, the wire being used to remove the drop from the lip of the pan. In
two or three hours afterwards the drops are taken off with the blade of a
knife, and are at once put into bottles or tins. On the large scale,
'confectionery drops' are moulded by a machine consisting essentially of
two metal rollers covered with hollows. A sheet of the warm and soft
composition, on being passed between the rollers, is at once converted
into a batch of symmetrical drops, the upper and lower halves being
moulded by the corresponding hollows of the upper and lower rollers. See
CANDYING, CONFECTION, ESSENCE, STAINS (Confectioner's), SUGAR PLUMS.

The following are a few of the principal confectionery drops kept in the
shops:--

=Drops, Acid'ulated.= _Syn._ ACID DROPS. _Prep._ Tartaric acid, 1/2 oz.,
dissolved in a very little water, is added to each lb. of sugar, as above;
with essence of lemon, orange, or jargonelle pear, to flavour, as desired.

=Drops, Chocolate.= _Prep._ Chocolate, 1 oz., is reduced to fine powder by
scraping, and added to powdered white sugar, 1 lb.; when the mixture is
made into drops, as above, care being taken to avoid heating it a second
time.

=Drops, Cof'fee.= _Prep._ A clarified, concentrated infusion of coffee, 1
oz., is used for each lb. of sugar.

=Drops, Fruit.= These are prepared according to the general description.
(See _above_.) The flavouring essences (volatile oils or essences of
lemon, orange, citron, raspberry, jargonelle pear, &c.) not being added
until the sugar is melted, to avoid, as much as possible, loss by
evaporation. The colouring matter may be any of the transparent 'stains'
usually employed for cakes, jellies, and confectionery. In this way are
made the majority of the first-class fruit drops and bon-bons of the
sugar-bakers. In some cases the plan is varied by adding the clarified
concentrated juice, or jelly of the fruit to the sugar. One variety of
raspberry and currant (red and black) drops are made in this way.

=Drops, Ginger.= _Prep._ From essence or tincture of ginger, as above. An
inferior kind is made in the way described under CANDY, GINGER.

=Drops, Jargonelle'.= Fruit drops flavoured with essence of jargonelle
pear (SOLUTION OF ACETATE of AMYLE).

=Drops, Lem'on.= Acidulated drops flavoured with essence of lemon. They
are usually stained with an infusion of turmeric. (See _above_.)

=Drops, Pep'permint.= From the whitest refined sugar, flavoured with
English oil of peppermint or its spirituous solution (essence of
peppermint), or with peppermint water.

=Drops, Rasp'berry.= See DROPS, FRUIT (_above._)

=Drops (Med'icated).= _Syn._ GUTTAE, L. This term is commonly applied to
compound medicines that are only taken in small doses. At the present time
they are almost exclusively confined to empirical and domestic medicine.
The plan of directing liquids to be measured by dropping is objectionable,
because the drops of different fluids vary in size, and are also further
influenced by the size of the bottle and the shape of its neck, as well as
the quantity of liquid it is poured from. See ESSENCE, and _below_.

=Drops, Acoust'ic.= _Syn._ ACOUSTIC BALSAM; GUTTAE ACOUSTICAE, BALSAMUM
ACOUSTICUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Oil of almonds, 1 oz.; laudanum and oil of
turpentine, of each 1 dr.; mix. For hardened wax, and to allay pain.

2. Tinctures of benzoin, castor, and opium, of each, 1 fl. oz.; essential
oil of assaf[oe]tida, 5 drops. As the last, and in deafness arising from
debility of the organism.

3. (Baume's.) Tinctures of ambergris, assaf[oe]tida, castor, and opium, of
each, 1 oz.; terebinthinated balsam of sulphur and oil of rue, of each, 15
drops. In atonic deafness.

4. (Bouchardat.) Compound spirit of balm, 2-1/2 dr.; oil of almonds, 5
dr.; ox-gall, 10 dr.; cresote, 10 or 20 drops. In cases complicated with
hardened wax, fetid discharges, &c.

5. (Dr Hugh Smith.) Ox-gall, 3 dr.; balsam of Peru, 1 dr. In fetid
ulcerations of the ear. One or two drops of the above are poured into the
ear; or a piece of cotton wool moistened therewith is introduced instead.
The last is the safest plan.

6. Glycerin, either alone or diluted with water. In deficiency of the
natural secretions of the ear; used in sufficient quantity to moisten the
first passages. See DEAFNESS, GLYCERIN.

=Drops, A'gue.= _Prep._ White arsenic, 1/2 gr.; hot water, 1 oz.;
dissolve.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1 teaspoonful, twice a day. See SOLUTION
(Arsenite of Potassa).

=Drops, An'odyne.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANODYNAE, L. The solutions of acetate and
hydrochlorate of morphia are commonly vended in the shops under this name.

=Drops, Ant'acid.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTACIDAE, L. _Prep._ (U. C. Hosp.) Liquor
of potassa, 3 fl. oz,; powdered myrrh, 1 oz.; triturate together until
thoroughly incorporated, add of liquor of ammonia, 1 fl. oz., mix well,
place the mixture in a stoppered bottle, and the next day decant the clear
portion. Antacid, tonic, and stomachic.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 drops, or more,
in water.

=Drops, Antihyster'ic.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTIHYSTERICAE, L. _Prep._ Cyanide of
potassium, 2 gr.; rectified spirit, 5 fl. dr.; syrup of orange flowers, 3
fl. dr.--_Dose_, 10 drops to 1/2 teaspoonful, when the attack is expected,
and repeated occasionally as required; in hysterical affections,
gastrodynia, &c.

=Drops, Antiscorbu'tic.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTISCORBUTICAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
Expressed juice of water-cress, 2 fl. oz.; salt of tartar, 1 oz.; agitate
together occasionally for a few hours, and in 2 or 3 days decant.--_Dose_,
12 or 15 drops, to a teaspoonful, twice a day, in a cupful of new milk.

2. Citrate of potassa, 4 dr.; ammonio-citrate of iron, 2 dr.; water, 10
fl. dr.--_Dose._ As the last, in water.

3. (GREEN'S ANTISCORBUTIC DROPS.) Merely a disguised solution of corrosive
sublimate. Most of the other 'antiscorbutic' and 'anti-venereal drops'
advertised by quacks have a like composition.

=Drops, Antiscrof'ulous.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTISCROFULOSAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
Iodine, 10 gr.; iodide of potassium, 1 dr.; water, 1 fl. oz.

2. (Augustin.) Chlorides of iron and barium, of each, 1/2 dr.; distilled
water, 1 fl. oz.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 drops, 2 or 3 times a day.

=Drops, Antispasmod'ic.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTISPASMODICAE, L. _Prep._ Tinctures
of castor, valerian, and assaf[oe]tida, of each, 2 dr.; tincture of
capsicum and balsam of Peru, of each, 1 dr.; camphor, 20 gr.; acetate of
morphia, 3 gr.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 drops, as required.

=Drops, Bateman's.= See DROPS, PECTORAL.

=Drops, Battley's.= See LIQUOR OPII SEDATIVUS.

=Drops, Bitter.= _Syn._ GUTTAE AMARAE, L.; GOUTTES AMERES, Fr. _Prep._ From
nux vomica (rasped), 1 lb.; liquor of potassa, 1/2 fl. oz.; bistre, 1 dr.;
compound spirit of wormwood, 32 fl. oz.; digest 10 days, express the
tincture, and filter. A most unscientific preparation; said to be tonic
and stomachic.--_Dose_, 1 to 8 drops in water or any bitter infusion. In
large doses it is poisonous.

=Drop, Black.= _Syn._ ARMSTRONG'S BLACK DROP, LANCASTER'S B. D., QUAKER'S
B. D., TOUSTALL'S B. D., BRAITHWAITE'S GENUINE B. D.; GUTTA NIGRA, L. This
celebrated preparation was originally prepared nearly a century and a half
ago by Edward Toustall, a medical practitioner in the county of Durham,
and one of the Society of Friends. The formula passing into the possession
of a relative of his (John Walton, of Shildon), was found among his
brother's papers, and, by the permission of Thomas Richardson, of Bishop's
Wearmouth, one of his executors, was handed to Dr Armstrong, who
subsequently published it in his work on typhus fever.

_Prep._ 1. (Original formula.) Opium (sliced), 1/2 lb.; good verjuice, 3
pints; nutmegs, 1-1/2 oz.; saffron, 1/2 oz.; boil them to a proper
thickness; then add, of sugar, 1/4 lb., and yeast, 2 teaspoonfuls. Set the
whole in a warm place, near the fire, for 6 or 8 weeks, then place it in
the open air until it becomes of the consistence of a syrup; lastly,
decant, filter, and bottle it up, adding a little sugar to each bottle. To
yield two pints of strained liquor.

2. (ACETUM OPII, L.--U. S.) Opium, 8 oz.; nutmeg, 1-1/2 oz. (both in
coarse powder); saffron, 1/2 oz.; distilled vinegar, 24 fl. oz.; digest on
a sand bath with a gentle heat for 48 hours, and strain; digest the
residuum with an equal quantity of distilled vinegar for 24 hours; then
put the whole into a percolator, and return the filtered liquid as it
passes until it runs clear; afterwards pour on the material, fresh
distilled vinegar until 48 fl. oz. of filtered liquor shall be obtained;
in this dissolve sugar, 12 oz., and gently evaporate the whole to 52 fl.
oz.

3. (Wholesale.) Opium, 10 oz., and distilled vinegar, 1 quart, are
digested together for about a fortnight, and after sufficient repose the
clear portion is decanted. This is the form commonly adopted by the
wholesale trade in England.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 drops. It is usually
considered to be of fully 4 times the strength of laudanum.

=Drops, Carmin'ative.= _Syn._ GUTTAE CARMINATIVAE, L. _Prep._ (Radius.) Oil
of mace, 1 dr.; nitric ether, 3 dr.--_Dose_, 6 to 10 drops on sugar; in
flatulent colic, &c.

=Drops, Cham'omile.= See ESSENCE.

=Drops, Dalby's.= See PATENT MEDICINES (Dalby's Carminative).

=Drops, Durande's.= _Syn._ GUTTAE AETHERIS TEREBINTHINATAE, L. _Prep._ (M.
Durande.) Rectified sulphuric acid, 3 parts; oil of turpentine, 1
part.--_Dose_, 20 to 30 drops, or more; in the passing of gall-stones.

=Drops, Dutch.= _Syn._ HAERLEM DROPS, TURPENTINE DROPS; BALSAMUM
TEREBINTHINAE, L. The genuine or imported 'Dutch Drops' is the residuum of
the rectification of oil of turpentine. It is also prepared by distilling
resin, and collecting the product in different portions. At first a white,
then a yellow, and lastly a red oil, comes over. The last is the balsam.
The article commonly sold under the name in this country is prepared by
one or other of the following formulae:--

1. Oil of turpentine, tincture of guaiacum, and sweet spirit of nitre, of
each 1 oz.; oils of amber and cloves, of each 15 drops.

2. Balsam of sulphur, 1 part; oil of turpentine, 5 parts. This last is the
form most generally employed. They are all regarded by those who use them
as detergent, diuretic, stimulant, and vulnerary.

=Drops, Female.= _Syn._ EMMENAGOGUE DROPS; GUTTAE EMMENAGOGAE, L. _Prep._
(Brande.) Compound tincture of aloes and tincture of valerian, of each, 2
fl. oz.; tincture of sesquichloride of iron, 1 fl. oz.--_Dose._ A
teaspoonful in water or chamomile tea; in obstructed menstruation, &c.

=Drops, Fit.= _Syn._ SOOT DROPS; TINCTURA FULIGINIS, GUTTAE F., L. _Prep._
From wood-soot, 2 oz.; sal-ammoniac, 1 oz.; salt of tartar, 1/2 lb.; soft
water, 4 lbs.; digest a week and filter. Reputed antispasmodic, and also
useful in scurvy and certain skin diseases.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful or
more, occasionally, in water.

=Drops, Golden.= _Syn._ DE LA MOTTE'S G. D.; BESTUCHEFF'S NERVOUS
TINCTURE; GUTTAE AUREAE, L.; ELIXIR D'OR, GOUTTES D'OR DU GENERAL LAMOTTE,
Fr. _Prep._ 1. (Original.) Chloride of iron (obtained by distilling iron
pyrites with twice its weight of corrosive sublimate), 3 oz.; alcohol, 7
oz,; expose the mixture in a closely stoppered bottle to the rays of the
sun until it becomes decoloured.

2. Chloride of iron, 1 part; alcohol and ether, of each, 3 parts. These
drops have the remarkable property of losing their yellow colour in the
sun, and recovering it in the shade. They are taken in gout,
hypochondriasis, and nervous complaints, in doses of from 10 to 60 drops.

=Drops, Hooping-Cough.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTI-PERTUSSICAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Dr
Graves.) Tincture of assaf[oe]tida and compound tincture of camphor, of
each 1/2 fl. oz.; compound tincture of bark, 5 fl. oz.--_Dose._ A
teaspoonful, 2 or 3 times a day.

2. (Potestates Succini.) Oil of amber, 1 oz.; carbonate (not sesquicarb.)
of ammonia, 1/2 oz.; strongest rectified spirit (alcohol), 1/2 pint;
digest 3 or 4 days, and decant the clear portion.--_Dose_, 10 drops to 1
dr., applied as a friction.

=Drops, Infantile.= Several anodyne, carminative, and absorbent
preparations, which pass by this name, will be found under MIXTURES, &c.

=Drops, Jes'uits'.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ANTIVENEREUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Gum
guaiacum, 7 oz.; balsam of Peru, 4 dr.; root of sarsaparilla, 5 oz.;
rectified spirit of wine, 1 quart; digest for 14 days.

2. (Quincy.) Copaiba, 1 oz.; gum guaiacum, 2 dr.; oil of sassafras, 1 dr.;
salt of tartar, 1/2 dr.; rectified spirit, 5 fl. oz.; digest a week.

3. (Walker's.) Copaiba, 6 oz.; gum guaiacum, 1 oz.; chio turpentine and
salt of tartar, of each, 1/2 oz.; cochineal, 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 1
quart; digest a week. See COMP. TINCTURE OF BENZOIN.

=Drops, K[oe]chlin's.= _Prep._ (Augustin.) Solution of ammonio-chloride of
copper and mercury, 1 fl. dr.; water, 10 fl. dr. In obstinate venereal
affections, scrofula, &c.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful after each meal.

=Drops, Lav'ender.= _Syn._ RED DROPS; GUTTAE LAVENDULAE, L. The same as
compound tincture of lavender.

=Drops, Life.= _Syn._ SALMON'S DROPS OF LIFE; GUTTAE VITAE, L. _Prep._
Tincture of castor, 8 fl. oz.; antimonial wine and water, of each 1 lb.;
opium, 3 oz.; saffron, 1/2 oz.; cochineal, camphor, and nutmegs, of each 2
dr.; digest for 10 days and filter. Anodyne and diaphoretic.--_Dose_, 20
to 60 drops.

=Drops, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ GUTTAE HYDRARGYRI BICHLORIDI, L. _Prep._ 1.
Bichloride of mercury, 2 gr.; hydrochloric acid, 3 drops; rectified spirit
and distilled water, of each, 1/2 fl. oz.--_Dose_, 12 to 20 drops.

2. Bichloride of mercury, 2 gr.; sal-ammoniac, 3 gr.; compound decoction
of sarsaparilla, 2 fl. oz.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful.

3. (Sir A. Cooper.) Corrosive sublimate, 1 gr.; dilute hydrochloric acid,
1/2 dr.; dissolve, and add tincture of bark, 2 fl. oz.--_Dose._ As the
last. They are all taken 2 or 3 times daily, as alteratives in scrofula,
syphilis, cancer, &c. It should not be measured in a metal spoon.

=Drops, Norris's.= An aqueous solution of tartar emetic, mixed with spirit
of wine, and coloured.

=Drops, Odontal'gic.= _Syn._ TOOTH-ACHE DROPS; GUTTAE ODONTALGICAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Dr Blake.) Alum (in fine powder), 1 dr.; sweet spirit of
nitre, 7 fl. dr.; agitate together occasionally for an hour.

2. (Dr Copland.) Powdered opium and camphor, of each 10 gr.; oils of
cloves and cajeput, of each 1 dr.; highly rectified spirit and sulphuric
ether, of each 1/2 fl. oz.

3. (Cottereau.) A saturated ethereal solution of camphor, to which a few
drops of liquor of ammonia is added.

4. (Dr R. E. Griffith.) Wine of opium, Hoffman's anodyne, and oil of
peppermint, equal parts. Used as a friction on the cheek or gum, as well
as applied to the teeth.

5. (Perry's.) A concentrated ethereal tincture of camphor and pellitory.

6. (Righini.) Creosote, 6 dr.; rectified spirit, 4 dr.; tincture of
cochineal, 2 dr.; oil of peppermint, 1/2 dr.

7. Camphor, 2 dr.; rectified spirit, 1 oz.

_Obs._ The above are applied to the tooth with a camel-hair pencil, or a
little wad of lint or cotton wool is moistened with them, and placed in or
against the tooth.

=Drops, Pectoral.= _Syn._ BATEMAN'S P. D.; GUTTAE PECTORALES, L. _Prep._ 1.
Paregoric, 10 fl. oz.; tincture of castor, 4 fl. oz.; laudanum, 1 fl.
oz.; tincture of saffron or of cochineal, 1/2 fl. oz.; oil of aniseed, 15
drops.

2. Castor, 1 oz.; oil of aniseed, 1 dr.; camphor, 5 dr.; cochineal, 1-1/2
dr.; opium, 3/4 oz.; treacle, 1 lb.; proof spirit, 1 gal.; digest for a
week.

3. (Phil. Coll. of Pharm.) Camphor, catechu, powdered opium, and red
sanders wood, of each 2 oz.; oil of aniseed, 4 fl. dr.; proof spirit, 4
old wine-gallons; digest 10 days, and filter.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, or
more, in coughs, colds, hoarseness, &c., assisted by an aperient.

=Drops, Rheumat'ic.= _Syn._ GUTTAE RHEUMATICAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Iodide of
potassium, 1 dr.; tincture of guaiacum, 2 fl. oz.; dissolve.--_Dose_, 20
to 30 drops. In both chronic and occasional rheumatism, assisted with the
copious use of lemon juice.

2. (Lampadius.) Bisulphuret of carbon and ether, of each 2 fl.
dr.--_Dose_, 6 to 12 drops, on sugar, or in milk.

3. (Wutzer.) Bisulphuret of carbon, 1 fl. dr.; alcohol, 2 fl. dr.--_Dose._
As No. 2. The last two are sudorific, alterative, resolvent, and
emmenagogue, and, besides rheumatism, have been used with advantage in
amenorrh[oe]a, in some cutaneous affections, in glandular swellings, &c.

=Drops, Rousseau's.= See WINE OF OPIUM (by Fermentation.)

=Drops, Sed'ative.= _Syn._ GUTTAE SEDATIVAE, L. The solutions of acetate and
hydrochlorate of morphia, black drop, Rousseau's drop, and Battley's
liquor opii sedativus, are frequently sold under this name by the
druggists. The anti-hysteric drops (_ante_) is also an excellent sedative.

=Drops, Spilbury's.= _Prep._ 1. (Dr Paris.) From bichloride of mercury,
gentian root, and dried orange peel, of each 2 dr.; precipitated sulphuret
of antimony and red sanders wood, of each, 1 dr.; proof spirit, 16 fl.
oz.; digest ten days and strain.

2. Levigated crocus metallorum ('crocus of antimony'), 6 dr.; corrosive
sublimate, 45 gr.; red sanders, 1/2 dr.; gentian root and dried orange
peel, of each 2 dr.; brandy (or equal parts of rect. sp. and water), 16
fl. oz.; digest as before.--_Dose_, 5 to 30 drops; as an antiscorbutic,
&c.

=Drops, Steel.= See TINCTURE OF SESQUICHLORIDE OF IRON.

=Drops, Ton'ic.= _Prep._ (Collier.) Elixir of vitriol, 2 fl. dr.; tincture
of calumba, 6 fl. dr. A teaspoonful three times daily, in a wine-glassful
of cold water.

=Drops, Torrington's.= See TINCTURE OF BENZOIN (Comp.).

=Drops, Van Swieten's.= An aromatised solution of corrosive sublimate.

=Drop, Ward's White.= _Prep._ From quicksilver, 4 oz.; nitric acid, 16 fl.
oz.; dissolve, add sesquicarbonate of ammonia, 7 oz.; evaporate and
crystallise; then dissolve the resulting salt by the heat of a sand bath,
in 4 times its weight of rose-water. Very poisonous.--_Dose_, 5 to 15
drops, as an antiscorbutic, antivenereal, &c.

=Drops, Worm.= _Syn._ GUTTAE ANTHELMINTICAE, G. VERMIFUGAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
Creosote, 1 dr.; oil of turpentine, 7 fl. dr.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, 3 or
4 times a day.

2. (Peschier.) Oil of male-fern, 3 fl. dr.; rectified oil of turpentine, 5
fl. dr. As the last; in tapeworm.

3. (Schwartz'.) Barbadoes tar, 1 fl. oz.; tincture of assaf[oe]tida, 1-1/2
fl. oz.--_Dose_, 30 to 40 drops, three times a day; in tapeworm.

=DROPS (Scouring).= _Prep._ 1. Oil of turpentine and oil of lemons, equal
parts. Both of the ingredients should have been recently distilled or
rectified.

2. Oil of lemon bottoms, 1-3/4 lb.; oil of turpentine, 1 quart; mix well,
and distil by the heat of a sand bath, until 3 pints have come over, or as
long as the distillate is clear, pale, and sweet. Used to remove paint,
grease, &c., from cloth.

=DROPSY.= _Syn._ HYDROPS, L. An unnatural collection of aqueous fluid in
any part of the body. Dropsy has received different names, according to
the part of the body affected by the disease. When it occurs in the
cellular membrane it is called ANASARCA; when in the cavity of the
abdomen, ASCITES; in the cavity of the cranium, HYDROCEPHALUS; in the
scrotum, HYDROCELE; in the uterus, HYDROMETRA; and in the chest,
HYDROTHORAX. Dropsy is mostly a symptom of extreme debility and a
broken-down constitution, and frequently follows lengthened attacks of
exhausting chronic diseases.

The treatment of dropsy, perhaps, more than any other disease, depends
upon the circumstances with which it is connected, and, more especially,
upon those which have caused it. The acute inflammatory forms of dropsy
generally require depletion. In most other cases, tonics may be
advantageously administered. To promote the absorption of the accumulated
fluids, diuretics are commonly resorted to. Confirmed dropsy (especially
HYDROCEPHALUS and HYDROTHORAX), occurring in patients either much
debilitated by previous disease or of a bad habit of body, is seldom
curable.

=DROWNING.= The cause of death from submersion in water is the entire
seclusion of air from the lungs, by which the aeration of the venous blood
is prevented. In consequence of this deprivation of air, venous blood
circulates through the arterial system, whilst the pulmonary vein ceases
to convey oxygenated blood to the heart. Under ordinary circumstances, in
the course of 4 or 5 minutes after the access of air has been cut off,
life becomes extinct. Many cases have, nevertheless, occurred of persons
being submerged for 15 or 20 minutes, and even longer, and where perfect
insensibility has existed, in which recovery has taken place.

_Prev._ The specific gravity of the human body is less than that of
water, so long as the lungs are partially filled with air; and this
difference is sufficient to keep the body floating with the mouth and
nostrils free for respiration, provided the face is turned upwards by
throwing the head back on the shoulders, by which the weight of the head
is sustained by the water. When a person throws himself into the water,
the body rises rapidly to the surface and assumes nearly the erect
position, the upper part of the head, down to a little below the eyes,
remaining above the surface of the water. This arises from the greater
density of the legs and thighs compared to that of the chest, which acts
as a species of float or buoy to the rest of the body. In this situation
the head may be thrown back, so that the face may form the exposed
portion, as before mentioned, when respiration may be carried on without
inconvenience in still water, and regularly, but sufficiently, so as to
sustain life for some time, even in a rough sea. The adoption of this
simple precaution would have saved thousands of valuable lives.

Another point which should be remembered by every person in danger of
drowning is, that there is always a considerable amount of residual air in
the lungs, in a nearly deoxidised state, and that if this air is expelled
by two or three forced inspirations, and a deep inspiration is then taken,
a larger quantity of vital air will be introduced into the lungs, and the
blood will continue aerated for a proportionally longer time; and
consequently, a longer period will elapse before another inspiration will
be required. If we prepare ourselves by taking two or three forced
inspirations, and then take a full inspiration, we may remain for 1-1/2 or
2 minutes before a second attempt at respiration need be made. This is the
plan adopted by the pearl fishers, and other divers who are remarkable for
remaining beneath the surface of the water for some time. A person in
danger of shipwreck, or expecting immediate submersion, in any other
situation, should have recourse to this expedient, which would prevent the
dreadful effects of attempting respiration whilst under water.

_Treat._ The first object is the restoration of the animal heat. For this
purpose, the wet clothes should be removed, and the body, after being well
dried, surrounded with warm air. In the absence of a warm-air bath, the
body may be laid between well-heated blankets, and bottles of hot water
applied to the feet and armpits. Gentle friction with warm flannel or the
hands should also be assiduously employed. Meanwhile attempts should be
made to excite respiration artificially; and when the apparatus is at
hand, slight shocks of electricity should be kept up at the same time. On
the appearance of returning life, such as sighing or convulsive twitching,
a vein may be opened. The throat may be tickled with the finger or a
feather, to excite vomiting, and a teaspoonful of warm water administered.
If the power of swallowing exists, a table-spoonful of warm wine or brandy
and water may be given. Even if no symptom of returning animation appear,
these means of recovery should be persisted in for three or four hours.

In the treatment of this species of asphyxia, nasal stimulants, as
ammonia, aromatic vinegar, &c., should be avoided, as well as the
injection of tobacco smoke, both of which have been found highly
prejudicial. The practice of holding the body with the head downwards,
which is sometimes adopted by the vulgar and ignorant, under the idea of
allowing the water to run out by the mouth, is still more dangerous and
absurd. The supposition that water is inhaled by drowning persons instead
of air is perfectly fallacious. The peculiar mechanism of the glottis, or
upper portion of the windpipe, is such as to prevent, by the spasmodic
closure of the epiglottis, the entrance of more than a very trifling and
accidental quantity of water, which is altogether too insignificant to
produce any very injurious effects. See ASPHYXIA.

=DRUGS.= Substances used in medicine, sold by druggists, and compounded by
apothecaries and physicians. Our continental neighbours, wiser than
ourselves, not merely require that persons engaged in selling and
dispensing drugs and pharmaceutical preparations shall be fully qualified
by previous education and training for the task, but also that the various
articles they sell and use shall be commercially pure and of the proper
quality. In the United States of America this subject has also engaged the
attention of the government and legislature. Under the Act of the 26th
June, 1848, inspectors were appointed to examine the quality of imported
articles of this class before allowing them to pass the Customs for home
use. An abridged copy of the order addressed to the "collectors and other
officers under this act" is appended, and will be useful to the reader, as
assisting to establish a standard by which the value of the substances
named therein may be estimated.

        TREASURY DEPARTMENT, _June 4th, 1853_.

    The following articles are to be entitled to entry when
    ascertained by analysis to afford the per-centages as under,
    viz.:--

    ALOES, 80% of _pure aloetic extract_.

    ASSAF[OE]TIDA, 50% of its _peculiar bitter resin_, and 3% of
    _volatile oil_.

    CINCHONA BARK,[264] 1% _of pure quinine_, or 2% of the several
    alkaloids, as _quina_, _cinchona_, _quinidine_, _aricine_, &c.

    BENZOIN, 80% of _benzoin resin_.

      Do. 12% of _benzoic acid_.

    COLOCYNTH, 12% of _colocynthine_.

    ELATERIUM, 30% of _elaterine_.

    GALBANUM, 60% of _resin_.

      Do. 10% of _gum_, and 6% _volatile oil_.

    GAMBOGE, 70% of _pure gamboge resin_, and 2% of _gum_.

    GUAIACUM, 80% of _pure guaiacum resin_.

    GUM AMMONIACUM, 70% of _resin_, and 18% of _gum_.

    JALAP,[265] 11% of _pure jalap resin_.

    MYRRH, 30% of _pure resin_, and 50% of _gum_.

    OPIUM, 9% of _pure morphia_.

    RHUBARB,[266] 40% of _soluble matter_.

    SAGAPENUM, 50% of _resin_, 30% of _gum_, and 30% of _volatile
    oil_.

    SCAMMONY, 70% of _pure scammony resin_.

    SENNA, 28% of _soluble matter_.

    Medicinal leaves, flowers, barks, roots, extracts, &c., not
    specified above, must be, when imported, in perfect condition,
    and of as recent collection and preparation as practicable.

    Pharmaceutical and chemical preparations, whether crystallised
    or otherwise, used in medicine, to be pure and of a proper
    consistence and strength, as well as of perfect manufacture,
    conformably with the standard authorities named in the Act; and
    must, in no instance, contain over 3% of excess of moisture or
    water of crystallisation.

    Essential or volatile oils, and expressed oils used in medicine
    must be pure and of the standard sp. gr. noticed and declared in
    the dispensatories named in the above Act.

    "Patent" or "Secret Medicines" are by law subject to the same
    examination as other medicinal preparations, and cannot be
    permitted to pass the Custom-house for home consumption, but
    must be rejected and condemned, unless the special examiner is
    satisfied, after due investigation, that they are fit and safe
    to be used for medical purposes.

    An appeal from the examiner to the collector to be admitted
    within 10 days.

                                              JAMES GUTHRIE,
                                _Secretary to the Treasury_.

[Footnote 264: Of whatever denomination.]

[Footnote 265: Root in powder.]

[Footnote 266: Only Turkey, East Indian, and Russian, admissible.]

=DRUM'MOND LIGHT.= See LIGHT (Artificial).

=DRUNK'ENNESS.= See ABSTINENCE, INTEMPERANCE, &c.

=DRY'ERS (Painter's).= _Prep._ 1. Litharge (best) ground to a paste with
drying-oil. For dark colours.

2. From white copperas and drying oil; as the last.

3. From sugar of lead and drying oil. The last two are for pale colours.

4. From white copperas and sugar of lead, of each 1 lb.; pure white lead,
2 lbs. For 'whites,' and opaque light colours, greys, &c.

Dryers are employed, as the name implies, to increase the drying and
hardening properties of oil paints. A little is beat up with them at the
time of mixing them with the oil and turpentine for use.

=DRY'ING.= See DESICCATION, &c.

=DRY'ING-OIL.= See OILS.

=DRY-ROT.= A peculiar disease that attacks wood, and renders it brittle
and rotten. It is generally caused by dampness and the subsequent
development of the spores of fungi, particularly those of _Merulius
lacrymans_ and _vastator_ and _Polyporus destructor_. The dry-rot
principally attacks 'ill-seasoned' timber, and more particularly that of
ships and badly ventilated buildings.

_Prev._ Various means have been proposed to prevent the attacks of dry-rot
and to arrest its progress when it has commenced, among which the process
called 'KYANIZING' (Kyan's patent) is that most generally known and most
extensively adopted. It consists in immersing the timber in a bath of
corrosive sublimate. The process termed 'PAYNIZING' (Payne's patent)
consists in first filling the pores with a solution of chloride of
calcium, under pressure, and next forcing in a solution of sulphate of
iron, by which an insoluble sulphate of lime is formed in the body of the
wood, which is thus rendered nearly as hard as stone. Wood so prepared is
now largely employed in our public works and railways. Sir W. Burnett's
process (patented in 1836) consists in impregnating the timber with a
solution of chloride of zinc. Mr J. Bethell's process (patented in 1838)
consists in thoroughly impregnating the wood with oil of tar containing
creasote and a crude solution of acetate of iron, commonly called
'pyrolignite of iron.' The impregnation is effected in a strong
cylindrical vessel, connected with a powerful air-pump, so that in the
first instance a vacuum being formed, and subsequently a pressure of
several atmospheres applied, the liquid may as much as possible be forced
into all the pores of the wood. The above processes for 'seasoning'
preserve the timber not only from dry-rot, but from the influence of the
weather and the attacks of insects and worms.

"The construction of air-drains or passages around wood-work to be
preserved is, where the method is applicable, a great aid to the
preservation of wood. Dry-rot is both prevented in new buildings and cured
in old ones by filling up the spaces between the floor-joists with
'tank-waste' from alkali works. This can also be applied to the ends of
beams resting in walls."--_Chemical News._

=DUB'BING.= _Prep._ 1. By boiling the waste cuttings of sheep-skins in
crude cod oil. 2. Black resin, 2 lb.; tallow, 1 lb.; crude cod oil or
train oil, 1 gall.; boil to a proper consistence. Used by the curriers to
dress leather, and by shoemakers and others to soften leather, and to
render boots and shoes waterproof.

=DUBOISIA MYOPOROIDES.= (Nat. order, _Solanacae_.) A small tree growing in
Australia, New Caledonia, and New Guinea. The leaves have been used in
Brisbane and Sydney as a substitute for atropine, and extract of
belladonna; to both of which Mr Tweedy believes them to be superior in
prompt and energetic action. Mr Tweedy further states that, in every case
in which he has used _duboisia_ to produce dilatation of the pupil of the
eye, its action has been beneficial, and he is induced to conclude, more
advantageous than that of atropine. According to Dr Ringer, _duboisia_,
besides causing dilatation of the pupil, quickens the pulse, parches the
tongue, stops the secretions of the skin, and induces headache and
drowsiness. He also reports that it is antagonistic in its action to
muscarine, and produces tetanus after the lapse of some hours or days.

For an account of the botanical properties of the plant, the reader is
referred to a paper by Mr E. M. Holmes in the 'Pharmaceutical Journal' for
March 9th, 1878; and to the 'Lancet' of March 2nd, 1878, for some
experiments on its physiological effects by Messrs Ringer and Tweedie. The
_Duboisia myoporoides_ was introduced into medical practice by Dr
Bancroft, of Brisbane.

Since the above has been written, Mr Gerrard has obtained a powerful
alkaloid from an extract of the leaves of the Duboisias, very similar in
chemical properties to aconite, and possessed of the same physiological
qualities as the extract.

=DUCK.= See POULTRY.

=DUCTIL'ITY= is the property of being drawn out in length without
breaking. See METALS.

=DULCAMA'RA.= See NIGHTSHADE (Woody).

=DUMB'NESS.= _Syn._ APHONIA, L. As speech is an acquired and imitative
faculty, persons who are either born deaf or become so in early infancy
are also, necessarily, dumb. The first step in treating dumbness must
therefore be directed to the removal of the deafness on which the
imperfection rests. The exertions of modern philanthropists have, however,
been so far successful in such cases as to enable the deaf-mute to
converse with those around him by signs. Those interested in the subject
may consult an admirable treatise on 'Deaf-dumbness,' by M. E.
Hubert-Valleroux, of which an excellent translation appeared in the
'Medical Circular,' vol. ii, for 1853. See DEAFNESS.

=DUMPLINGS, Norfolk.= Mix half a pound of flour with half a teaspoonful of
baking powder and a pinch of salt; make into a little dough with cold
water; fall into small balls, put them into boiling water immediately, and
boil for twenty minutes.

=DUNGER--MANURE= (Boutin, Paris). A bluish-green fluid, containing about
190 grammes of solid matter per litre. The residue consists of sulphates
of copper, iron, magnesia, and soda, sal ammoniac, nitrates of potash and
soda, common salt, and none or a mere trace of phosphoric acid. The blue
deposit which separates on standing is ultramarine. (Keller, Karmrodt, and
Nessler.)

=DUNG'ING.= _Syn._ CLEANSING. One of the principal processes in the arts
of calico printing and dyeing, its object being to free the cloth from
loose matters, which would interfere with the dyeing. After the thickened
mordants have been applied to the fabric and properly fixed, it is
necessary to remove the now useless thickening matter, together with the
excess of mordant, which has not come into actual contact with the cloth.
Formerly a bath formed of cow-dung, diffused through hot water (130 deg. to
212 deg. Fahr.) was always used to wash away these loose matters; but now
various manufactured substances are successfully employed for the purpose.
The best dung substitutes are the arsenite and arseniate of soda, the
silicate of soda, and phosphate of lime. Experience proves that, in the
case of these substitutes, a final rinse in cow-dung before dyeing is
advantageous. A process very similar to 'dunging' is employed after
dyeing, to clear and give purity to the undyed parts. This subsequent
process is distinguished by the term 'clearing.' Cow-dung has been used in
'clearing' operations, but its employment is not to be recommended. Bran
scalded and mixed with water is employed for certain goods, but bleaching
powder is the most generally used 'clearing agent.'

=DUST, ATMOSPHERIC.= When a ray of sunlight is admitted into a dark room,
or an electric beam is transmitted through a glass tube, myriads of little
motes are revealed, which move and dance about in all directions.

In ordinary daylight these minute particles are invisible. Nevertheless,
they are always more or less present in the atmosphere wherever (except
under special conditions) this permeates, and they constitute that more or
less attenuated, impalpable, generally dry, or dessicated form of matter
which we denominate dust.

As with every inspiration we take into our bodies more or less of this
suspended material, the study of the composition and characters of the
different substances which compose it is one possessed of paramount
interest, both for the pathologist and sanitarian.

Amongst solid, inorganic matters found in the open air are silica,
peroxide of iron, silicate of alumina, carbonate and phosphate of lime,
sand, carbon, chloride of sodium, and metallic iron. These, of course, are
of telluric origin, and are carried into the atmosphere by strong currents
and winds, which latter have the power of transporting dust to great
distances, _e.g._ red sand from the interior of Africa has been found in
the sails of ships 600 or 800 miles distant from the African coast, whilst
particles of carbon, sand, and dried mud, ejected to great heights from
volcanoes into the air, have been transported over still greater
distances.

Some doubt appears to prevail as to whether all dust storms originate on
the earth, it having been conjectured that some of the solid matters found
in the atmosphere may be of meteoric origin, and may have entered it from
the realms of space. The chloride of sodium (which the chemist knows is so
omnipresent that he cannot heat an ordinary platinum wire in a Bunsen
burner without indications of its presence) is derived from the spray of
the sea, lifted and diffused into the air by the wind; the iron dust from
the rails over which railway trains are constantly passing; the silica,
amongst other sources, from the traffic over macadamised thoroughfares.

The organised and organic substances contained in the external air are
very numerous. The animal kingdom is the source of the wings of moths,
butterflies, and other insects, spiders' legs and webs, hair, wool,
epithelium, and eggs, many of these bodies being mere _debris_.

The vegetable kingdom contributes spores, pollen, cells, cotton fibre, and
the germs of vibriones and monads. Besides these are many living
creatures, brought by the agency of monsoons and cyclones from extensive
deserts. Showers of sand derived from these wastes occur in different
parts of Europe. Ehrenberg submitted the sand obtained during seventy of
these showers to microscopic examination, and found, in addition to sand
and oxide of iron, numerous organic forms, amongst which 194 Polygastrica,
145 Phylolithariae, besides Polythalmia, &c. Silvestre found four species
of diatoms and living infusoria in the sand obtained from a dust shower in
Sicily in 1872. But, besides the presence of these organisms in the
external air, which may be regarded exceptional, it contains, under
ordinary conditions, numerous living creatures, some brought into it from
the earth by the force of winds, others growing in it. More than 200
forms--rhizopods, tardigrades, and Anguilulae--have been found in it by
Ehrenberg. So tenacious of life are these latter that, even if dried, they
will retain their vitality for months, and even years.

Of the organisms found in the air the following are the most
important:--1. Extremely small, round, and oval cells, which, that they
may be rightly examined by the microscope, require a power of 600 or 1000
diameters. They are found sometimes growing together and sometimes
cleaving, when they present an appearance like the figure 8. Sulphuretted
hydrogen in the air is said to stimulate their growth and carbolic acid to
check it. Although existing in the open air, they are by far more abundant
in the atmosphere of dirty prisons. They are also met with in the sweat of
the prisoners inhabiting these localities. Observers believe they increase
rapidly by cleavage. No ill effects have been traced to them.

"To the same class, perhaps, of these round and oval cells the bacteria
and monads, which have been described as gathered from the air, must be
assigned; the development of these cells into vibriones and rod-like
bacteria, though asserted, has not yet been definitely proved, and,
indeed, Burden-Sanderson's observations rather throw doubt on the
statement that true bacteria exist in the air.

"2. Spores of fungi are not infrequent in the open air; they occur most
commonly in the summer (July and August); they are not in this country
more frequent with one wind than another; the largest number found by
Maddox in ten hours was 250 spores; on some days not a spore can be found.
Maddox leaves undetermined the kind of fungus which the spores developed
under cultivation; the spores were pale or olive coloured and oval,
probably from some form of smut. Angus Smith found in water through which
the air of Manchester was drawn innumerable spores. Mr Dancer has
calculated that in a single drop of the water 250,000 fungoid spores as
well as mycelium were present; but as the water was not examined for some
time there may have been growth. Mycelium of fungus seems uncommon in the
air, but is sometimes found.

The cells of the _Protococcus pluvialis_ are not uncommon, neither,
perhaps, are those of other algae. On the whole the experiments of Maddox
show that in his locality (near Southampton) it is incorrect to speak of
the air being loaded with fungoid spores; they can be found, but are not
very numerous."[267]

[Footnote 267: Parkes.]

Amongst other suspended matters are minute fragments of dried horse
droppings, derived from the original substance, reduced to powder by the
traffic, and carried by aerial currents into the atmosphere. In the
'Chemical News' for October, 1871, Professor Tichborne gives the results
of some analyses of the street dust of Dublin. Some dust taken from the
top of a pillar 134 feet high contained 29.7 per cent. of organic matter,
whilst that collected from the street consisted of as much as 45.2 per
cent. This organic matter was principally composed of comminuted stable
manure; it was capable of acting as a ferment, and was possessed of
deoxidising powers sufficient to reduce nitrate to nitrite of potash.

This evidence of the presence of suspended known matters in the air has
led some pathologists to conjecture that certain formless substances found
in it, undeterminable by the microscope, may in reality be disease germs,
which, being transported through long distances by the wind, may also be
the means of spreading certain maladies from one locality to another. In
this manner cholera has been supposed to have been propagated from India,
the particles of the dried excreta of cholera patients being supposed to
be the carriers of the formidable disease; this hypothesis of its origin,
however, is not yet, at any rate, universally accepted. "In the case of
smallpox and scarlet fever the distance to which the 'contagions' spread
by means of the air is certainly inconsiderable."[268]

[Footnote 268: Ibid.]

Hitherto we have spoken only of the nature of the dust occurring in the
external air. The composition of that met with in confined spaces is, of
course, largely influenced by surrounding conditions and circumstances;
for instance, in indifferently ventilated apartments, in addition to the
substances already enumerated, the dust of the confined air has been found
to contain small particles of food, bits of the hair of human beings,
domestic animals, and feathers of birds, as well as of coals, cinders,
charred wood, linen, cotton, and wool fibres, varieties of epithelium, and
certain round cells resembling nuclei.

In the apartments of the sick it is additionally charged with a very large
quantity of organic matter.

The spores of the Tricophyton and Acorion have been discovered in and seem
peculiar to skin hospitals. In that taken upon two occasions from the ward
of St. Louis (the Skin Hospital of Paris), and submitted to examination,
one specimen was found additionally to contain 36 per cent. and in the
other 46 per cent. of organic matter.

"The scaly and round epithelia found in most rooms are in large quantity
in hospital wards, and probably in cases where there is much expectoration
and exposure of pus or puriform fluids to the air the quantity would be
still larger."[269]

[Footnote 269: Parkes.]

The investigation of the air of a cholera ward in 1849 by Britain and
Swayne, at Clifton, revealed the presence of bodies resembling fungi;
minute scales of variolous matter have been found by Bakewell in smallpox
wards, and cells of pus and epithelium in the sheds and stables of animals
affected with cattle disease and pleuro-pneumonia. Dr Watson detected in
the air of a ward for consumptive patients at Netley, together with pus
cells, bodies bearing a great resemblance to the cells met with in
tuberculous matter, these latter not being discoverable in the open air or
in the rooms of non-consumptive persons; whilst Rainy, examining the air
of the cholera ward at St. Thomas's Hospital, found bacteria in it,
besides fungi. The presence of these bodies was, however, detected in the
open air.

The atmosphere of mines, workshops, manufactories, and rooms in which
handicraft of any kind is carried on, is more or less laden with small
particles of substances employed in the arts, manufactures, and various
industries. The nature of these floating substances, as well as a list of
the diseases, together with the amount of mortality they produce, will be
found under the article "TRADES, CERTAIN, THEIR EFFECTS ON HEALTH."

Dr Wynter Blyth gives the following instructions for collecting
atmospheric dust for examination:--

"The most simple way to obtain the emanations from a sick room for
microscopical observation is to suspend a common water bottle from the
ceiling filled with iced water. The moisture of the air condenses, and
brings with it organic matters; or the moisture may be gathered which
adheres to panes of glass in cold weather; or a bottle may be taken
containing some distilled water, absolutely free from impurities of any
kind, and filled several times with the air of the place. The water may
then be submitted to microscopical and chemical examination.

"Metallic dust, such as iron, may be attracted by a magnet. The most usual
and successful way is, however, by _aspiration_, either by an aspirator
made for the purpose [see ASPIRATOR], or by means of an ordinary cask, by
which a considerable volume of air is drawn through a small quantity of
distilled water, glycerin, or other liquid. The indirect way for the
organic matter, &c., mentioned above, viz., analysis of the rain water,
and the obvious way of collecting the dust, by carefully sweeping it off
shelves, &c., may be also enumerated.

"_Examination of dust._ The dust obtained by any or all of these methods
should now be examined microscopically and chemically. Low powers should
be used at first, and then (if looking for germs) the highest that can be
obtained. If the dust is in any quantity it can be submitted to chemical
examination, but a knowledge of what class it belongs to--animal, mineral,
or vegetable--is sufficient for most purposes."[270]

[Footnote 270: 'Dictionary of Hygiene.']

=DUST-BIN.= A dust-bin on any premises may become a nuisance and a peril
to health if certain precautions are not observed with respect to it.

It should have a tolerably tight-fitting cover, and one that is waterproof
also, if, especially as it ought to be, the dust-bin is situated in the
open air. The bottom should never be the bare earth, but one that is
properly bricked or tiled. It should be lime-washed occasionally, in
summer time the most frequently. Only dry refuse, such as ashes and the
sweepings of rooms, &c., should be thrown into it.

On no account should fragments of vegetable or animal nature be put in,
such as fishbones, potato parings, cabbage stalks, dirty or discarded
pieces of apparel, or bits of rags or dusters. These should be at once
burnt on the kitchen fire; the best kind of stove for consuming these is
that known as the kilnhouse. Meat bones should be got disposed of as soon
as possible, as they frequently give rise to unpleasant and offensive
odours. Finally, the dust-bin should not be too large. If too capacious,
it acts as a guile for servants not to have it cleaned out as often as it
should be, the frequent removal of its contents being a most essential
condition toward the preservation of health.

=DUSTING.= This very important branch of household labour is sometimes
very inefficiently performed. Very frequently the dust of an apartment is
not removed, but merely disturbed or driven from one place to settle down
on another.

It should always as much as possible be got rid of by means of a duster or
a brush and dust-pan.

As the dust should adhere to the former, this should from time to time be
taken out into the open air and shaken. During the time a room is being
dusted the furniture should be collected in as small a space as possible,
and enveloped in the dusting-sheet. The dusting-sheet on its removal
should be carefully folded together, taken into the air and shaken. The
furniture may then be dusted and returned to the proper places.

A duster should never be rubbed over furniture standing close to a wall,
or a dirty mark on the wall-paper will be the result. The same caution
applies to mantel-pieces, where the paper may soon be spoilt by the act
of dusting, unless contact with the duster be avoided.

=DUTCH DROPS.= The dark-coloured residue left by the dry distillation of
turpentine. (Hager.)

=DUTCH GOLD.= See ALLOY.

=DUTCH LIQ'UID.= See OLEFIANT GAS.

=DYE'ING.= The act of tinging or colouring absorbent materials by
impregnating them with solutions of colouring matters or dye-stuffs. The
colouring matters which impart their tints without the intervention of
other substances are called 'substantive colours'; while those which
require such aid are called 'adjective colours.' The bodies employed to
fix and develop the latter class are called 'mordants.' The exact way in
which dye-stuffs act upon fibrous materials has not yet been investigated
as fully as it deserves; the generally received opinion is that the fibre
has a chemical affinity for the colouring matter in the case of
substantive dyes, and likewise for the mordant, which, in its turn, has an
affinity for the colouring matter of adjective dyes. Another opinion is
that the fibres have pores, which, when expanded by heat or chemical
agents, admit particles of colouring matter. However this may be, it is
certain that different materials 'take' dyes in different proportions;
thus, silk and wool take the coal-tar dyes in the most perfect manner, but
cotton requires the intervention of a most powerful mineral or animal
mordant. Wool takes the colouring matters of most dye-stuff so well that
the deepest tints can readily be produced. SILK and COTTON are dyed with
greater difficulty, whilst LINEN shows still less disposition to take
dyes. The operations which take place in dyeing are 'mordanting,'
'ageing,' 'dunging,' 'dyeing,' and 'clearing.' The first of these
operations is noticed under MORDANT. After the fabric has been mordanted,
it is generally hung up in a room through which a current of steam and air
is passing, by means of which the union between the fibre and the mordant
is quickened very considerably. This exposure to moist air is the step in
the process to which the term 'ageing' is applied. The operations of
'dunging' and 'clearing' are noticed above (see DUNGING). The 'dyeing'
proper, which follows the 'dunging,' is effected by running the fabric
through the solution of the dye-stuff, the colour being modified more or
less by the nature of the mordant used. Under the names of the different
colours the means used to dye such colours are minutely described. See
BLACK DYE, BLUE DYE, &c.

The following particulars respecting the production of the more common
colours may prove interesting to the reader, who merely requires some
general information on the subject:--

BLACK is usually produced by logwood or galls with an iron mordant. Common
black silks are dyed with logwood and fustic, iron being used as a
mordant. The best silks are dyed black on a blue ground. Woollen goods are
first dyed blue with indigo, and afterwards with sumac, logwood, and green
or blue copperas. Cotton and linen goods are dyed black in a very similar
manner.

BLUE is commonly produced from indigo, either in the form of sulphate or
in aqueous solution. Prussian blue, with a persalt of iron or tin as a
mordant, gives a very splendid dark blue. Of late several blues of novel
shades have been produced from coal-tar.

RED is obtained in various shades by using cochineal, safflower, lac-dye,
madder, or logwood, with a tin mordant.

PURPLE. Until the last few years the dyer was dependent for his purples on
orchil or cudbear, but he has now at his disposal the magnificent series
of aniline, or coal-tar, colours, ranging from the most delicate violet,
or 'mauve,' to the full crimson-purple, known as 'magenta.' See PURPLE
DYE.

YELLOW. The most important yellow dyes are made from quercitron, fustic,
turmeric, arnotto, and French and Persian berries. For further
information, see BLEACHING, CALICO-PRINTING, &c.

=DYER'S SPIRITS.= See TIN MORDANTS.

=DYES.= See DYEING, and the names of the principal colours.

=DYE-STUFFS.= The colouring materials used in dyeing are so called. The
more important of them are noticed under the respective names.

=DYNAMITE.= Nobel's dynamite consists of a mixture of 75 parts of
nitroglycerin incorporated with 25 parts of an infusorial earth known as
'kieselghur,' found at Luneburgh, and consisting of the fossil shells of
infusoria. Kieselghur is almost pure silica. Dynamite is in regular use on
the Continent for mining operations, and its manufacture and transport
appear to be subject only to reasonable precautions. If ignited in the
open air, or even when loosely packed, it burns quietly away, with the
evolution of a small quantity of nitrous acid. Although the first cost of
dynamite is four times that of gunpowder, it is said to be really only
half as expensive, since it possesses eight times the explosive power of
the latter; added to which the labour of boring blast-holes is avoided. It
also possesses the advantage of not being impaired in efficiency by damp.

When required for use the dynamite is rammed into a thick paper cartridge,
into which a fusee is passed, by means of which it is ignited. Although
dynamite when once made may be comparatively harmless until exploded at
will; that great risk is incurred in its manufacture may be inferred from
the fact that, upon two occasions the manufactory on the Continent in
which it is prepared has been twice entirely destroyed. On the occasion of
the last accident it was impossible to learn the cause of the disaster,
since every one in the building was blown to atoms.

Diralin is said to be a mixture of nitroglycerin with sawdust or wood-pulp
as used in paper-mills, the two latter substances having been previously
treated with nitric and sulphuric acids.

=DYNAMOM.= (Dr Momma Duesseldorf.) A galvano-electric curative apparatus. A
small capsule of horn, containing a disc secured to a pedicel. On the disc
a number of sharp needles are fixed. By gently moving the apparatus, and
afterwards withdrawing it, artificial pores are produced in the skin by
punctures which are not very painful. These are then to be rubbed with a
certain oil, probably containing cantharides. (Wittstein.)

=DYS'ENTERY.= _Syn._ BLOODY FLUX; DYSENTERIA, L. A disease arising from
inflammation of the mucous membrane of the large intestines, and
characterised by stools consisting chiefly of blood and mucus, or other
morbid matter, accompanied with griping of the bowels, and followed by
tenesmus. There is generally more or less fever, and the natural faeces are
either retained or discharged in small, hard balls (_scybala_). The common
causes of this disease are marsh miasma, improper diet, excessive
exhaustion, and fatigue, and, above all, exposure to the cold and damp air
of night after a hot day.

_Treat._ The common dysentery of this country generally gives way to
gentle aperients (castor oil or salts-and-manna), to cleanse the bowels,
followed by mild opiates or morphia, to allay irritation. The chronic
symptoms, which frequently hang about for some time, are best combated by
mild tonics and vegetable bitters (bark, calumba, cascarilla).
Occasionally, chalybeates (ammonia-citrate of iron, lactate of iron, wine
of iron, saccharine carbonate of iron) will be found useful during
convalescence. Throughout, the diet should be light and nutritious.

The contagious dysentery, of camps and hot climates, is a severe and often
fatal disease, in which the preceding symptoms are complicated with
remittent or typhoid fever. Its treatment is tedious and difficult, and
depends chiefly on judiciously meeting the several symptoms as they
develop themselves. Aperients, diaphoretics, and nauseants, followed by
tonics, are the remedies generally relied on. The febrile symptoms must be
treated according to their inflammatory or putrid tendency. This variety
of the disease frequently gives rise to organic diseases of the abdominal
viscera, dropsy, &c. It is regarded by some as contagious, but without
sufficient reason.

=DYSMENNORH[OE]'A.= See MENSTRUATION.

=DYSPEP'SIA.= [L.] _Syn._ DYSPEP'SY, INDIGESTION. This complaint pervades
every rank of society, and is, perhaps, of all others, the most general.
Few indeed are there who wholly escape it, in one or other of its forms.
The common symptoms of dyspepsia are--want of appetite, sudden and
transient distensions of the stomach, frequent eructations, heartburn,
stomachic pains, occasional vomiting, and, frequently, costiveness or
diarrh[oe]a. Sometimes the head is affected, and dimness of sight, double
vision, muscae volitantes, and slight vertigo, are experienced, along with
a multitude of other symptoms, depending on a derangement of the functions
of the nervous system.

The causes of dyspepsia are numerous. In the higher ranks of society it is
a common consequence of over-indulgence in the luxuries of the table, of
late hours, or of the want of proper exercise, both of body and mind. In
the studious, and those who lead a sedentary life, it is usually caused by
excessive mental exertion or anxiety, or by the fatigues of business, and
the want of sufficient bodily exertion and of pure air. In the lower
orders of society it generally results from inebriety, or a deficiency of
proper food and clothing, bad ventilation, &c.; and is not unfrequently
occasioned by the physical powers being over-taxed, especially soon after
meals.

The treatment of dyspepsia depends less on medicine than on the adoption
of regular habits of life. Moderation in eating, drinking, and the
indulgence of the passions; early rising, due exercise, and retiring to
rest at an early hour, will do much to restore the tone both of the
stomach and nerves. Excessive study and mental exertion should be avoided,
and recourse should frequently be had to society and amusements of a
lively and interesting character. If the bowels are confined, mild
aperients should be taken, and if diarrh[oe]a is present, antacids and
absorbents may be had recourse to with advantage. The stomach may be
strengthened by the use of mild bitters, tonics, and stimulants, and sea
bathing, or the shower or tepid bath, may be taken, when convenient, to
strengthen the nervous system. When dyspepsia is a secondary or
symptomatic disease, the cause should be sought out, and the treatment
varied accordingly. Among the aperient medicines most suitable to
dyspepsia may be mentioned--Epsom salts, phosphate of soda, and Seidlitz
powders, each of which should be taken largely diluted with water. An
occasional dose of the '_Abernethy Medicines_' (which _see_) has also been
recommended. Among antacids, are the bicarbonates and carbonates of
potassa and soda, either of which may be taken in doses of half a
teaspoonful dissolved in water; or, if the spirits are depressed, one or
two teaspoonfuls of spirit of sal volatile will be more appropriate; and
in cases accompanied by diarrh[oe]a, a little prepared chalk. As bitters,
the compound infusion of orange peel, or of gentian, are excellent. As
tonics, small doses of bark, or of sulphate of quinine, to which
chalybeates may be added, if there is pallor of countenance, or a low
pulse, with no disposition to fever or headache.

When dyspepsia is complicated with hysteria, hypochondriasis, or
chlorosis, the treatment noticed under those heads may be conjoined to
that above recommended. When it depends on constipation, or a deficiency
of bile, the mildest and most effective of all remedies will be found
supplied in inspissated ox-gall. "In all cases of incipient constipation,
ox-gall is a remedy of undoubted efficacy; and even in protracted cases,
when hope has almost fled--but where evidences of strangulation are not
unequivocally manifested--it should never be omitted by the practitioner.
In habitual or chronic constipation, accompanied by indigestion,
clay-coloured stools, and a feeling of oppression after food has been
taken, it acts with almost specific certainty. When, however, the liver
begins to assume its healthy action, its employment should be
discontinued, and it will then produce all the symptoms of regurgitation
of bile into the stomach. This state will be readily recognised as a
favorable omen of returning power." (Dr Allnatt.)

=DYSPN[OE]'A.= Difficulty of breathing. It is generally symptomatic of
some other affections. When it occurs in persons of a nervous or irritable
habit of body, perfect quiet, a semi-recumbent posture, fresh air, and
some small doses of ether, ammonia, or opium, will generally effect a
cure. Those of a full habit require aperients and depletion. To prevent
attacks of the kind, excess in eating and drinking, and the use of
stimulants, should be avoided.

=DYSU''RIA.= [L.] _Syn._ DYS'URY. Difficult urination. It is generally
symptomatic of disease of the kidneys, bladder, or urethra. The treatment
depends on the exciting cause.


=EAR (Inflamma'tion of).= _Syn._ OTITIS, L. This affection, when it
attacks the internal part of the ear, is generally accompanied with
confusion of sound, deafness, and more or less fever. It is most frequent
among children, and is commonly produced by exposure to draughts of cold
air, and, occasionally, by foreign matters, as cherry-stones, insects,
&c., having got into the external ear. In such cases, the removal of the
offensive matter, and due attention to warmth and cleanliness, with a dose
of laxative medicine, will be all the treatment required. The pain may
generally be relieved by throwing warm water into the ear by means of a
syringe, and fomenting the surrounding parts with decoction of poppy-heads
and chamomile flowers. Should this treatment not succeed, a drop or two of
laudanum, with one drop of oil of cloves and a little oil of almonds, may
be dropped in the ear, and a piece of cotton wool introduced afterwards.
Cases of acute inflammation of the internal ear are occasionally met with
in adults, which assume a very serious character, and demand the most
careful treatment. See DEAFNESS.

=Earache.= Pain in the ear may arise from various causes, amongst which,
in the absence of organic disease, cold, and that peculiar derangement of
health popularly called 'nervousness,' are the most common. In the one
case, the proper remedy is warmth; in the other, the attention should be
directed to the restoration of the body to the healthy standard.

=Earache, Simple Cure for.= Take a common, tobacco-pipe, place a wad of
cotton in the bowl, drop upon it 8 or 10 drops of chloroform, and cover
with another wad of cotton; place the stem to the affected ear, then blow
into the bowl, and in many cases the pain will cease almost
immediately.--_Amer. Journ._

=EARTHS.= In _chemistry_, a group of metallic oxides. The principal earths
are baryta strontia, lime, magnesia, alumina, berylla or glucina, yttria,
zirconia, and thoria. The first four are termed ALKALINE EARTHS; the
remainder, together with the oxides of the very rare metals erbium,
terbium, norium, cerium, lanthanum, and didymium, constitute the EARTHS
PROPER.

The term _earth_ was very loosely applied by the older chemical and
pharmaceutical writers, and the practice is still common among the vulgar
at the present day. Thus, ABSORBENT EARTH (chalk); ALUMINOUS E.,
ARGILLACEOUS E. (alumina); BOLAR E. (bole); BONE-E. (phosphate of lime);
FULLER'S E. (an absorbent clay); HEAVY E. (baryta); JAPAN E., or TERRA
JAPONICA (catechu); SEALED E. (bole), &c., are names even now frequently
encountered both in trade and in books.

=EARTHEN-WARE AND GLASS, to prevent the Cracking of.= When quite new, all
vessels of glass and earthenware should be laid to soak in cold water, and
after some hours, this water, covering the vessels, should be gradually
heated to the boiling point. It is a good plan to place a little hay on
the top of the water.

Glass and earthenware vessels thus treated are far less liable to crack
when subjected to the heat of boiling water than it would otherwise be.

=EARTH-NUT.= See ARACHIS HYPOG[OE]A.

=EAU.= (Fr.) Water. This word, like its English synonym, is applied to
numerous substances, differing in their composition, sensible properties,
and uses, of which the following are a few useful examples:--EAU DOUCE,
fresh or river water; EAU DE MER, sea or salt water; EAU DE FONTAINE, EAU
DE SOURCE, spring water; EAU DE PUITS, well or pump water; EAU DE RIVIERE,
river water; EAU DISTILLEE, distilled water; EAU DE ROSE, rose water; EAU
DE VIE, brandy; EAU DE COLOGNE, Cologne water; EAU D'HONGRIE, Hungary
water; EAU BENITE, holy water; EAU FORTE, aquafortis; EAU DE SAVON,
soapsuds; EAU DE SENTEUR, scented water, &c.

=Eau Athenienne.= (Hte. Bourgeois, Paris.) Pour nettoyer la tete et
enlever les pellicules--for cleaning the head and removing scurf. An
alcoholic solution of potash-soap, with some solution of potash and
aromatic oil. (Dr P. Goppelsroeder.)

=Eau Berger for Dyeing the Hair.= Two fluids for consecutive application.
No. 1 is a solution of 1.3 grammes sulphate of copper, .25 grammes nitrate
of nickel, 30 grammes distilled water, 4 grammes ammonia. No. 2 is a
solution of calcium sulphide, made by passing sulphuretted hydrogen into
milk of lime until it ceases to be absorbed, and then filtering from the
excess of lime. (W. Engelhardt.)

=Eau Capillaire Progressive, pour retablir la coleur naturelle des cheveux
et de la barbe. Formule rationelle, succes garanti.= Progressive hair-wash
for restoring the natural colour of the hair and beard. Formula rational,
success guaranteed (Dr R. Brimmeyer, chimie-pharmacien, Echternach,
Luxembourg). (Schaedler.)

=Eau d'Afrique, for dyeing the Hair Black.= Three fluids to be
consecutively applied. No. 1 is a solution of 3 parts nitrate of silver in
100 parts water. No. 2 is a solution of 8 parts sodium sulphide in 100
parts water. No. 3 is a solution of nitrate of silver like No. 1, but
perfumed. (Reveil.)

=Eau d'Atirona.= An elegant fluid cosmetic soap, by the use of which all
imperfections of the skin will be easily and painlessly removed. It
consists of 25 grammes of a spirituous tincture of cinnamon and cloves, 4
grammes soda soap, and a drop of peppermint oil. (Wittstein.)

=Eau de Bahama.= A black dye for the hair. It is a solution of sugar of
lead perfumed with oil of anise, and containing flowers of sulphur in
suspension. (Reveil.)

=Eau de Beaute, Eau de Paris sans pareille, or Eau de Princesses= (August
Renard, Paris); with a German title, "Rhuemhehst bekanntes cosmetisches
Wasser genannt Prinzessen-Wasser." The well-known and renowned cosmetic
called Princesses' Water.' To experience the brilliant effects of this
marvellous fluid we need only, after washing, habitually pass a small
sponge moistened with the fluid gently over the skin, and allow it to dry
without rubbing. By so doing our complexion will remain white, smooth,
clear, and soft, even to extreme old age. Those, however, who are troubled
with freckles, heat-spots, or any other eruption should use the water
several times a day as directed. They need suffer no longer from any
defect of the skin. Princesses' Water when shaken is a milk-white fluid
contained in an oval bottle with a long neck, which holds 125 grammes. On
standing it deposits a white precipitate. It is made from 2.5 grammes
calomel, .45 grammes corrosive sublimate (so altered by the added perfume
that the usual tests do not reveal it), and 122 grammes orange-flower
water.

=Eau de Botot.= A mouth wash. Tincture of cedar wood, 500 grammes;
tincture of myrrh and tincture of rhatany, of each 125 grammes; peppermint
oil, 5 drops. (Winkler.)

=Eau de Capille= (Kamprath & Schwartze). A hair dye. A mixture of 16
grammes glycerine, 8 grammes hyposulphite of soda, 1 gramme sugar of lead
(or an equivalent quantity of Liq. Plumbi subacet.), about 2 grammes
precipitated sulphur and 130 grammes water, perfumed with a small quantity
of eau de Cologne. (Hager.)

=Eau de Charbon, Dr Chattam's= (A. Ahnelt, Charlottenburg, the African
traveller). A prophylactic and specific against syphilis. 150 grammes of a
slightly red fluid, consisting of a watery solution of carbolic acid
coloured with aniline and perfumed with 1 drop peppermint oil and 8 drops
chloroform dissolved in 20 grammes spirit. (Hager.)

=Eau de Cythere.= A hair dye. A solution of 4 parts chloride of lead and 8
parts crystallised hyposulphite of soda in 88 parts distilled water.
(Hager.)

=Eau de Docteur Sachs.= For promoting the growth of the hair, preventing
its turning grey, for protecting the scalp from all injurious influences,
and for preserving it in a state of purity and health. A solution of
castor oil in spirit containing picrotoxin. (Dr C. Schacht.)

=Eau de Fee--Fairy Water.= A natural hair wash (Lattke, Chemiker, Kiel).
Recommended as a preparation consisting solely of harmless vegetables. It
consists mainly of a strong solution of nitrate of lead. (Himly.)

=Eau des Fees--Fairy Water.= A hair wash. A solution of 1-1/4 parts lead
sulphite in about 3 parts sodium hyposulphite, 7-3/4 parts glycerin, and
88 parts water. According to the directions for use, more than three
bottles of 120 grammes of the Fairy Water should not be used before the
hair has been treated with Eau de Poppee, and, to raise it to the highest
possible degree of beauty, with Huile regeneratrice d'Hygie. (Hager.)

=Eau de Hebe.= For freckles. To be applied with a small sponge in the
evening and washed off in the morning. Lemons, cut small, digested in a
closed flask with distilled vinegar, lavender vinegar, oil of lemon, and
rosemary, and filtered.

=Eau de Java Anticholerique= is a solution of camphor and carbolic acid in
spirit. (Casselmann.)

=Eau de la Floride.= A colourless fluid with a greenish-yellow deposit
consisting of sugar of lead, 50 parts; flowers of sulphur, 20 parts;
distilled water, 1000 parts. (F. Eymael.)

=Eau de Lechelle= may be replaced by a filtered mixture of 200 parts aqua
aromatica, 300 parts aqua dest., 10 parts acid. carbol., 10 parts ol.
thymi, 20 parts acid. tannic.

=Eau de lys de Lohse= (Lohse formerly--before the French war--Lohse,
Berlin). A cosmetic consisting of 2 grammes zinc oxide, 2 grammes
prepared talc, 4 grammes glycerin, and 200 grammes rose water. (Schaedler.)

=Eau de Mont Blanc.= A hair dye. A solution of nitrate of silver.

=Eau de Naples.= Neapolitan washing solution. A mixture of 12 parts borax,
100 parts distilled water, 50 parts rose water, 1 part camphor, 4 parts
tinct. benzoin. (W. Hildwein.)

=Eau de Quinine--Glycerin Hair Wash, with Extract of Peruvian Bark= (A.
Heinrich, Leipzig). For removing scurf and strengthening the hair. 2
grammes balsam of Peru, 6 grammes castor oil, 60 grammes rum, 35 grammes
water, 5 grammes tincture of red cinchona. (Hager.)

=Eau de Vienne.= A hair dye from Paris. Two fluids, one of which is a
solution of nitrate of silver in ammoniacal water, and the other a
solution of pyrogallic acid.

=Eau Dentifrice de Mallard.= Star anise, common anise, cinnamon, cloves,
of each, 8 parts; guaicum wood, 10 parts; brown cinchona, 6 parts; rose
leaves, 5 parts; nutmegs, 2 parts, are placed in a displacement apparatus
and percolated with 3 parts cochineal; 12-15 parts water, 1000 parts sp.
vini; sp. gr. .860. The tincture is displaced with water and 1000 parts
are mixed with 7 parts of a mixture of peppermint oil, spirit of scurvy
grass, and tinct. of benzoin, allowed to stand and filtered.

=Eau Dentifrice des Cordilleres.= An Indian recipe. 360 parts strong
spirits, 330 parts water, 2-1/2 parts extract of red or yellow cinchona, 1
part oil of cinnamon, 2 parts oil of cloves, 3 parts oil of anise, 5 parts
oil of peppermint. (Hager.)

=Eau Ecarlate--Scarlet Water.= (Buerdel). For renovating red linen and
woollen fabrics. Oxalium, 25 parts; soda, 16 parts; potash, 5 parts;
water, coloured with cochineal and slightly perfumed, 1000 parts.
(Sauerwein.)

=Eau Lajeune.= A hair dye. An elegant pasteboard box, in which are three
bottles of fluid and two bone-handled tooth-brushes. No. 1 contains a
clear fluid consisting of pyrogallic acid 1.5 gramme, .3 gramme colouring
matter of alkanet, 17.5 grammes spirit of wine, 27 grammes water. No. 2 is
filled with a thick brown fluid, which from decomposition has produced a
deposit sometimes brown, sometimes grey. This partly-decomposed fluid was
originally a mixture of silver nitrate, 3.5 grammes; ammonia, 4.5 grammes;
gum arabic or some similar mucilage, 2.5 grammes; distilled water, 23
grammes. No. 3, labelled "Fixateur," contains 7.5 grammes fluid,
consisting of .5 gramme sodium sulphide, 7 grammes distilled water. The
directions for use, translated into various languages, say--Dissolve 10
grammes subcarbonate of soda in half a litre of warm or cold rain water,
and with this wash the grease from the hair. Afterwards rinse it in clear
water, and dry it thoroughly with a cloth. Pour one part of fluid No. 1
into a saucer, and with brush No. 1 apply it to the roots of the hair.
Allow it two or three minutes to dry, then rub the hair with an old linen
cloth to remove the superfluous moisture. Next repeat the operation, using
fluid and brush No. 2, and without waiting wash the hair with warm or cold
soapy water. This hair dye is quite harmless, and leaves no marks on the
skin behind it. _To use it for the Beard._--The process is the same as
that for the hair, except that instead of the soda solution, ordinary soap
is to be used to cleanse the beard from grease. It often happens that when
the user of the dye has not taken ordinary care in cleansing the hair, the
latter becomes of a false and unnatural tint. In this case the Fixateur
should be used. A small sponge should be moistened with this and passed
over the hair, which will make the colour natural and glossy. The Fixateur
as well as the sponge must only be used in this way. It may be employed
two days after the first operation without it being necessary to dye the
hair anew. (Hager.)

=Eau Medicinales= are either simply watery solutions (HYDROLES,
HYDROLATURES, SOLUTIONS PAR L'EAU), or distilled water (EAUX DISTILLEES);
or they are vinous or alcoholic tinctures or solutions of essential oils,
aromatics, or more active drugs. See CORDIALS, HAIR DYES, PERFUMERY,
SPIRITS, TINCTURES, WATERS, &c.

=Eau Tonique de Chalmin= is a perfumed solution of tannin.

=Eau Tonique Parachute des Cheveux.= To prevent the falling off of the
hair. Macerate some pieces of violet root for some days in 120 grammes
rose water, filter, and add to the fluid 2 decigrammes sulphate of iron, 3
drops vinegar, 1.3 gramme each of tincture of benzoin and balsam of Peru,
7.5 grammes Provence oil, and 10 drops oil of bergamot. (Dr Casselmann.)

=Eau Virginale= (Chable). Lead acetate, zinc sulphate, of each 1 part;
distilled water, 28 parts; eau de Cologne, 12 parts. Dissolve and mix;
allow to stand for a month and filter. A spoonful mixed with a glass of
water to be used as a vaginal injection. (Reveil.)

=Eaux=, in perfumery, are solutions of the fragrant essential oils in
spirit, as eau de Cologne, eau de bouquet, &c.; or they are distilled
waters, largely charged with the odorous principles of plants, as eau de
rose, eau de fleurs d'oranges, &c.

=Eaux=, of the liqueuriste, are aromatised spirits or cordials.

=EB'LANINE.= The yellowish-red, crystallisable, solid substance, which is
left behind in the retort, when wood spirit is rectified from quicklime.
It is insoluble in water, and sublimes without fusion at 273 deg. Fahr.

=EBONITE.= The only difference between this and vulcanite, consists in the
colouring materials used. See CAOUTCHOUC.

=EB'ONY.= The wood of the _Diospyrus Melanoxylon_, an East Indian tree, of
the natural order _Ebenaceae_. Two other species of the same genus, namely,
_Diospyrus Ebenus_ and _D. Ebenaster_, yields respectively MAURITIUS EBONY
and the BASTARD EBONY of Ceylon. Pale-coloured woods are stained in
imitation of ebony (FACTITIOUS EBONY), by washing them with or steeping
them in a strong decoction of logwood or of galls, and, when dry, washing
them over with a solution of sulphate or acetate of iron. They are then
rinsed in clean water, and the process is repeated, if required. The wood
is lastly polished or varnished.

=EBRI'ETY.= See INTOXICATION.

=EBULLI''TION.= The state of boiling, or the agitation of a liquid arising
from its rapid conversion into vapour by heat. Ebullition occurs in
different liquids at very different temperatures, such temperatures being
called their 'boiling-points.' Under the same circumstances the
boiling-points are constant, and by observing them the chemist is often
able to distinguish liquids which much resemble each other. The
boiling-point of the same liquid may, however, vary considerably under
different circumstances. The causes which induce variation are increased
or diminished atmospheric pressure, the greater or less depth of the
liquid, and the character of the containing vessel. Thus boiling water is
colder by some degrees when the barometer is low, in bad weather, or at
the top of a hill, than when the barometer is higher, in fine weather, or
at the bottom of a valley or mine. There is a very simple and beautiful
experiment, illustrative of the effect of diminished pressure in lowering
the boiling-point of a liquid. A little water is made to boil for a few
minutes in a flask or retort placed over a lamp, until the air has been
expelled, and the steam issues freely from the neck. A tightly fitting
cork is then inserted, and the lamp at the same moment withdrawn. When the
ebullition ceases, it may be renewed at pleasure for a considerable time
by the affusion of cold water, which, by condensing the vapour within,
occasions a partial vacuum. Liquids in general boil from 60 deg. to 140 deg. lower
than their ordinary boiling-points when heated _in vacuo_.

The following table furnishes very exact information respecting the effect
of increasing pressure upon the boiling-point of water:--

Boiling water contained in a deep vessel is hotter than that in a shallow
one, on account of the greater resistance in the one case than the other
to the escape of the steam. It is also found that fluids boil at a lower
temperature and more quietly in vessels with rough and spicular surfaces,
than in those with smooth or polished ones. The boiling-point of water, as
marked on the scale of the thermometer, is 212 deg. Fahr., but in glass
vessels, under common circumstances, it varies from

        TABLE I.--_Boiling-points of Water at different
        Pressures._ By Mr C. GREVILLE WILLIAMS.

  --------------+-----------+---------------+-----------
  Boiling-point | Barometer | Boiling-point | Barometer
   deg. Fahr.       | Inches.   |  deg. Fahr.       | Inches.
  --------------+-----------|---------------+-----------
      184       | 16.676    |    200        | 23.454
      185       | 17.047    |    201        | 23.937
      186       | 17.421    |    202        | 24.441
      187       | 17.803    |    203        | 25.014
      188       | 18.196    |    204        | 25.468
      189       | 18.593    |    205        | 25.992
      190       | 18.992    |    206        | 26.529
      191       | 19.407    |    207        | 27.068
      192       | 19.822    |    208        | 27.614
      193       | 20.254    |    209        | 28.183
      194       | 20.687    |    210        | 28.744
      195       | 21.124    |    211        | 29.331
      196       | 21.576    |    212        | 29.922
      197       | 22.030    |    213        | 30.516
      198       | 22.498    |    214        | 31.120
      199       | 22.965    |    215        | 31.730
  --------------+-----------+---------------+-----------

212.254 deg. to 215.6 deg.; whilst in perfectly pure and smooth glass vessels
water may be heated to 221 deg. Fahr. without boiling. That the elevation of
the boiling-point in this case is due to the nature of the surface, may be
at once demonstrated by throwing into water, about to boil in a glass
matrass, a little iron filings or coarsely powdered glass, when ebullition
will commence with almost explosive violence, at the same time that the
temperature of the fluid will sink about 2 deg. Fahr.

The boiling-point of water contained in ordinary vessels may be raised
considerably above 212 deg. Fahr., by the addition of saline matter, as will
be seen in the following table, extracted from Mr C. G. Williams's
excellent 'Handbook of Chemical Manipulation,'--

        TABLE II.--_Boiling-points of Saturated Solutions of
        various Salts at the ordinary Atmospheric Pressure._ By
        C. G. WILLIAMS.

     Name of Salt.         Boiling-point.

  Chloride of calcium        355 deg. Fahr.
  Acetate of soda            256   "
  Nitrate of soda            246   "
  Sal-ammoniac               236   "
  Common salt                224   "
  Cream of tartar            214   "

The above solutions are suitable for chemical baths. With the exception of
the first, they furnish in their boiling-points temperatures, as nearly as
can be obtained, 10 deg. above each other. They were chosen by Mr Williams
because, in 'fractionating' volatile substances, it is usual to separate
the distilled products by differences of temperature equal to 10 deg. Fahr. In
long operations it is found inconvenient to employ a saturated saline
solution for a bath (by which the highest temperature would be obtained),
as the constant evaporation of the water induces the crystallisation of
the salt. It is hence usual to keep it considerably below that point.

The following table, compiled chiefly from the pages of Dr Miller's
'Elements of Chemistry,' gives the boiling-points of several interesting
substances.

        TABLE III.--_Boiling-points of various Liquids at the
        ordinary Atmospheric Pressure._

    Name of Substance.       Boiling-point.

  Liquid carbonic acid        -108 deg. Fahr.
  Liquid sulphurous acid      + 17.6 "
  Chloric ether                 51.9 "
  Aldehyd                       69.4 "
  Ether                         94.8 "
  Bisulphide of carbon         118.5 "
  Bromide                      145.4 "
  Wood spirit                  149.9 "
  Alcohol (sp. gr. .815)       173.1 "
  Benzol                       176.8 "
  Dutch liquid                 184.7 "
  Acetic acid                  243.1 "
  Sulphur (melted)             609.  "
  Mercury                      662.  "

=EBUL'LIOSCOPE.= _Syn._ EBULLITION ALCOHOLOMETER, THERMO-ALCOHOLOMETER.
"This instrument is essentially a thermometer, and its application to
alcoholometry is based upon the fact that the boiling-point of a spiritous
liquid is scarcely altered by the presence, within certain limits, of the
substances which may be dissolved in it, and which, by increasing its
specific gravity, render the ordinary alcoholometers or hydrometers
useless for the purpose of indicating its alcoholic richness. The
ebullioscope was invented by the Abbe Brossard-Vidal, of Toulon, and in
its original form consisted of a spirit-lamp surmounted by a small boiler,
into which a large cylindrical glass bulb was plunged, having an upright
stem of such calibre that the quicksilver contained in them, by its
expansion and ascent when heated, raised before it a little glass float in
the stem, which was connected by a thread with a similar glass bead,
hanging in the air. This thread passed round a pulley, which, turning with
the motion of the beads, caused an index to move along a graduated
circular scale, which represented on its face the per-centage of absolute
alcohol in spirituous liquors of different boiling-points. This form of
the apparatus being found inconvenient and liable to get disarranged,
various improvements were made in it by MM. Conaty, Lerebour, and others.
The modification of the instrument now in use, and known as Field's PATENT
ALCOHOLOMETER, was made by the late Dr Ure, and can scarcely be improved
on. It consists of a thermometer having a very minute bore and a large
bulb, similar to that employed to determine the height of mountains from
the boiling-point of water, but instead of thermometric degrees being
marked upon the scale the per-centage under proof is placed on the
left-hand side of the stem, and the per-centage content of proof spirit on
the right-hand side. These commence at 178.5 deg. Fahr., the temperature at
which 'proof spirit' boils, and which here forms the bottom of the scale.
The succeeding number are based upon the boiling-points of mixtures of
alcohol and water. The little boiler being charged, and about a
teaspoonful of salt (35 gr.) being added, to prevent loss of alcohol by
evaporation, the thermometer is set in its place, and the spirit-lamp
lighted. When the mercury begins to rise out of the bulb of the
thermometer, the 'damper-plate' is pushed in a little way, to moderate the
heat. The eye is now kept steadily on the instrument, and as soon as the
liquor boils freely, and the mercury becomes stationary in the stem, the
indication is carefully noted, and the damper-plate pushed home to
extinguish the flame.

"The ebullioscope is adjusted to the mean boiling-point of water under an
atmospheric pressure of 29.5 inches. When the pressure is either higher or
lower, both water and alcohol boil at a somewhat different temperature, to
meet which a barometrical equation is attached to the thermometer by means
of a small subsidiary scale. It is therefore necessary, prior to
commencing the operation of testing any liquor, to charge the little
boiler with pure water only, and to fix the thermometer in its place. When
the water boils freely, the mercury becomes stationary in the stem,
exactly opposite the true barometrical indication at the time. Should this
be against the line 29.5, no correction will be required; but should it
stand at any other line, above or below, then the various boiling-points
will bear reference to that boiling-point only. In the latter case, the
boiling-point of the water on the barometrical indicator must be set
against the boiling-point of the liquid on the scale, when opposite the
line--29.5 will be found the true strength. Thus:--the barometer being at
30 inches, and the indication or boiling-point being 72 u. p., 30 on the
indicator must be placed against 72 u. p. on the thermometer, when against
the line of 29.5 will be seen 69.6 u. p., the real strength of the sample
tested.

"When a spirit is stronger than the 'excise proof,' its boiling-point
varies too little with its alterations of strength to render the
ebullioscope of much practical value. To make it applicable to the
stronger spirits, it is therefore necessary to dilute them with exactly
their own bulk of pure water before testing them, and then to double the
resulting indication, as suggested by Dr Ure. Our own plan is always to do
this when the spirit is stronger than 20 u. p.

"By means of the ebullioscope the alcoholic content of beer, wines, and
spirits, of every variety and class, may be readily determined with
sufficient accuracy for all practical purposes; and by methods which we
shall hereafter point out, the amount of saccharine extractive, or sugar,
in cordialised spirit, malt liquors and wines, may also be ascertained.

"The ebullioscope (Field's ALCOHOLOMETER) employed by us in numerous and
extensive investigations connected with public hygiene, was made by Mr
Long, of Little Tower Street, and is an instrument which should be in the
hands of every wine and spirit merchant and licensed victualler, as well
as every private gentleman who feels interested in the quality of the
liquors in his cellar. The instrument is accompanied by a useful little
pamphlet of directions and tables, which has been very accurately got up,
as we understand, by the late Dr Ure, expressly for Mr Long." (A. J.
Cooley.)

=ECHINOCOCCUS HOMINIS.= This creature, which is the larva of the _Tinaea
Echinococcus_, is a very common parasite infesting man, and has been found
in the human lungs, heart, kidneys, liver, spleen, ovaries, breasts,
membrane of the throat, and the bones. The disease to which it gives rise
is of a very long and painful nature, frequently terminating fatally, and
one in which no remedies have hitherto been found of any avail. The part
of the human economy most frequently attacked by the ravages of the
Echinococcus is the liver, in the substance of which it gives rise to the
formation of a hydatid tumour. This tumour is composed of a thick-walled
cyst or bag, within which is another of a much more delicate texture.
"This latter membrane is the mother-sac of the Echinococcus embryo"
(Huxley), and corresponds with the germinal membrane of Professor Goodsir.
It is studded with innumerable transparent cells, varying as extremes of
measurement from 1/10000th to 1/3000th of an inch. It is the seat of
development of innumerable Echinococci, and to this membrane, in a fresh
hydatid tumour, they are found connected by a delicate membrane, either
singly, or more commonly in clusters, the number of individuals on the
cluster varying from 10 to 100 or more, as shown in the annexed
woodcut."[271]

[Footnote 271: Aitken.]

[Illustration]

The size of the embryo varies from 1/18th to 1/20th of a line to 1/10th to
1/18th, according as it is elongated or contracted. Fig. 2 represents two
Echinococci. In the one the head is drawn within the vehicle, and in the
other it is extruded.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

Fig. 3 represents a transverse view of an echinococcus; S S are suctorial
discs; the hooklets may be seen encircling a membranous disk.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

In Fig. 4 we have a representation of the circlet of these hooklets, B,
which are thirty-four in number; C gives various views of separate
hooklets; _b_ is the base; _c_ the central extremity; _e_ the hooklets
viewed upon their concave or inferior border. The dotted lines connecting
_f_, _g_, _k_, represent the outer surface of the neck, and runs through
the fixed point of the three hooks which move upon the central fixed
process, as on the pivot.

The inhabitants of Iceland are said to suffer severely from the effects of
the Echinococcus Humanus; it has been computed that a sixth of the
population of the island are attacked by it.

=ECLECTIC REMEDIES.= These are medicines chiefly employed by a sect of
American practitioners, self-styled "Eclectics." The medicinal properties
appended to each of these preparations are those ascribed to them by the
Eclectics themselves.

APOCYNIN. From the roots of _Apocynum_ and _Ros[oe]mifolium_. Given in
jaundice, hepatic torpor, and constipation.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 gr.

ASCLEPEDIN. From _Asclepias tuberosa_. Expectorant, diaphoretic, and
tonic.--_Dose_, 1 to 5 grains three times a day.

BAPTISTIN. From Wild Indigo. Given in liver affections.--_Dose_, 1/4 to
1/2 grain.

BAROSMIN. From _Buchu_. Diuretic, alterative, antispasmodic.--_Dose_, 2 to
4 grains.

CAULOPHYLLIN. From _Caulophyllum thalictroides_. Tonic and alterative,
acts on the uterus.--_Dose_, 1/4 to 1 grain three times a day; as a
parturient, 2 to 4 grains.

CERASEIN. From the _Cerasus virginiana_. Given as a substitute for quinine
when this latter is inadmissible.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr.

CIMICIFUGIN. _Syn._ MACROTIN. From Black Snakeroot. Tonic, alterative,
nervine, antiperiodic, and in chorea.--_Dose_, 1 to 6 gr.

CORNINE. From _Cornus Florida_ (Dogwood). Antiperiodic.--_Dose_, 10
grains.

EUPATORINE. From _Eupatoreum purpureum_. Diuretic.--_Dose_, 3 to 5 grains.

EUPHORBIN. From _Euphorbia corollata_. Emetic, cathartic, expectorant, and
vermifuge.--_Dose_, 1 grain or less.

GELSEMIN. From _Gelsemium sempervirens_. Given in pneumonia, hysteria, and
dysmenorrh[oe]a.--_Dose_, 1/4 to 2 grains. This must not be confounded
with the powerful alkaloid, Gelsimia.

GERANIN, or GERANIIN. From _Geranium maculatum_. Astringent.--_Dose_, 1 to
5 gr.

HAMAMELIN. From _Hamamelis Virginica_ (Witch hazel). Astringent.--_Dose_,
5 grains.

HYDRASTIN. From _Hydrastis Canadensis_. Tonic.--_Dose_, 3 to 5 grains.
This must not be confounded with the alkaloid Hydrasta.

IRIDIN. From the _Blue flag_. Alterative, sialagogue,
anthelmintic.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 5 gr.

INGLANDIN. From _Butter-nut_. Given in chronic hepatic disorders and
constipation.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 gr.

LEPTANDRIN. From _Leptandra Virginica_. Given in liver affections, chronic
dysentery, diarrh[oe]a, and typhus.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 gr.

LYCOPIN. From _Lycopus Virginicus_. Given in haemorrhage, diabetes, and
dysentery.--_Dose_, 2 to 3 grains.

MYRICIN. From _Myrica cerifera_. Stimulant, astringent, and
antispasmodic.--_Dose_, 2 to 10 grains.

POPULIN. From _Populus tremuloides_. Tonic and febrifuge.--_Dose_, 4 to 8
grains.

PRUNIN. From _Wild Cherry Bark_. Stimulant, tonic, and
expectorant.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 gr.

RUMIN. From _Rumex crispus_. Action like rhubarb.--_Dose_, 3 grains.

SANGUINARIN. From _Sanguinaria Canadensis_. Hepatic and
alterative.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 grains.

STILLINGIN. From _Stylingia sylvatica_. Given in bronchitis and
laryngitis. Used externally as a stimulant. Internally, 1 drop with
mucilage.

=EDELENZIANWURZELSAFT--Noble Gentian-root Juice--Enzian Extract--Extract
of Gentian.= A water-clear, colourless Schnapps, which contains much fusel
oil and has had some of the spirit removed, distilled from gentian plant.
(Hager.)

=EDIBLE EARTHS.= There seems little reason to doubt that the inhabitants
of many countries, especially during famine and in times of scarcity, use
certain kinds of earth as food. In Spain, a particular kind of earth known
as _bucaro_ is eaten; the Russian peasant partakes of his _rock-flour_;
the Thuringian of his _rock-butter_; the Swede, of his _bergmehl_ or
_mountain meal_; the native of Java of an earth known as _teneampa_; the
Hindoo, of the so-called _Patna earth_; and the Persian of a species of
soil known as _Gheli Giveh_.

Mr Molvar has analysed an earth, eaten by the poorer classes of the
Neograd district in Hungary, and finds it has the following composition:--

  Carbonic acid     40.357
  Lime              51.488
  Magnesia           0.110
  Volatile matter    5.545
  Ferrous oxide      0.158
  Alumina            2.272

As the volatile matter seemed to be the probable means of nourishment, it
was subjected to a special examination, and was found to contain, besides
empyreumatic substances, 0.067 water, and 0.010 nitrogen.

Dr Schmidt, a German chemist, gives the following as the composition of
100 parts of the air-dried powder from the coast of the White Sea:--

  Water given off at 100 deg. C                  0.260
  Given off at a low red heat                0.835
  Alumina                                   40.797
  Ferric oxide                               0.310
  Magnesia                                   0.618
  Lime                                      traces
  Soda                                       1.829
  Potassa                                    9.845
  Silicic acid, trace of fluorine, and loss 45.506

This earth is eaten by the Laplanders, who mix it with the flour of which
they make their bread.

The Persian edible earth called _Gheli Giveh_ contains:--

  +----------------------+------+
  |Magnesic carbonate    |66.963|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Calcic carbonate      |23.634|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Sodium chloride       | 3.542|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Sodic sulphate        | 0.293|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Sodic carbonate       | 0.598|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Magnesic hydrate      | 1.311|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Ferric oxide          | 0.092|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Alumina               | 0.227|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Silicic acid          | 0.765|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Water combined at 120 deg.| 1.153|
  +----------------------+------+
  |Hydroscopic moisture  | 1.422|
  +----------------------+------+

The 'Chemical News' (xxxvi, 202) contains the analysis by Mr Paterson Muir
of a clay from Mackenzie County, South Island, New Zealand, which is
largely eaten by sheep. It consists of:--

  +------------------+------+
  |Silica            | 61.25|
  +------------------+------+
  |Alumina           | 17.97|
  +------------------+------+
  |Ferric oxide      |  5.72|
  +------------------+------+
  |Lime              |  1.91|
  +------------------+------+
  |Magnesia          |  0.87|
  +------------------+------+
  |Sodium chloride   |  3.69|
  +------------------+------+
  |Potassium chloride| trace|
  +------------------+------+
  |Water             |  7.31|
  +------------------+------+
  |Organic matter    |  1.77|
  +------------------+------+
  |                  |100.49|
  +------------------+------+

See ANIMALCULAE.

=EDULCORA'TION.= The affusion of water on any substance for the purpose of
removing the portion soluble in that fluid. Edulcoration is usually
performed by agitating or triturating the article with water, and removing
the latter, after subsidence, by decantation or filtration. It is the
method commonly adopted to purify precipitates and other powders which are
insoluble in water. The washing-bottle is a most useful instrument for the
edulcoration of precipitates. In its simplest form, it is a bottle fitted
with two bent glass tubes, one drawn to a fine point and reaching to the
bottom of the bottle, the other only entering the cork a few inches. By
blowing down the latter tube, the water is forced out of the former in a
fine stream. See WASH-BOTTLE.

=EEL.= _Syn._ ANGUILLA, L. A family of fishes belonging to the 'apodal'
section of the _malacopterygii_. At least three species of eels are found
in this country--the 'sharp-nosed,' the 'broad-nosed,' and the 'snig.' The
first, which is common in streams and lakes, attains the greatest
size--sometimes 25 lbs. or even 30 lbs. The 'snig' is considered superior
to other kinds for the table. As articles of food, eels are said to be
laxative and far from wholesome. The fat (EEL FAT; ADEPS ANGUILLAE, OLEUM
A.) is among the simples of the Ph. L. 1618, and was formerly considered
'good against stripes,' and is even now used by the vulgar as a friction
for stiff joints. For the table, eels are generally dressed by stewing,
frying, baking, or potting, which is done in the usual way, the fish being
cut into pieces 2 or 3 inches long, and melted butter, onions, sweet
herbs, and anchovy sauce, added at will. The CONGER EEL is a distinct and
gigantic species of the same family. Its flesh is coarse and oily, but is
much esteemed by the inhabitants of the southern coast of Devon, on which
it abounds.

Letheby states the following to be the composition of the Eel:

  +------------------+-----+
  |Nitrogenous matter|  9.9|
  +------------------+-----+
  |Fat               | 13.8|
  +------------------+-----+
  |Saline matter     |  1.3|
  +------------------+-----+
  |Water             |  75.|
  +------------------+-----+
  |                  |100.0|
  +------------------+-----+

Payen's analysis differs from the above, in giving a larger proportion of
nitrogenous matter, and a still greater quantity of fat.

The native inhabitants of New Zealand and kindred races suffer largely
from scrofula, the prevalence of which disease amongst them has been
attributed to their partaking so largely of eel as a common article of
diet.

=EFFERVES'CENCE.= The rapid escape of gas in small bubbles from a liquid.
See DRAUGHT, POWDER, &c.

=EFFLORES'CENCE.= The spontaneous conversion of a crystalline solid into a
dry pulverulent form. Crystals which in a dry atmosphere lose their water
of crystallisation, and become crusted over with a mealy powder, are said
to be EFFLORESCENT.

=EGG.= _Syn._ OVUM, L. A body produced in the females of birds and certain
other animals, containing an 'embryo' of the same species, or body, from
which a similar animal may ultimately be produced. The eggs of the common
domestic fowl are nutritious and easily digestible; and when lightly
cooked by boiling and eaten with a little salt, are admirably adapted as
an aliment for the sick and delicate. When boiled hard or fried, they are
rendered less digestible, and possess no advantage in this respect over
butcher's meat. A new-laid egg, beaten up in a cup of tea, coffee, or
chocolate is an excellent ingredient in the breakfast of a person with a
poor appetite, and is very supporting. A glass of wine, beer, or porter,
similarly treated, along with a biscuit, has been recommended as a light
and nutritious luncheon or supper, well suited to the debilitated and
dyspeptic. Raw eggs may be advantageously substituted for cod-liver oil in
all the cases in which this last is ordered, occurring in persons with
delicate or irritable stomachs. The addition of fresh salad oil vastly
increases their medicinal virtues. A fresh egg is said to contain about
the same amount of nourishment as 1-1/2 oz. of fresh meat and 1 oz. of
wheaten bread, but in a more digestible form.

  _Composition of the contents of the egg._
    Water               74.02
    Albumen             14.08
    Oil and fat         10.25
    Mineral matter       1.65

                       100.00

  _Composition of the white of egg._ (Thompson.)
    Nitrogenous matter     20.40
    Fatty matter
    Saline matter           1.60
    Water                  78.00

                          100.00

  _Composition of the yolk._ (Thompson.)
    Nitrogenous matter     16.00
    Fatty matter           30.70
    Saline matter           1.30
    Water                  52.00

                          100.00

=Egg, White of= (ALBUMEN OVI), is officinal in the B. P. Yelk of egg
(_vitellus ovi_) is an ingredient in the BRANDY MIXTURE (MISTURA SPIRITUS
VINI GALLICI) of the London College. It is also a popular application to
chaps, cracked nipples, abrasions, &c., and is largely used to render
oleaginous substances miscible with water, in the preparation of
emulsions.

The average weight of the new-laid egg of a hen is about 2-1/2 oz., and
its sp. gr. is 1.080 to 1.090; the white generally weighs about 1-1/2 oz.;
the yolk, a little under 3/4 oz.; and the shell and skin, 1/4 oz. Dr Prout
found that an egg, on being kept for 2 years in a dry situation, lost
544-3/10 gr., from the evaporation of a portion of its water through the
shell. By boiling in water an egg loses from 2% to 3% of its weight.

_Choice._ The larger end of a new-laid egg feels cold when placed against
the tongue. New-laid eggs appear semi-transparent when placed between the
eye and a strong light, and have a small and perceptible division of the
skin from the shell, which is filled with air. This mode of examination
among the trade is called 'candling.' When they shake they are stale. The
eggs of turkeys and pea-hens are much esteemed for some purposes; those of
ducks and geese are coarse and inferior.

Sound eggs will sink if put into a solution, consisting of 1 oz. of salt
in 10 oz. of water; in the same solution indifferent ones will float,
whilst bad or worthless ones will swim even in pure water.

_Pres._ Eggs may be preserved for any length of time by excluding them
from the air. One of the cleanest and easiest methods of doing this is to
pack them with the small end downwards, in clean dry salt, in barrels or
tubs, and to place them in a cool and dry situation. We have eaten eggs
thus preserved that were more than a twelvemonth old, and that had been
for some months on shipboard in a tropical climate, and which yet retained
all the peculiar sweetness of new-laid eggs. With a like intention, eggs
are placed in vessels containing milk of lime or strong brine, or are
rubbed over with butter, lard, or gum water, all of which act by excluding
the air. Eggs for keeping should never be laid on their sides, and when
kept in the air should be occasionally turned to prevent the yolk
attaching itself to the side instead of floating in the albumen. Some
persons place the eggs in a netting or on a sieve or colander, and immerse
them for an instant in a caldron of boiling water before packing them
away. The practice of packing eggs in damp straw, or anything else that
can convey a flavour should be carefully avoided. The shells of eggs are
porous, and readily admit the passage of gaseous substances, especially of
fetid odours. It is from inattention to this point that a large number of
the eggs imported from the coast of France have a less delicate flavour
than those of our poultry yards. Damp chopped straw, as well as most other
organic substances exposed to warmth and moisture, readily ferment or
putrefy; and during fermentation a considerable increase of temperature
takes place, as any one may readily perceive by examining the common
hotbeds in our gardens, which are merely masses of organic matter in a
state of decomposition. Eggs, as long as they retain the embryo of the
future chick in a vital state, possess in themselves a certain degree of
warmth, which tends materially to promote the decomposition of the
substances they are packed in, particularly in the presence of moisture.

A correspondent of the 'Chemical News' says: "Eggs may be kept fresh for a
whole year by subjecting them to the following process. The fresh eggs are
carefully placed in a mixture of five kilogrammes of alum, dissolved in
five litres of water, heated to from 45 deg. to 50 deg. C., and left in that
liquid for from thirty to forty minutes; the eggs are next drained, and in
the meantime the solution of alum is heated to boiling-point. The eggs are
again immersed in the liquid and kept therein from ten to fifteen seconds;
after having been drained and cooled, they are packed in either dry bran,
sawdust, cork-dust, sifted ashes, or in cotton-wool."

M. Durand, of Blois, proposes to preserve eggs by coating them with
silicate of soda.

    _To Preserve Eggs fresh for many weeks._--As the eggs are taken
    from the nest, brush each one separately with a thin solution of
    gum Arabic, being careful to leave no portion of the shell
    uncovered by it. The half of each egg must first be done, and
    left to become dry before the remainder is touched, that the gum
    may not be rubbed off any part by its coming in contact while
    wet with the hand as it is held to be varnished, or with the
    table when it is laid down to harden.--ELIZA ACTON.

_Eggs to boil in the Shell._--Eggs brought from a cold place and suddenly
plunged into boiling water are very frequently liable to crack, and thus
to allow of the partial escape of their contents. In winter it will be
found a good plan to hold them for an instant over the steam of the
saucepan before they are placed in it, which they should be, very gently.
By boiling for three minutes, the whites will become in a partially solid
state. Exactly five minutes will harden the whites and leave the yolks
liquid. Eight or ten minutes will render them hard. Eggs should always be
boiled in water sufficient to entirely cover them. They should be boiled
15 minutes for salad-dressings.

_Eggs, to Poach._--Take for this purpose a wide and delicately clean pan
about half filled with the clearest spring water; throw in a small
saltspoonful of salt, and place it over a fire quite free from smoke.
Break some new-laid eggs into separate cups, and do this with care, that
the yolks may not be injured. When the water boils, draw back the pan,
glide the eggs gently into it, and let them stand till the whites appear
almost set, which will be in about a minute; then without shaking them
move the pan over the fire, and just simmer them from two minutes and a
half to three minutes. Lift them out separately with a slice, trim quickly
off the ragged edges, and serve them upon dressed spinach or upon minced
veal, turkey, or chicken; or dish them for an invalid upon delicately
toasted bread, sliced thick and free from crust; it is an improvement to
have the bread buttered, but it is less wholesome.

Comparative time of poaching eggs: swan's eggs, 5 to 6 minutes (in basin,
10 minutes); turkey's eggs, 4 minutes; hen's eggs, 3 to 3-1/2 minutes;
Guinea fowl's, 2 to 3 minutes; bantam's, 2 minutes.

_Obs._ All eggs may be poached _without boiling_ if kept just at simmering
point, but _one boil_ quite at last will assist to detach them from the
stewpan, from which they should always be very carefully lifted on what is
called a fish or egg slice. There are pans made on purpose for poaching
and frying them in good form; but they do not, we believe, answer
particularly well. If broken into cups slightly rubbed with butter and
simmered in them, their roundness of shape will be well preserved.--ELIZA
ACTON.

=Egg, Elas'tic.= Take a good and sound egg, place it in strong vinegar,
and allow it to remain for 12 hours; it will then become quite soft and
elastic. In this state it can be squeezed into a tolerably wide-mouthed
bottle; when in, it must be covered with water having a little soda
dissolved in it. In a few hours the egg will be restored to nearly its
original solidity; after which the liquid may be poured off and the bottle
dried, the whole being kept as a curiosity to puzzle one's friends for an
explanation how the egg got there. ('Parlour Pastime.')

=Egg Flip.= _Prep._ 1. Beer, 1 pint; eggs, 3 in no.; sugar, 2 oz.; nutmeg
and ginger, q. s. to flavour; the eggs are broken into one half of the
beer, the sugar added, and the whole beaten well together; the mixture is
then placed in a clean warmer, and heated over the fire to nearly the
boiling-point, and stirred one way all the time, care being taken not to
let it either boil or curdle; the other portion of the beer and the spices
are then added, and the whole mixed well together.

2. As above, but adding a glass of spirit. Some persons also add a little
lemon peel.

=Eggs, Packing, for Shipboard.= The following plan is now adopted by many
firms shipping eggs:--"In the bottom of the box may be placed bran, cut
hay, and sawdust. Tear up old newspapers to about 8 or 10 inches square.
The paper should be about medium--that is, not too stiff nor too soft.
Place one of these pieces of paper on the hand, and on this an egg, on one
end; close the lower hand so as to bring the paper up all round the egg;
with the other hand crumple the loose corners and edges of the paper down
over the other end of the egg; lay another piece of paper on the hand, on
which place the same egg, but the other end up; bring up the new paper and
crumple down as before. This gives a good cushion to both ends, and a fair
one over the centre. Repeat this till you have six thicknesses of paper,
reversing the egg each time, and always keeping it on the end. This gives
you a ball about 3 to 3-1/2 in. thick by 3-1/2 to 4 in. long. Care should
be taken not to press the paper too closely to the egg while covering.
Place on one end in the box or basket; place alongside and press them
together close enough to prevent their becoming loose in the box, fillings
at the ends and on top with crumpled paper."--J. P.

=Egg, Glaire of.= _Prep._ Separate the whites from the yolks, and whisk
them to a froth, let them stand 24 hours, and strain them through muslin.
Used as a glaze or varnish by bookbinders and others.

=Egg, Liquid.= _Prep._ (Jayne.) From lime, 1 bushel (slaked with water);
common salt, 2 or 3 lbs.; cream of tartar, 1/2 lb.; water, q. s. to form a
mixture strong enough to float an egg. Used to preserve eggs, which it is
stated it will do for two years, by simply keeping them in it. Simple milk
of lime answers quite as well.

=Egg Wine.= As egg flip, but using equal parts of white wine and water,
instead of beer.

=ELA'IDINE.= A fatty compound of elaidic acid and glycerin, formed by the
action of nitrous acid or nitrate of mercury on olive oil. It is neutral;
melts at 90 deg. Fahr.; and is very soluble in ether, scarcely so in alcohol.
It is one of the components of CITRINE OINTMENT. By saponification it is
resolved into its two constituents.

=ELA'IN.= See OLEIN.

=ELAIOM'ETER.= _Syn._ OLEOM'ETER. An instrument for ascertaining the
specific gravity of oils. See HYDROMETER and OIL.

=ELAL'DEHYD.= A peculiar crystalline substance which forms in ALDEHYD when
kept for some weeks at a temperature of 32 deg. Fahr. It melts into a
colourless liquid at about 38 deg., in which state it is miscible with water,
alcohol, and ether. It is isomeric with aldehyd, but its vapour has about
three times the density of that substance, whilst it neither combines with
ammonia nor comports itself with potassa and solution of silver like
aldehyd.

=ELAOP'TENE.= See OIL (Volatile).

=ELAT'ERIN.= _Syn._ MOMORDICINE. The active principle of ELATERIUM. It was
discovered by Dr Clutterbuck in 1819, but first obtained in a state of
purity in 1830 by the late Mr Hennel.

=Elaterin.= _Syn._ ELATERIUM. (Dr Morries.) Obtained by evaporating
tincture of elaterium (made with rectified spirit) to the consistence of
thin oil, and throwing it in boiling distilled water. When cold, the
crystalline precipitate is collected, and dried with a gentle
heat.--_Dose_, to commence with 1-16th of a grain.

_Prep._ 1. (Dr Morries.) Elaterium is digested in hot alcohol, the
resulting tincture filtered, evaporated to the consistence of thin oil,
and then thrown into boiling distilled water. When the whole is cold, the
precipitate is collected and purified by redissolving it in alcohol and
precipitation by water, as before.

2. (Hennel.) The alcoholic extract of elaterium is digested in ether, and
the residuum dissolved in hot alcohol; crystals form as the solution
cools.

3. An alcoholic tincture is evaporated to the consistence of a syrup, and
thrown into a mixture of equal parts of liquor of potassa and water at a
boiling temperature. Almost pure elaterin separates as the liquid cools.

_Obs._ Elaterin forms delicate, white, silky crystals, having a bitter
taste; it is fusible at about 365 deg. Fahr.; tastes bitter; odourless;
neutral; insoluble in water; and dissolves readily in hot alcohol. Its
medicinal action is similar to that of elaterium, differing only in its
greater activity.--_Dose_, 1/16 gr. to 1/20 gr.

=ELATER'IUM.= _Syn._ SQUIRTING CUCUMBER. In _pharmacy_, 'the fresh unripe
fruit' of the wild cucumber, '_Ecbalium officinarum_--Richard,' Ph. L.
(_Momordica Elaterium_, Linn.). According to present usage, the word is
more generally applied to the feculence deposited from the juice of the
wild cucumber. It is thus applied in Ph. B. E. & D. See _below_.)

=Elaterium.= B. P. _Syn._ EXTRACT OF ELATERIUM, E. OF SQUIRTING CUCUMBER;
EXTRACTUM ELATERII (Ph. L.), ELATERIUM (Ph. E. & D.,) L. The feculence of
the juice of the above fruit.

_Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) Slice wild cucumber before it is quite ripe in the
long direction, and strain the juice, very gently expressed, through a
fine hair sieve; then set it aside for some hours, until the thicker part
has subsided. The thinner supernatant fluid being rejected, dry the
thicker portion with a gentle heat. The processes of the other colleges
are essentially the same.[272]

[Footnote 272: At the Mitcham Gardens, elaterium is manufactured in much
the same way, only that considerable force is used in the expression of
the juice, and the product therefore less potent, though more in quantity.
The manufacture usually commences about the second week in September. (Dr
Royle).]

2. (Dr Clutterbuck.) The cucumbers (fully ripe) are cut longitudinally,
and sprinkling with cold water, and the juice allowed to strain through a
fine sieve into an earthenware vessel. The seeds and surrounding pulp are
next placed on the sieve, with the split fruit, and washed repeatedly with
cold water. The washings being received in the same vessel with the juice,
the whole is allowed to repose for a few hours, when the clear portion is
decanted and the sediment spread thinly on fine linen, and dried by
exposure to the air and a gentle heat avoiding the sunshine or a bright
light. Quality very fine. Forty fruits, by this process, yield only 6 gr.
of elaterium.

3. (Apothecaries' Hall.) The fruit, slit into halves, is placed in hempen
or horsehair bags, and submitted to slight pressure in a tincture press.
The juice, as it runs off, passes through a fine hair sieve into a
cylindrical glass jug or jar, where it is allowed to remain for two hours,
when the clear supernatant liquor is poured off, and the thick portion
containing the sediment is poured on a paper filter, supported on linen,
and allowed to drain, after which it is dried by a gentle heat in a stove.
The product has a green colour, and constitutes the finest elaterium of
commerce. A darker and inferior article is obtained from the liquor,
poured from the first sediment by placing it in shallow pans, and allowing
it again to deposit.

_Prop., &c._ Elaterium is sold in thin cakes, and when pure has a
pale-gray or greenish-gray colour, floats on water, is easily pulverised
by pressure, and forms with rectified spirits a rich, green-coloured
tincture. Elaterium obtained as a second deposit (ELATERIUM NIGRUM), is
dark and inferior. Alcohol dissolves from 50% to 60% of good elaterium.
"When exhausted by rectified spirit, the solution, concentrated, and
poured into hot dilute solution of potassa, deposits, on cooling, minute
silky, colourless crystals (of ELATERIN), weighing from 1/7th to 1/4th of
the elaterium operated on." (Ph. E.)

_Obs._ To procure a fine sample of elaterium it is necessary to remove it
as soon as it is deposited, as a heavy mucilage falls down soon
afterwards, which materially injures its quality and appearance. English
elaterium is the best. The foreign is uniformly adulterated with chalk or
starch, and coloured with sap green.

_Dose_, 1/16 gr. to 1/2 gr., formed into a pill with extract of gentian
and liquorice powder; as a hydragogue and cathartic in dropsies, twice a
day, repeated every other day for a week or ten days. Its use must be
avoided when there is much debility or any inflammatory symptoms. Larger
doses than 1/2 gr. of pure elaterium are poisonous. The _antidotes_ are
emetics, followed by demulcents, opium, and stimulants.

=EL'DER.= _Syn._ SAMBUCUS (Ph. L. & E.), L. A large shrub or small tree
belonging to the natural order _Caprifoliacae_. It is indigenous in Europe,
and has long been valued for its medicinal properties. "The recent flowers
of the _Sambucus nigra_" (Ph. L.) or common elder are regarded as
diaphoretic and pectoral, and a distilled water (ELDER-FLOWER WATER; AQUA
SAMBUCI) is made of them. The inner bark of the same tree is purgative and
emetic, and is used in dropsy; the leaves are purgative; the juice of the
fresh berries is made into wine (ELDER WINE), and is largely used to make
FACTITIOUS PORT WINE, and to adulterate the real wine. See WATERS
(Distilled).

=ELECAMPANE'.= _Syn._ INULA (Ph. L.), L. "The root of _Inula Helenium_"
(Ph. L.). A plant of the nat. order _Compositae_. Tonic, diaphoretic, and
expectorant.--_Dose_, 20 gr. to 1 dr., or more, either in the form of
powder or decoction; in catarrh, dyspepsia, &c. It is now seldom used.

=ELECTRANODYN.= For the cure of neuralgia, headache, migrain, faceache,
and apoplectic attacks. As a necklace for children for toothache, as a
preventive of quinsy, &c. A tissue paper converted into a nitrogenous
material (pyroxylin or _dueppelpapier_) by immersion in a mixture of
sulphuric and nitric acid, and containing besides an insignificant
proportion of wax and resin. (Hager.)

=ELEC'TRIC.= _Syn._ ELECTRICAL. Exhibiting the effects of ELECTRICITY when
'excited' by friction; pertaining to, derived from, or produced by
electricity.

=Electric.= _Syn._ INSULATOR, NON-CONDUCTOR. A substance which may under
ordinary circumstances be readily made to evince electrical properties by
friction. Electrics do not transmit, or conduct, electricity; whilst, on
the other hand, ANELECTRICS are good transmitters or conductors of
electrical action. The most perfect electrics are shell-lac, sulphur,
amber, jet, resinous bodies, gums, gun-cotton, glass, silk, diamond,
agate, and tourmaline; dry fur, hair, wood, feathers, and paper;
turpentine and various oils; dry atmospheric air and other gases, steam of
high elasticity, and ice at 0 deg. Fahr. The most perfect anelectrics or
conductors are the metals, charcoal, and saline fluids.

=Electric Eel.= The _Gynotus electricus_, a fish having the power or
giving violent electric 'shocks'; which power it exerts for killing or
stunning its prey. It is an inhabitant of the fresh-water lakes and rivers
of the warmer regions of America, Africa, and Asia.

=Electrical Machine.= An instrument for the excitation and collection of
electricity. The term is only applied to contrivances in which friction is
the immediate cause of the electrical disturbance; those which act through
chemical force, magnetism, or heat, being known by various distinctive
names, as 'voltaic battery,' 'electro-magnetic machine,' 'induction-coil,'
'thermo-electric pile,' &c.

The electrical machines in common use are composed of a hollow glass
cylinder, or circular plate of glass, turning on an axis, and rubbing
against two or more leather rubbers covered with silk, the electricity
being collected by sharp points fixed in a metal rod standing on a glass
pillar. A description of these instruments, however, would be out of place
in the present work, which does not aim at giving information that may be
easily obtained from other sources.

Cylinder machines are seldom made of greater size than 13 inches by 9, and
are about as powerful as an 18-inch plate machine. The latter are commonly
made up to 3 and 4 feet diameter, and will, with a suitable condenser,
give 15 inch sparks in air.

=ELECTRI''CITY= (-tr[)i]s'-[)i]t-e). The name given primarily to one of
the great forces of nature, and secondarily to that department of physical
science which embraces all that is known respecting this particular force.
Many theories respecting the nature of electricity have been advanced for
the purpose of explaining electrical phenomena. The theory of Dr Franklin
supposed the existence of a single homogeneous, imponderable fluid, of
extreme tenuity and elasticity, in a state of equable distribution
throughout the material world. This fluid is assumed to be repulsive of
its own particles, but attractive of all other matter. When distributed in
bodies, in quantities proportionate to their capacities or attraction for
it, such bodies are said to be in their 'natural state.' When we increase
or diminish the natural quantity of electricity in any substance,
excitation is the result, and the substance, if 'overcharged,' is said to
be electrified 'positively,' or if 'undercharged,' 'negatively.' These
theories, and all others based upon the assumption that electricity is a
form of matter, have been found to be inadequate for the elucidation of
electrical phenomena.

At the present day, however, two kinds of electric forces are recognised,
and distinguished as negative and positive, but they are both assumed to
be analogous in principle, and very generally assumed to be simply due to
different analogous motions of matter. For a full exposition, however, the
reader must refer to some of the especial works on the subject.

=ELECTRICITY, Iron reduced by.= Gelatin capsules of the size of a 2-grain
pill, filled with powdered blacksmith scales (black oxide of iron).
(Hager.)

=ELECTRO-CHEM'ISTRY.= That branch of chemistry which treats of the agency
of electricity in effecting chemical changes.

=ELECTRO-ETCH'ING.= See ETCHING.

=ELECTROL'YSIS.= (-tr[)o]l'-e-s[)i]s). Electro-chemical decomposition. The
voltaic current has the power of loosening and separating the constituents
of certain compound bodies when these are interposed in the circuit. The
substances which are thus susceptible of decomposition are termed
electrolytes. They are all binary compounds, containing single equivalents
of their components, which are held together by very powerful affinities.
The amount of electrical power required to effect decomposition varies
greatly with different electrolytes: solution of iodide of potassium,
melted chloride of lead, hydrochloric acid, water mixed with a little
sulphuric acid, and pure water, demand very different degrees of
decomposing force, the resistance increasing from the first-mentioned
substance to the last, which latter it has been denied can be decomposed.
One of the indispensable conditions of electrolysis is fluidity. When a
liquid is electrolysed its components are discharged solely at the
limiting surfaces, where, according to the usual figurative mode of
speech, the current enters and leaves the liquid, all the intermediate
portions appearing quiescent. The terms 'anode' and 'cathode' have been
proposed respectively for the surfaces which are supposed to receive and
let out the current of positive electricity. The anode is therefore
directly against or opposite the positive pole of the battery, or,
according to the improved nomenclature, the positive electrode; and the
cathode against the negative pole, or electrode. The bodies which are set
free by the action of the current are termed ions; those which go to the
anode and appear at the positive electrode being distinguished by the term
anions, and those which go to the cathode and appear at the negative
electrode by the term cathions. This nomenclature has, however, been but
partially adopted, and is making but slow way, if any, many preferring the
old terms of electro-positive for anions, and electro-negative for
cathions.

The relative decomposing effects produced by the same current in different
electrolytes are exactly expressed by the chemical equivalents of the
electrolytes. Thus, if a current be made to traverse acidulated water,
iodide of potassium, and chloride of lead, these three electrolytes will
suffer decomposition at the same time, but by no means to the same extent;
for the current which decomposes but 9 parts of water will separate into
their elements 166 parts of iodide of potassium and 139 parts of chloride
of lead. The electrolysis of metallic salts is now carried out on a large
scale in the beautiful arts, which we notice under the general head of
ELECTROTYPE.

=ELECTROMOTIVE ESSENCE= (Romershausen). An embrocation for restoring the
suspended functions of the skin by stimulating the flow of vital
electricity and the functions of the nerves. A solution of oils of
turpentine and rosemary in the ninth dilution of alcohol previously
coloured red with some vegetable dye. (Reithner.)

=ELECTRO-PLA''TING and GILDING.= See ELECTROTYPE.

=ELECTROPH'ORUS.= A simple instrument for exciting electricity, generally
used in the chemical laboratory for charging small Leyden jars when gases
have to be exploded by the electric spark. To construct it, a plate of
tinned iron is made into a circle of about 12 inches diameter; a raised
border is then turned up for about half an inch, and the extreme edge is
turned outwards over a wire to avoid a sharp border. A mixture of equal
parts by weight of shell-lac, Venice turpentine, and resin, is made by
gently heating them together with stirring until well fused and thoroughly
incorporated. This composition is poured into the plate, to quite fill it,
and kept melted until all bubbles have disappeared. Another portion of the
instrument, serving the same purpose as the conductor of an electric
machine, is a circle of wood, rather smaller than the resinous plate,
rounded at the edge, and neatly covered with tin-foil. An insulating
handle, formed of a piece of stout glass rod, is cemented into the centre
of this wooden disc. Before using the instrument it must be carefully
dried and slightly warmed. The resinous surface is excited by beating it
obliquely with a folded piece of warm flannel. When this has been done for
about a minute, the warm dry cover of the instrument is to be placed upon
the resinous plate, and touched with the finger. If the cover is then
raised a few inches, and the knuckle approached, a powerful spark of
positive electricity will pass; and if the cover be again replaced,
touched, and raised, a second spark will pass. This may be repeated many
times without again exciting the resinous plate. By receiving the sparks
with the knobs of a Leyden jar, a charge strong enough to give a powerful
shock, or explode a gaseous mixture, may be rapidly obtained. Other forms
have been given to the instrument, but the essential part of every one is
a plate of some resinous substance.

=ELECTROTYPE.= _Syn._ ELECTRO-MET'ALLURGY, GALVAN'O-PLAS'TIC. The art of
working in metals by the aid of electricity. Strictly speaking, the term
electrotype is only applicable to one branch of 'electro-metallurgy'--that
which relates to the production of copies of engraved plates, medals,
coins, and other works--but it is now commonly employed in the sense
indicated by our definition. According to this extended signification of
the term, the art of electrotype includes ELECTRO-PLATING, and
ELECTRO-GILDING.

_General Principles._--If a current from a voltaic battery be passed, by
means of platinum electrodes, through water to which some sulphuric acid
has been added, electrolysis, takes place, hydrogen appearing at the
cathode, and oxygen at the anode. If into the acid liquid some crystals of
sulphate of copper be now thrown, electrolysis will still go on, but only
one of the elements of the water, namely oxygen, will be evolved; for the
hydrogen, on being released, will take the place of the copper in the
solution, and the copper thus liberated will be deposited on the platinum
plate or wire which constitutes the negative electrode. This experiment
may be continued until all the copper is extracted from the solution. Let
this experiment be repeated with a copper plate for the positive
electrode, and it will be found that neither of the gases will be evolved.
The hydrogen, as before, will take the place of the copper in the
solution; the oxygen, instead of escaping at the anode, will combine with
the copper of the electrode and the sulphuric acid to form sulphate of
copper. The chemical forces called into action by the current are so
beautifully balanced, that in the last experiment the quantity of copper
supplied by the positive electrode exactly equals the quantity withdrawn
from the solution and deposited upon the negative electrode. The whole art
of electrotype consists in applying the metals thus released from their
solutions to artistic or useful purposes. To obtain compact and brilliant
deposits, many precautions have to be observed. The solutions must be kept
saturated, or nearly so; the mould to be copied, or object to be coated,
must not be too small, or out of proportion to the size of the zinc plate
of the battery; in fine, the power employed must be carefully regulated
according to the work to be done. In all arrangements the moulds or
objects which receive the deposits act as negative electrodes, and are
consequently in connection with the zinc of the battery or generating
cell.

_Electrotype Processes._ Although reguline deposits of many metals can be
obtained through the agency of voltaic electricity, we shall only treat of
those of copper, silver, gold, and platinum. When copper is deposited, the
object is generally to produce a substantial copy of a medal, an engraved
plate, or other work of art; but when solutions containing the precious
metals are electrolysed, the deposits are nearly always used for covering
the surface of inferior metals. We shall notice the operations connected
with the deposition of copper, and those relating to electro-plating under
separate heads.

1. DEPOSITION OF COPPER:

The moulds or models intended to receive the deposited metals may be
formed of various materials. For medals and similar small works, moulds of
fusible metal, white wax, stearine, stearic acid, and gutta percha, are
commonly used. The first are formed by dropping or pressing the medals to
be copied upon the melted metal, taking care that the former are quite
cold, and that the surface of the metal is bright or free from oxide. To
make a mould in gutta percha, the material must be softened in warm water,
and then pressed upon the medal by means of a strong screw press. With the
other materials the manipulation is very easy. A ribbon of cardboard or
thick paper is placed round the medal, so as to form a rim; the material,
which has been melted in an earthen vessel, is then poured on, and allowed
to remain until quite cold and hard, when it is cautiously removed. For
large works, moulds of plaster of Paris are usually employed; these
require to be saturated with wax or tallow, by standing them in a shallow
vessel containing these substances in a melted state. For copying seals
and small coins, impressions in ordinary sealing-wax may be used as
electrotype moulds. Non-metallic moulds must be coated with some substance
which has the property of conducting electricity before they can be used
as negative electrodes. The substance commonly employed is plumbago or
black-lead. It must be in the condition of an impalpable powder. It is
rubbed briskly over the surface of the mould (wax, stearine, plaster, &c.)
by means of a strong fine camel-hair brush, till the whole presents the
well-known black-lead polish. The adhesion of the plumbago may be often
promoted by breathing slightly on the mould. To cause it to adhere to
sealing wax impressions, the wax may be slightly moistened with spirits of
wine, or exposed to the vapour of ether. Delicate moulds and objects,
which cannot well be black-leaded, may be covered with a conducting film
of silver, by first dipping them in bisulphuret of carbon holding about
1/20th part of phosphorus in solution, and then, after a few seconds,
immersing them in a weak solution of nitrate of silver, and allowing them
to dry in the light. Metallic moulds require no preparation.

The voltaic apparatus used may now be described. The single-cell
arrangement, used for small works, is formed on the principle of Daniell's
Constant Battery. It consists of a vessel of glass, earthenware, or wood,
containing a smaller cell of thin biscuit ware, or other porous material;
a rod or plate of amalgamated zinc, placed within the porous cell, and a
wire connecting the zinc with the mould to be copied; the latter being
placed in the outer vessel. The annexed figure represents a convenient
form of the single-cell:--

The battery arrangement has many advantages over that described above, and
should always be employed when large objects are to be electrotyped, or
when a number of small moulds are to be operated upon. In this arrangement
the copper solution is electrolysed in a separate vessel, termed the
decomposition cell, and the current generated by one or more cells of a
Daniell's or Smee's battery. This arrangement is shown in the following
engraving:--

[Illustration:

  _a._ An oval vessel of salt-glazed earthenware or wood nearly
      filled with a saturated solution of sulphate of copper.
  _b._ A porous diaphragm, containing the cylinder or plate of zinc
      (_c_), and filled with dilute sulphuric acid.
  _d._ A small bar of brass or copper fastened to the vessel by the
      binding screws (_e, e_), and supporting the plate of zinc
      (_c_), by the hook of copper wire (_f_), and the mould (_g_),
      by the hook (_h_).
  _i._ A small shelf or partition to support crystals of sulphate of
      copper, to keep up the strength of the solution.]

[Illustration:

  _a._ A constant battery cell.
  _b._ Decomposition cell, a cubical vessel made of wood or
      earthenware, and filled with a mixture of 1 part of dilute
      sulphuric acid (1 acid + 9 water), and 2 parts of saturated
      solution of sulphate of copper by measure.
  _c, c, c._ Moulds suspended to the brass rod (_f_), and connected
      with the zinc or positive element of the battery (_a_), by
      means of the screw (_g_.)
  _d, d._ Pieces of sheet copper suspended on the brass rod (_h_),
      and connected with the zinc end of the battery, by means of
      the screw (_i_), employed to keep up the strength of the
      cupreous solution in the decomposition cell.]

To connect the moulds with the zinc or positive element, stout copper
wires or strips of thin sheet copper are employed. In the case of a
non-metallic mould, the wire must lead directly to the plumbagoed surface,
or, what amounts to the same thing, the plumbago must be extended to the
point of attachment. The connecting wires, and the backs and edges of
metallic moulds, must be covered with sealing-wax varnish, or other
non-conducting substance, to prevent them receiving the deposit. Before a
mould is placed in the copper solution it is advisable that everything
should be arranged, so that the immersion may occasion immediate voltaic
action. If the connection between the zinc and the mould is not effected
until after the immersion, the solution may act chemically on the surface
of the mould, and cause the deposit to appear dark and dirty. When a mould
has remained in the solution long enough to receive a complete coating of
copper, it may be lifted out with impunity for examination. If everything
is going on well, the deposited metal will present a brilliant, light,
copper-coloured surface. When sufficiently thick, the deposit is removed
with care, washed and placed to dry. Electrotype medals may be polished
with wash-leather and the plate brush, or bronzed. Various natural objects
such as insects, fruits, &c.; small works of art, such as busts and
statuettes; chemical vessels, particularly glass flasks and retorts; and
numerous classes of articles, may be rendered less fragile by coating them
with copper by the electrotype process.

II. DEPOSITION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS--

The solutions generally employed as electrolytes from which silver and
gold are respectively separated, are those of the argento-cyanide and the
auro-cyanide of potassium. These compounds are what chemists call double
salts; for instance, cyanide of potassium is simply a compound of
potassium and cyanogen; but argento-cyanide of potassium is cyanide of
silver united with cyanide of potassium. When a solution of this double
salt is electrolysed silver appears at one electrode and cyanogen at the
other, while a proportionate amount of the simple cyanide of potassium is
formed in the solution. But if the positive electrode is of silver, the
cyanogen combines with it, and forms cyanide of silver, which unites with
the liberated cyanide of potassium, and so keeps up the strength of the
solution.

As in the deposition of copper, the apparatus used for plating or gilding
may be the single cell or the decomposition cell and battery. The
necessity of economising solutions of silver and gold has, however, led to
certain modifications in the apparatus. The single-cell arrangement
consists, as before (see _above_), of an outer vessel of glass or
earthenware, containing a cell of porous biscuit ware; but the object to
be silvered or gilded is placed, with the cyanide solution in the latter,
while the zinc is placed in the outer vessel, with the dilute sulphuric
acid.[273] The zinc is usually employed in the form of a cylinder,
completely surrounding the porous cell. In the battery arrangement the
decomposition cell may be of porcelain or glass; the silver or gold
employed to keep up the strength of the solution may be in plates, wires,
or ingots. For plating small objects, a single cell of a Daniell's battery
will afford ample decomposing power; gilding may be better accomplished by
using three such cells. The battery arrangement is much more convenient,
effective, and economical than the single-cell arrangement.

[Footnote 273: The strength of the acid water acting upon the zinc must be
regulated according to the work to be done. If the action between the acid
and the zinc be too energetic, the electricity developed will be more than
sufficient to release pure metal, and hydrogen will be evolved, which will
interfere with the deposition.]

On a large scale, electro-plating is carried out in oblong vats,
occasionally holding from 200 to 250 gallons of solution. Silver plates
connected with a powerful voltaic or magneto-electric battery, are placed
at intervals in the vats; they form the positive electrodes, and
correspond in extent of surface with the articles to be coated, and face
them on both sides. The articles (tea-pots, cruet-frames, forks, spoons,
&c.) act as the negative electrodes, and are suspended by copper wires
from brass rods laid lengthways over the vats, and connected with the
battery. The articles plated are usually formed of nickel silver or German
silver, which is chosen on account of its silvery whiteness, a quality of
great importance when portions of the coating of noble metal have been
worn away by use.

To prepare the articles for plating, they are first boiled in a solution
of potassa, to free them from grease; they are then quickly dipped in red
nitrous acid, to remove any oxide that may have formed on the surface, and
after this well washed in water, to remove every trace of acid. They are
then suspended from copper wires, and dipped into a solution of mercury in
cyanide of potassium, or some other mercurial solution, and afterwards
washed in water, as before. The amalgamation of the surface effected by
the last operation promotes the adhesion of the film of silver. The
articles having been weighed, are now immersed in the silvering solution,
and left until a sufficient amount of silver has been deposited on them.
Their condition at any time may be ascertained by weighing a test-object
removed from the solution. In some electro-plating establishments the
silvering solution is kept constantly stirred by simple mechanical
arrangements; in others, continual motion is given to the suspended
articles. On being removed from the vats the plated articles are well
brushed with brushes of fine brass wire attached to a lathe, and cleaned
with fine Calais sand; they are afterwards polished on revolving brushes
with rottenstone, then by hand with soft leather and rouge, and, lastly,
with the naked female hand. A lasting polish is given to some articles by
burnishing with a burnisher formed of highly polished hardened steel,
bloodstone, agate, or flint. The process of electro-gilding on the large
scale is nearly the same as that of electro-plating or silvering, but, of
course, plates of gold are suspended in the solution instead of silver
plates.

Various solutions for silvering, plating, and platinising, have been
recommended. We give below those generally employed.

1. Solvent solution. Cyanide of potassium, 2 oz; distilled water or rain
water, 1 pint; dissolve. Other proportions may be employed. Used as a
general solvent for salts of silver, gold, and platinum.

2. Silver solution. Oxide of silver?[274] (not dried), 1 oz.; the solvent
solution (No. 1), 1 pint. Used for the single-cell apparatus, its strength
being maintained as the deposition proceeds by a fresh supply of oxide
from time to time.

[Footnote 274: Precipitated from pure solution of nitrate of silver by
excess of lime water. It should be well washed, and preserved in bottles
with distilled water.]

Cyanide of silver dissolved in solvent solution (No. 1). This is the
solution generally employed for plating with a separate decomposition
cell.

3. Gold solution. Add to a pint of No. 1 oxide of gold, 1/4 oz. Used in
the same manner as the second silver solution.

Cyanide of gold dissolved in solution of cyanide of potassium (No. 1).
Used as last.

4. Platinum solution. The double chloride of platinum and potassium,
dissolved in solution of caustic potassa. Other solutions have been
proposed, but this appears to be decomposed with the greatest ease.

The above sketch of the electrotype art is necessarily very imperfect. For
minute details respecting manipulation, the reader is referred to the
excellent treatises on the subject that have been written; more
particularly to Ernest Spon's valuable work, entitled 'Workshop Receipts.'

=ELEC'TUARY.= _Syn._ ELECTUARUM, L. Electuaries (ELECTUARIA) are formed of
light powders, generally vegetable, mixed up with honey, syrup, or sugar,
to the consistence of a stiff paste. In the present Pharmacop[oe]ia they
are included under the title Confection, but this arrangement is
manifestly improper, as the words are not synonymous. In Conserves and
Confections the addition of the saccharine matter is in much larger
proportion, and is designed to preserve the vegetable matter; in
Electuaries, the syrup is designed merely to communicate the required
form. (Dr Murray.)

The preparation of electuaries is similar to that of confections and
conserves, and the same precautions must be observed to reduce the dry
ingredients to very fine powder before adding them to the syrup or other
substances used to give them form. Care must also be taken to diffuse the
ingredients equally through every portion of the mass, by patient and
laborious stirring. The neglect of this point has often led to
disagreeable consequences, from some portion of the electuary being nearly
inert, while another portion has possessed increased activity. See
CONFECTION, CONSERVE, LINCTUS, &c.

=Electuary of Ac'etate of Potassa.= See CONSERVE.

=Electuary of Al'um.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ALUMINIS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Ph[oe]bus.) Alum, 1 dr.; extract of logwood, 4 dr.; balsam of Peru, 6
drops; water of sage, q. s. Astringent and antiseptic; in diarrh[oe]a,
sponginess of the gums, &c.

2. (St. Marie.) Alum, 1 dr.; catechu and extract of bark, of each 2 dr.;
conserve of roses, 6 dr.; simple syrup, q. s.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful,
every 4 hours; in chronic diarrh[oe]a, leucorrh[oe]a, haemorrhages, &c. See
CONFECTION.

=Electuary, An'odyne.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANODYNUM, L. _Prep._ See
CONFECTION OF OPIUM.

=Electuary, Anti'monial.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTIMONII, Fr. _Prep._
Electuary of senna, 1 oz.; guaiacum resin, aethiops mineral, prepared
sulphuret of antimony, each 1/2 oz.; syrup, q. s.--_Dose_, 1 dr. to 2 dr.
twice a day.

=Electuary, Anti-rheumatic.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTIRHEUMATICUM; CHELSEA
PENSIONER. _Prep._ Guaiacum resin, 1 dr.; rhubarb, 2 dr.; bitartrate of
potash, 1 oz.; sulphur, 2 oz.; one nutmeg; mix the powders with 1 lb. of
honey. Take two spoonfuls night and morning.

=Electuary, Ar'abic.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM SARZAE COMPOSITUM, E. ARABICUM,
L.; ELECTUAIRE ARABIQUE, Fr. _Prep._ From sarsaparilla, 5 oz.; senna and
China root, of each, 3 oz.; dried walnut peel, 1 oz. (all in fine powder);
honey, q. s.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 dr. See TRAITEMENT ARABIQUE.

=Electuary, Aromat'ic.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM AROMATICUM (Ph. E.). This
preparation differs from the aromatic confection of the other British
colleges, in not containing chalk. It is aromatic and stomachic, but not
antacid or absorbent. CONFECTION.

=Electuary, Bath.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTI-CACHECTICUM, E. MARTIALE, E.
FERRI COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ From blacksmiths' clinkers, reduced to an
impalpable powder, and made into an electuary with honey or treacle, q.
s.; afterwards adding powdered ginger and carbonate of magnesia, of each,
1 oz., to every lb. of the mixture.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful night and
morning every day, for 3 or 4 days, and again, after an equal interval, as
long as thought necessary; as a chalybeate tonic, and in worms.

=Electuary of Bitar'trate of Potas'sa.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM POTASSAE
TARTRATIS, L. _Prep._ (Monro.) Cream of Tartar, 1 oz,; powdered ginger and
conserve of roses, of each 1 dr.; syrup of orange peel, q. s.--_Dose_, 1
to 3 dr.; as a hydragogue purge. It is also a useful laxative in common
cases. See CONFECTION OF CREAM OF TARTAR.

=Electuary, Black.= _Syn._ TROUSSEAU'S ELECTUARY, TROUSSEAU'S BLACK TONIC;
ELECTUARIUM NIGRUM, E. FERRI TANNATIS, L. _Prep._ From sesquichloride of
iron, 4 dr.; tannin, 1 dr.; confection of roses, 2 oz.; syrup of orange
peel, 1 oz. Tonic and astringent.--_Dose_, 5 to 30 gr.

=Electuary of Black Pep'per.= See CONFECTION OF PEPPER.

=Electuary of Burnt Sponge.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM SPONGIAE USTAE, L. _Prep._
(Hulse.) Burnt sponge, 10 gr.; rhubarb, 4 gr.; conserve of roses, q. s.
For a _dose_, to be taken night and morning; in scrofula, glandular
swellings, &c. See CONFECTION OF SPONGE.

=Electuary of Cas'sia.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CASSIAE (Ph. D. 1826.), E. C.
FISTULAE (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. D. 1826.) Fresh cassia pulp and syrup of
orange, of each, 1/2 lb.; manna, 2 oz.; tamarind pulp, 1 oz.; mix, and
evaporate to a proper consistence.--_Dose_, 2 dr. to 1 oz.; as a gentle
laxative for children, or as a vehicle for other cathartics. That of the
shops is commonly made with equal parts of tamarind and cassia pulps,
mixed with 1/8th of manna, and flavoured with a few drops of tincture of
orange peel, without any evaporation. See CONFECTION.

=Electuary of Cat'echu.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CATECHU, CONFECTIO C., C.
JAPONICA, L. _Prep._ (Ph. E.) Powdered catechu and kino, of each, 4 oz.;
cinnamon and nutmegs, of each, 1 oz.; opium (dissolved in a little
sherry), 1-1/2 dr.; syrup of red roses (evaporated to the consistence of
honey), 1-1/2 pint. See CONFECTION, and _below_.

=Electuary of Cat'echu (Compound).= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CATECHU COMPOSITUM
(Ph. D.). See CONFECTIONS. Both the above are astringent, aromatic, and
anodyne.--_Dose_, 15 gr. to 1 dr., or more; in diarrh[oe]a, dysentery, &c.

=Electuary, Cathar'tic.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CATHARTICUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
Confection of senna, 1-1/2 oz.; flowers of sulphur, 1/2 oz.; syrup of
roses or of orange peel, q. s.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, 3 or 4 times a day,
in piles; or, 2 to 3 teaspoonfuls, as a gentle laxative for females, and
in skin diseases, gonorrh[oe]a, &c. A mild and excellent medicine. It may
be safely given in larger doses.

2. (Brera.) Aloes, 8 gr.; cream of tartar, 2 dr.; honey, q. s. For a dose.
In amenorrh[oe]a, attributed to abdominal engorgement.

=Electuary, Cephal'ic.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CEPHALICUM, E. VALERIANAE
COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ (Hosp. F.) Valerian root and mistletoe of the oak,
of each 1 oz.; honey, 1-1/2 oz.; tincture of henbane, q. s. to make an
electuary. In nervous and rheumatic headache, &c.; assisted by an
aperient.

=Electuary of Char'coal.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CARBONIS, E. CARBONII,
CONFECTIO C., L. _Prep._ 1. (Hosp. F.) Confection of senna, 2 oz.; fresh
burnt charcoal, 1/2 oz.; carbonate of soda, 1/4 oz.; syrup of orange peel,
q. s.

2. (Radius.) Electuary of senna, 2 oz.; powdered charcoal and carbonate of
soda, of each, 1 dr. Both the above are given in obstinate
constipation.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 teaspoonfuls twice a day. See ELECTUARY FOR
THE TEETH.

=Electuary for Chol'era.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTI-CHOLERICUM, L. The
preparations that come under this name are numerous, including aromatic
confection, and several like absorbent or astringent preparations. This
name has been given to the American remedy for cholera, noticed at page

=Electuary of Cincho'na Bark.= _Syn._ ELECTUARY OF BARK; ELECTUARIUM
CINCHONAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From yellow bark and simple syrup, of each 1 oz.;
conserve of red roses and confection of orange peel, of each 1/2 oz. Tonic
and febrifuge.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 dr.; in debility, agues, &c.

2. (Radius.) Peruvian bark, 1 oz.; syrup of orange peel, q. s. As the
last.--_Dose_, a teaspoonful or more, 3 or 4 times daily. (See _below_.)

=Electuary of Cinchona (Compound).= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CINCHONAE
COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (ACIDULATED,--Copland.) Yellow bark, 1 oz.;
confection of roses, 1/2 oz.; diluted sulphuric acid, 1 dr.; syrup of
ginger, 1-1/2 oz.

2. (ASTRINGENT,--Saunders.) Powdered Peruvian bark, orange peel, and
conserves of roses and hips, of each 6 dr.; crabs' eyes (or prepared
chalk), 2 dr.; syrup of catechu, q. s.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, 2 or 3
times daily; in chronic diarrh[oe]a, &c.

3. (WITH CATECHU,--Pierquin.) Peruvian bark, 1 oz.; catechu and balsam of
tolu, of each 1 dr.; syrup of comfrey (_Symphytum officinale_,--Linn.), q.
s.--_Dose._ As the last; in spitting of blood, haemorrhages, &c.

4. (WITH CLOVES,--Dewees.) Peruvian bark, 2 oz.; cloves, 1 dr. (better, 4
dr.); simple syrup, q. s. A piece the size of a walnut, every hour or two,
during the intermission of an ague.

5. (WITH IRON,--Cadet.) Peruvian bark, 6 dr.; oxide of iron and confection
of opium, of each 2 dr.; syrup of cinnamon, q. s.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful,
or more, twice a day; in dropsy of the belly, after the evacuation of the
fluid, and as a tonic in debility, accompanied by nervous excitement, &c.,
in the absence of fever.

6. (Quarin's.) Red bark, 1 oz.; ammoniated iron, 1 dr.; made into an
electuary with equal parts of oxymel of squills and syrup of the 'five
roots' (diuretic). Tonic, febrifuge, and pectoral.

7. (WITH SAL-AMMONIAC,--P. Cod.) Gray bark, 2-1/4 oz.; hydrochlorate of
ammonia, 1 dr.; honey and syrup of wormwood, of each 2 oz. In
intermittents occurring in scrofulous subjects.

8. (WITH SODA,--P. Cod.) Powdered cinchona, 1 oz.; carbonate of
soda, 2 dr.; thin mucilage, q. s. to mix. Tonic, febrifuge, and
stomachic.--_Dose_, 2 dr., 2 or 3 times a day; in agues, complicated with
acidity and dyspepsia.

9. (WITH SULPHUR,--Cadet.) Peruvian bark, 1 dr.; sulphur, crabs' eyes
(chalk), and spermaceti, of each 2 dr.; extract of opium, 4 dr.; conserve
of roses, 4 dr.; syrup of milfoil, q. s. Highly praised in debility from
phthisis.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, 2 or 3 times a day, assisted with the
liberal use of raw or lightly boiled eggs and cod-liver oil.

10. (WITH TIN,--Cadet.) Peruvian bark 1 oz.; tin filings and valerian
root, of each 1/2 oz.; syrup of saffron, q. s. In epilepsy, worms,
&c.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, morning and evening. See CONFECTION OF BARK.

=Electuary of Copai'ba.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM COPAIBAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Copaiba
and powdered cubebs, equal parts; conserves of roses and orange peel, of
each (in equal quantities), q. s.

2. (Caspar.) Blanched almonds, 6 dr.; powdered marsh-mallow root, 1 dr.;
catechu, 1/2 dr.; balsam of copaiba, 3 dr.

3. (Ricord.) Confection of almonds, 1 oz.; copaiba, 1/2 oz.; hard extract
of rhatany, 3 dr.; syrup of orange peel, q. s. All the above are excellent
in gonorrh[oe]a, gleets, &c. The last two agree better with the stomach
than most other like preparations.--_Dose_, 1 teaspoonful, or more
(rapidly increased to 2 or 3 dr.), 3 or 4 times daily. See CONFECTION.

=Electuary of Cow'hage.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM DOLICHOS, E. MUCUNAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. Dip the pods of dolichos in treacle, allow them to drain a
moment, and then scrape off the hairs for use.

2. (Chamberlain.) As the last, nearly.

3. (Correa.) Cowhage (the hairs or setae), 40 gr.; syrup, 1/2 oz.

4. (Ellis.) Cowhage (hairs), 1 dr.; honey, q. s.

5. (Guy's Hosp.) Cowhage (hairs), any quantity, made into an electuary
with treacle, q. s. In worms.--_Dose._ For a child, a teaspoonful; for an
adult, a table-spoonful; in the morning, fasting, and at night, for 3 or 4
days; followed by a dose of castor oil, to which a teaspoonful of
turpentine may be advantageously added. See COWHAGE.

=Electuary of Cu'bebs.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CUBEBAE, L. _Prep._ 1. See
ELECTUARY OF COPAIBA.

2. (Beral.) Cubebs and copaiba, of each 2 oz.; powdered alum, 1 oz.;
extract of opium, 5 or 6 gr.; mix.

3. (Bouchardat.) Cubebs, 1/2 oz.; copaiba, 1 oz.; sweet spirit of nitre,
1/2 fl. dr.; oil of peppermint, 8 or 10 drops; powdered sugar, q. s.

4. (Radius.) Cubebs, 1/2 oz.; honey, 1 oz. In gonorrh[oe]a, mucous
discharges from the vagina, bladder, &c.--_Dose_, 1 teaspoonful,
afterwards increased to 2 or 3 teaspoonfuls, twice or thrice daily. See
CONFECTION OF COPAIBA, ELECTUARY OF C., &c.

=Electuary, Demul'cent.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM DEMULCENS, L. _Prep._ From
spermaceti, syrup of poppies, and syrup of tolu, of each 2 dr.; powdered
gum tragacanth, 1 dr.; confection of roses, 6 dr.; nitre, 1/2 dr.--_Dose._
A piece the size of a small filbert, frequently; as a pectoral and
demulcent in coughs, hoarseness, &c.

=Electuary, Deob'struent.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM DEOBSTRUENS, L. _Prep._
(Copland.) Confection of senna, 1-1/2 oz.; cream of tartar, 1 oz.;
sulphur and syrup of ginger, of each 6 dr.; borax, 3 dr.; syrup of
poppies, 2 dr.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, or more, nightly; in the obstinate
constipation of females, painful and suppressed menstruation, &c.

=Electuary for Dys'entery.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTI-DYSENTERICUM (Ph. E.
1744), L. Electuary of catechu, mixed with half its weight of Locatel's
balsam.

=Electuary, Emmen'agogue.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM EMMENAGOGICUM, L. _Prep._
From myrrh, 1 dr.; ammoniated iron, 1 scrup.; syrup of ginger, q. s. to
mix.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 1 dr., night and morning; in deficient or
suppressed menstruation.

=Electuary for Epilep'sy.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTI-EPILEPTICUM, L. _Prep._
1. See ELECTUARY OF CINCHONA (Comp.), No. 10.

2. (Dr Mead.) Powdered cinchona, 1 oz.; valerian and tin (both in powder),
of each, 1/2 oz.; syrup, q. s. to mix.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, night and
morning.

=Electuary, Feb'rifuge.= See ELECTUARY OF CINCHONA, &c.

=Electuary, Compound Guaiacum.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM GUAIACI COMPOSITUM.
(Mid. H.) _Prep._ Guaiacum resin, 2 dr.; rhubarb, 1 dr.; sulphur, 2 dr.;
nitre, 2 dr.; syrup of poppies, q. s.; mix.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 1 dr.

=Electuary of In'digo.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM INDIGI, E. PIGMENTI INDICI, L.
_Prep._ (Ph[oe]bus.) Powdered indigo, 4 dr.; aromatic powder, 1/2 dr.;
syrup, 1 fl. oz. or q. s. In spasmodic diseases, especially in epilepsy,
chorea, and hysteria, and the convulsions of children. It has also been
used with advantage in that species of impotence in which strychnia is
useful. The above quantity is to be all taken, in divided doses, during
the day. To be of permanent advantage, it should be continued for several
weeks.

=Electuary of Ipecacuan'ha.= See CONFECTION.

=Electuary of Jal'ap.= See CONFECTION.

=Electuary of Kermes.= MARMELADE DE ZANETTI; ELECTUARIUM KERMETIS, E. K.
MINERALIS, L. _Prep._ From manna, 4 oz.; pulp of cassia and oil of
almonds, of each 2 oz.; butter of cacao, 1/2 oz.: Kermes mineral, 10 gr.;
syrup of marsh-mallow, 3 fl. oz.; syrup of orange flower, q. s. A
diaphoretic laxative.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 teaspoonfuls, or more.

=Electuary of Lau'rel Ber'ries.= See CONFECTION OF RUE.

=Electuary, Len'itive.= See CONFECTION OF SENNA.

=Electuary, Mahomed's.= _Prep._ 1. From grocer's currants, 2 oz.; powdered
senna, 1/2 oz.; powdered ginger, 1 dr.; finely powdered capsicum and
cloves, of each 20 gr.; croton oil, 3 drops; conserve of roses and syrup
of saffron, of each in equal parts, q. s. to mix.

2. (Bateman.) Currants, 1 oz.; senna, 1/2 oz.; ginger, 1/2 dr.; syrup of
roses, q. s.; croton oil, 1 drop.--_Dose_, 1 or 2 teaspoonfuls, early in
the morning; in dyspepsia and habitual constipation. The first formulary
produces a most useful medicine, particularly for free-livers.

=Electuary of Male Fern.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM FELICIS MARIS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Powder of male fern, 3 dr.; conserve of roses, 1 oz.

2. (Radius.) Ethereal extract of male fern, 1/2 dr.; honey of roses, 1 oz.
The half of either to be taken at night, and the remainder the next
morning. In worms.

=Electuary, Mustard.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM SINAPIS. (Guy's H.) _Prep._
Mustard seed, lightly bruised, 1 oz.; sulphur, 2 dr.; syrup of orange
peel, 1 fl. oz.--_Dose_, 1 dr., 3 or 4 times a day.

=Electuary of Ni'tre.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM POTASSAE NITRATIS, L. _Prep._
(Hosp. F.) Nitre, 3 dr.; confection of roses, 2 oz.--_Dose._ A piece of
the size of a filbert, where the use of nitre is indicated. See
CONFECTION.

=Electuary, Olibanum.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM OLIBANI. [Fr.] _Prep._ Olibanum,
1/2 oz.; balsam of copaiva, 1/2 oz.; conserve of hips, 1 oz.; syrup, q.
s.--_Dose_, 2 dr. twice a day.

=Electuary of O'pium.= See CONFECTION OF OPIUM.

=Electuary, Pec'toral.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM PECTORALE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph.
E. 1744.) From conserve of roses, 2 oz.; compound powder of tragacanth, 4
dr.; flowers of benzoin, 1 dr.; syrup of tolu, q. s.--_Dose._ A little,
_ad libitum_.

2. Oxymel of squills, syrup of marsh-mallows, mucilage of gum Arabic, and
syrup of tolu, of each 1/2 oz.; powdered lump sugar, 2 oz. As the last.

=Electuary of Pep'per.= See CONFECTION, and _above_.

=Electuary for Piles.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM HAEMORRHOIDALE, L. _Prep._ 1. See
CONFECTION and ELECTUARY OF PEPPER.

2. (Dr Copland.) Cream of tartar, 1 oz.; precipitated sulphur (pure), 3
dr.; confection of senna, 2 oz.; syrup of orange peel or ginger, q. s. to
mix.

3. (Dr Graves.) Confection of senna and sulphur, of each 1 oz.; balsam of
copaiba and cream of tartar, of each 1/2 oz.; jalap and ginger, of each 1
dr.; syrup of orange peel, q. s.

4. (Hosp. F.) Confection of senna, 2 oz.; black pepper and precipitated
sulphur, of each 1/2 oz.; oil of cubebs, 1 dr.; syrup, q. s. The last
three are useful laxatives in piles, and by their preventing the
accumulation and hardening of the faeces, often remove the
affection.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, three or four times a day. From the
difficulty experienced in procuring pure precipitated sulphur, washed
sublimed sulphur may be advantageously substituted.

=Electuary of Pomegran'ate= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM GRANATI, L. _Prep._ 1. From
the root-bark, 1 dr.; assaf[oe]tida, 1/2 dr.; croton oil, 6 drops;
conserve of roses, 1 oz.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, night and morning.

2. (Radius.) Extract of the root-bark, 6 dr.; lemon juice, 2 fl. dr.;
linden water, 3 fl. dr.; gum tragacanth, q. s. to make an electuary. One
half to be taken at once; the remainder in an hour. Both are given in
tape-worm.

=Electuary of Prunes.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM PRUNONUM. (Zwelfer.) _Prep._
Pulp of prunes boiled to a due consistence, 2 lbs.; pure sugar, 1 lb.

=Electuary of Resin.= See CONFECTION OF RESIN.

=Electuary of Rhubarb.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM RHEI, L. _Prep._ (Saunders.)
Powdered rhubarb, 1-1/2 dr.; sulphate of potassa, 1 dr.; cream of tartar,
4 dr.; pulp of tamarinds, 2 oz.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, as a mild
stomachic laxative.

=Electuary, Compound Saffron.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM CROCI COMPOSITUM.
CONFECTION D'HYACINTHE, [F.] _Prep._ Prepared Armenian bole, 8 oz.;
levigated crab's eyes, 8 oz.; cinnamon, 3 oz.; yellow sandal, red sandal,
myrrh, of each 1 oz.; dittany of Crete, 1 oz.; all in fine powder. On the
other hand, dissolve 1-1/2 lb. of honey in 3 lbs. of syrup of pinks, over
a gentle fire, and strain, and when nearly cold stir into it 1 oz. of
saffron in powder. Let stand twelve hours, and then stir in carefully the
powders first mentioned.

=Electuary of Scam'mony.= See CONFECTION.

=Electuary for Scur'vy.= See CONSERVE (Antiscorbutic).

=Electuary of Sen'na.= See CONFECTION OF SENNA.

=Electuary of Squills.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM SCILLAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Oxymel of
squills, 2 fl. oz.; cream of tartar and powdered sugar, of each 1-1/2
oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 teaspoonfuls, as a laxative and expectorant; in old
coughs, &c.

2. (Radius.) Squills, nitre, gum ammoniacum, and tartrate (bitartrate) of
potassa, of each 2 dr.; sal-ammoniac, 20 gr.; syrup of cinnamon, q.
s.--_Dose_, 2 dr.; three times a day; in dropsies. See CONSERVE OF
SQUILLS.

=Electuary of Steel.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM FERRI, E. CHALYBEATUM, L. _Prep._
1. (Dr Collier.) Potassio-tartrate of iron, 1/2 oz.; confection of roses,
1 oz.; syrup q. s. to mix.

2. (Collier.) Precipitated sesquioxide of iron, 1 oz.; honey,
2 oz.; ginger syrup, 1/2 fl. oz. Both the above are tonic and
emmenagogue.--_Dose._ One teaspoonful, thrice a day. See CONFECTION.

=Electuary, Stim'ulant.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM STIMULANS, L. _Prep._ From gum
ammoniacum (strained), 1 oz.; vinegar of squills, 1/2 oz.; mixed with a
gentle heat, and spread on leather. Applied to the chest or pit of the
stomach, as a mild counter-irritant and antispasmodic; and as a discutient
to tumid glands and indolent tumours. It is wrongly called an electuary.

=Electuary, Stomach'ic.= _Syn._ DINNER ELECTUARY; ELECTUARIUM STOMACHICUM,
CONFECTIO STOMACHICA, L. _Prep._ 1. Rhubarb, ginger, and extract of
chamomile, of each 1 dr.; confection of orange peel, 4 dr.; syrup q. s.

2. Rhubarb and gentian, of each, 1-1/2 dr.; extract of hops and powdered
capsicum, of each 1/2 dr.; oil of chamomile, 12 drops; confection of hips
and syrup of orange peel, of each 1/2 oz.

3. Green peppermint, lump sugar, and confection of orange peel, equal
parts.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, an hour before a meal. They are all
excellent stomachics, and are useful to improve the appetite, and in
dyspepsia.

=Electuary of Sul'phur.= See CONFECTION OF SULPHUR, and _below_.

=Electuary of Sulphur (Compound).= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM SULPHURIS
COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Sulphur, 3/4 oz.; cream of tartar, 1 oz.;
confections of senna and black pepper, of each 2 oz.; syrup of ginger, 1
fl. oz. An excellent medicine in piles.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, twice a
day.

2. (WITH BORAX.) Flowers of sulphur, 1 oz.; cream of tartar, 1-1/2 oz.;
borax, 1/2 oz.; confection of senna, 2-1/2 oz.; syrup of orange peel q. s.
to mix.--_Dose._ 1 to 3 teaspoonfuls, in diseases of the uterine organs
and lower bowels. See CONFECTION.

=Electuary for the Teeth.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM DENTIFRICUM, L. See TOOTH
PASTE, DENTIFRICE, &c.

=Electuary of Tin.= See CONFECTION OF TIN, and _below_.

=Electuary of Tin (Compound).= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM STANNI COMPOSITUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. Powdered tin, 1 oz.; confection of oil of turpentine, 2 oz.

2. (Dr Cheston.) Tin filings, 4 dr.; carbonate of iron (sesquioxide), 1
dr.; conserve of wormwood, 3 dr.

3. (Foy.) Powder of tin, 1 oz.; extract of wormwood and powdered jalap, of
each, 1 dr.; compound syrup of chicory, q. s. In worms.-_Dose._ A
tablespoonful, or more, for 2 or 3 successive mornings, fasting; followed
by a purge.

=Electuary of Tur'pentine.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM TEREBINTHINAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
(St. B. Hosp.) Common turpentine, 1 oz.; honey, 2 oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
teaspoonfuls; in complaints of the urinary organs, worms, &c.

2. (Radius.) Turpentine, soap, and rhubarb, of each, 1 dr.; syrup of
wormwood, q. s.--_Dose._ Three teaspoonfuls a day; in dropsy, worms, &c.

3. (E. OLEI TEREBINTHINAE,--Copland.) As confection of turpentine,--Ph. D.
See CONFECTION.

=Electuary, Ver'mifuge.= _Syn._ ELECTUARIUM ANTHELMINTICUM, E. VERMIFUGUM,
L. _Prep._ 1. (Bresmer.) Worm-seed and tansy-seed, of each 4 dr.; powdered
valerian root, 2 dr.; jalap and sulphate of potassa, of each 1-1/2 to 1/2
dr.; oxymel of quills, q. s. to mix.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, or more;
repeated night and morning, followed by a brisk purge.

2. (Rosenstein.) Worm-seed, 10 gr.; sulphate of iron, 4 gr.; jalap and
honey, of each 20 gr. For two doses, as the last. 2 or 3 dr. of confection
of senna are often substituted for the jalap and honey.

3. (Foy.) Aloes, 1/2 oz.; common salt, 3 dr.; flour, 2 oz.; honey q. s. to
form a stiff paste. Used as a suppository in ascarides.

4. Flowers of sulphur, 4 oz.; powdered jalap, 1 oz,; powdered bark, 1 oz.;
syrup of buckthorn q. s.--_Dose._ Two or three teaspoonfuls, every morning
early. See CONFECTION and ELECTUARY OF TIN, TURPENTINE, WORM-SEED, &c.

=Electuary for Worms.= See ELECTUARY VERMIFUGE (_above_).

=EL'EMENTS.= _Syn._ ELEMENTARY BODIES, SIMPLE B.; ELEMENTA, L. In
_chemistry_, those substances or bodies which have hitherto resisted every
attempt which has been made to decompose them, or to resolve them into
simpler forms of matter. Earth, air, fire, and water, were regarded by the
ancients as simple bodies, of which all others are composed, and they
still constitute the 'four elements' of the vulgar. The imaginary
principles or elements of the alchemists were termed salt, sulphur, and
mercury. About sixty-four different kinds of matter are at present
recognised as elementary bodies. They are substances having the most
diverse characters. The great majority exist in the solid state; bromide
and mercury are liquid; while oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and chlorine,
are gaseous. About four fifths of the elements are metallic, as instanced
by gold, silver, copper, iron, &c.; the remainder are non-metallic, as
instanced by carbon, sulphur, phosphorus, &c. A list of the known elements
is given under the head of ATOMIC WEIGHTS (which _see_).

=EL'EMI.= _Syn._ GUM ELEMI; ELEMI (B. P.). "A terebinthinate concretion,
from an uncertain plant." (Ph. L.) MEXICAN ELEMI is known to be the
produce of a species of the genus _Elaphrium_. MANILLA ELEMI is probably
the product of _Canarium commune_.

_Prop., &c._ The elemi of commerce is of a pale-yellow colour, brittle
without, but soft and tough within; it has a warm bitter taste, and a
fragrant aromatic smell, partaking of fennel and juniper. It is only
partially transparent even in thin plates, is very fusible, and has a
density a little greater than that of water. It contains 12-1/2 per cent.
of volatile oil (oil of elemi). It is used to give toughness to lacquers
and varnishes, and in medicine in the preparation of ELEMI OINTMENT.

_Pur._ The elemi of the shops is often adulterated, but more frequently a
factitious kind is sold for the genuine gum. This fraud may be detected by
exposing the suspected article to heat, along with a little water, when
the factitious fragrance of the spurious article evaporates, and the
coarse terebinthinate smell of the resin used to adulterate it, or which
is sold for it, becomes readily distinguishable.

=Elemi, Facti''tious.= _Prep._ 1. Yellow resin, 8 lbs.; melt, add Canada
balsam, 2 lbs; withdraw the vessel from the heat, and further add of oil
of juniper, 2 dr.; oil of sweet fennel, 1 dr.; oil of nutmeg, 1/2 dr.

2. Yellow resin, 7 lb.; Canada balsam, 1 lb.; juniper oil bottoms, 4 dr.;
oil of mace, 3 dr.; mix as before.

=EL'EMIN.= The crystalline resin of gum elemi.

=ELIX'IR.= In _pharmacy_, a name formerly applied to various compound
tinctures, and to preparations supposed to contain the quintessence of
other substances. (It is still applied to several popular remedies.) The
elixirs of the alchemists were solutions employed in their fruitless
attempts to transmute the baser metals into gold.

=Elixir, Ac'id.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ACIDUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (Dippell's) Sulphuric
acid, 1 part, dropped gradually into rectified spirit of wine, 5 parts;
placed in a large flask, and afterwards coloured by digestion on animal
kermes and saffron, of each 1 part.

2. (Haller's,--Ph. Sax. 1837.) From sulphuric acid and rectified spirit,
of each 1 part; as before.

3. (Vogler's.) From sulphuric acid and nitrous ether, equal parts, as
above. Astringent and antiseptic.--_Dose._ A few drops, in water.

=Elixir of Al'oes.= _Syn._ COMPOUND TINCTURE OF ALOES; ELIXIR ALOES, L.
See TINCTURE.

=Elixir of Aloes (Compound).= _Syn._ ELIXIR OF ALOES COMPOSITUM, L.
_Prep._ (Dr Copland.) Acetate of potassa, inspissated ox-gall, socrotine
aloes, and myrrh, of each 2 dr.; hay saffron, 1 dr.; brandy (or proof
spirit), 2-1/2 fl. oz.; digest a week, and strain. Stomachic and
laxative.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, or more; in dyspepsia, constipation, &c.

=Elixir, Anti-asthmat'ic.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ANTI-ASTHMATICUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
Oil of aniseed, camphor, and balsam of tolu, of each 1 oz.; cochineal, 1
dr.; proof spirit, 1 gal.; digest a week, and filter.

2. As the last, adding powdered opium, 1-1/4 oz.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful to
allay irritation, assisted by an occasional dose of aperient medicine; in
asthma, chronic coughs, &c.

3. (Boerhaave's.) Aniseed, asarabacca, elecampane, liquorice root, orris
root, and sweet flag (calamus), of each equal parts; made into a tincture,
with brandy.--_Dose_, 20 to 40 drops.

=Elixir Antigoutteux de Villette= is a tincture of 100 parts brown
cinchona bark, 50 parts poppy petals, 25 parts sassafras, 50 parts
guaiacum in 4,000 parts rum, mixed with 2,500 parts syrup of sarsaparilla.
(Hager.)

=Elixir, Anti-scrof'ulous.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ANTI-SCROFULOSUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
(P. Cod.) The ammoniated tincture of gentian. See TINCTURE.

2. (Desforges.) Guaiacum, 5 oz.; cinchona bark and pellitory of each 3
oz.; cloves, 5 dr.; orange peel and benzoin, of each 2 dr.; hay saffron,
1/2 dr.; rectified spirit and brandy, of each 1/2 pint; digest a week, and
filter. Used as an application to scorbutic gums.

=Elixir, Bitter.= _Syn_. ELIXIR AMARUM (Ph. Germ.) _Prep._ Extract of
buckbean, extract of orange peel, of each 2 parts; peppermint water,
alcohol (68 per cent.), of each 16 parts; spirit of ether (made of 3 parts
of alcohol and 1 part of ether), 1 part. Dissolve and mix.

=Elixir, Boerhaave's Asthmat'ic.= See ELIXIR ANTIASTHMATIC (_above_).

=Elixir, Boerhaave's Vis'ceral.= _Syn._ ELIXIR BOERHAAVII, E. B.
VISCERALE, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Han.) Aloes, myrrh, and saffron, of each 1 oz.;
tartrate of potassa, 2 oz.; alcohol (strongest rectified spirit), 14 oz.;
water, 1 oz.; macerate 3 days, and filter. This preparation "has been
highly praised in visceral obstruction." (Dr Griffith.)--_Dose_, 1 to 3
teaspoonfuls.

=Elixir of Celery= (Dr Wilkinson's.) For increasing, preserving, and
producing virility. Juniper berries, angelica root, lovage root, of each 1
part; spirit, 12 parts; orange-flower water, rose water, of each 4 parts;
spring water, sufficient. Distil 20 parts, and mix the distillate with 12
parts clarified honey. (Hager.)

=Elixir, Claude's.= _Syn._ ELIXIR CLAUDERI, L. 1. (Pideret.) Salt of
tartar, sal-ammoniac, strained aloes, and myrrh, of each 1 oz.;
elder-flower water, 1-1/4 pint, digest, with agitation, for 24 hours, and
filter.

2. (Parrish.) Carbonate of potassa, 1 oz.; aloes, guaiacum, myrrh,
saffron, and rhubarb (contused), of each 2 dr.; water, 18 fl. oz. Macerate
a few days, and decant.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 teaspoonfuls; in amenorrh[oe]a,
constipation, scurvy, visceral obstructions, &c.

=Elixir, Cough.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ANTI-CATARRHALE, L. _Prep._ 1. See
ANTI-ASTHMATIC ELIXIR.

2. (Hufeland.) Extracts of blessed thistle and dulcamara, of each 1 dr.;
cherry-laurel water, 1 fl. dr.; fennel-water, 1 fl. oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
teaspoonfuls, 3 or 4 times a day. It is a most useful remedy in coughs
occurring in nervous, hysterical, or irritable patients. See ELIXIR OF
IPECACUANHA, ELIXIR LETTSOM'S, &c. (_below_).

=Elixir, Daffy's.= _Syn._ ELIXIR SALUTIS, E. SENNAE COMPOSITUM, TINCTURA
SENNAE COMPOSITA, L. This is an aromatised and sweetened tincture of senna,
to which other cathartics are generally added. Nearly every drug-house has
its own formula for this article. The following are those employed in the
London trade:--

_Prep._ 1. East India senna, 1-1/2 lb.; jalap, 5 oz.; coriander seed and
aniseed, of each 1/2 lb.; rhubarb, 1/4 lb.; red sanders wood, 2 oz.; salt
of tartar, 2 oz.; treacle, 7 lbs.; rectified spirit of wine, 2-1/2 galls.;
water, 3-1/4 galls. All the solids are well bruised, and macerated in the
mixed fluids for 14 days, when the whole is pressed, and strained through
a flannel bag. It is too glutinous to run through filtering paper.

2. Senna, rhubarb, and aniseed, of each 2 lbs.; jalap and caraways, of
each 1 lb.; red sanders wood, 1/2 lb.; brown sugar, 7 lbs.; proof spirit,
10 galls.; as the last.

3. Senna, 56 lbs.; aniseed, 7 lbs.; rhubarb (East India), 14 lbs.;
coriander seed, 6 lbs.; caraway seed and red sanders wood, of each 5 lbs.;
cassia bark and jalap, of each 3 lbs.; proof spirit, 100 galls.; digest
for 14 days, press, strain, and add molasses, 84 lbs.; mix well, and
either clarify or strain through flannel.

4. For proof spirit in the last two formulae, equal parts of spirit of wine
and water are employed by the smaller houses.

5. (Redwood.) Senna, 1/2 lb.; aniseed, caraways, and jalap, of each 1 oz.
2 dr.; juniper berries, 2-1/2 oz.; proof spirit, 6 pints; macerate for 14
days, then add of treacle, 10-1/2 oz.; water, 1 lb. 5 oz.; mix and strain.

6. (Dicey's.) Senna, 1 lb.; guaiacum shavings, elecampane root (dried),
aniseed, caraway seed, coriander seed, and liquorice root, of each 1/2
lb.; stoned raisins, 2 lbs.; proof spirit or brandy, 9 quarts; macerate
for 10 days.

7. (Swinton's.) Senna, 1 lb.; jalap, 3 lbs.; coriander seed, caraway seed,
liquorice root, and elecampane root, of each 4 oz.; moist sugar, 2 lbs.;
rectified spirit of wine and water, of each 1 gal.; as the last.

_Obs._ Daffy's elixir is a favorite purge with drunkards, and is a common
and very popular remedy in flatulent colic, dyspepsia, diarrh[oe]a,
&c.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 table-spoonfuls, or more.

=Elixir de Pepsin Digestif.= (Grimault & Co.) For loss of appetite and
disordered digestion. Contains pepsine, in quantities not at all
proportionate to the price of the article.

=Elixir Deslauriers Toni-Febrifuge au Quinquina et Caffe.= A tonic
febrifuge. Yellow cinchona (Koeningschina), 20 grammes; brown cinchona, 8
grammes; powdered coffee beans, slightly roasted, 16 grammes; wine, 250
grammes; sugar, 15 grammes; citric acid, 2.5 grammes. Boil once after
standing some time in a warm place, and filter. Add to the filtered liquid
85 grammes sugar and 15 grammes spirit.

=Elixir de St. Hubert pour les Chasseurs= is a solution of 2 parts
carbolic acid in 50 parts spirit. (Casselmann.)

=Elixir, Devil's.= _Syn._ ELIXIR CAPSICI COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ From pods
of capsicum, and cloves (bruised), of each 1 oz.; ginger and saffron, of
each 3 oz.; cantharides, 5 dr.; proof spirit, 7 lbs.; digest for 10
days.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 3 dr., in mixtures. It is stimulating,
anti-choleraic, and aphrodisiac.

=Elixir of Garlic.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ALLII, L. _Prep._ From garlic roots
(bruised), 80 in no.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest, distil to
dryness, and repeat the process with the same spirit from fresh roots, a
second and a third time; lastly, add camphor, 2 dr. Diaphoretic and
pectoral.--_Dose._ A teaspoonful, twice a day; in asthma, old coughs,
diarrh[oe]a from debility, &c.

=Elixir, Garus's.= _Syn._ ELIXIR GARI, L.; ELIXIR DE GARUS, Fr. _Prep._ 1.
Myrrh, 1 oz.; aloes and saffron, of each 1/2 oz.; cinnamon, cloves, and
nutmeg, of each 1 dr.; proof spirit, 1 quart; digest a week, add water, 5
fl. oz., and distil over 1 quart; to the distillate (ALCOOLAT DE GARUS)
add of syrup of maidenhair, 2 lbs.; orange-flower water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Foy.) Compound tincture of saffron, 8 pints; syrup of maidenhair, 10
pints; mix; add caramel, q. s. to colour, dissolved in orange-flower
water, 1/2 pint.

3. (P. Cod.) Aloes and saffron, of each 1 oz.; myrrh, cinnamon, and
cloves, of each 1/2 oz.; nutmeg, 1/2 dr.; proof spirit, 12 pints;
orange-flower water, 16 fl. oz.; macerate 2 days, distil 6 pints, and add
to the distillate (ALCOOLAT DE GARUS), of syrup of capillaire, 7-1/2
pints; and colour with saffron q. s.

4. (Soubeiran.) Socotrine aloes and saffron, of each 1 oz.; myrrh, canella
alba, citron, and nutmegs, of each 1/2 oz.; spirit (sp. gr. .923), 20
lbs.; orange-flower water, 16 fl. oz.; macerate as last, distil 10 lbs.,
and add to the distillate (ALCOOLAT DE GARUS), of syrup of capillaire,
12-1/2 lbs.; orange-flower water, 8 fl. oz.; with saffron q. s. to colour.

5. (Thierry.) Aloes, myrrh, and saffron, of each 2 dr.; nutmeg, 4 dr.;
canella alba and cloves, of each 1 oz.; spirit (.864), 13 lbs.; draw over
12 lbs. of 'alcoolat,' add to the residue of the distillation rose water,
10 lbs.; distil 6 lbs., and add as much of this aromatic water to the
alcoolat as will raise its sp. gr. to .890. Then to every 11 lbs. of the
above mixed liquor add of simple syrup, 15 lbs.; tincture of vanilla and
orange peel, of each 2-1/2 fl. oz.; fresh milk (skimmed), 1 lb.; and
tincture of saffron q. s. to colour; digest with agitation for two days,
and filter. Used as a stomachic, carminative, and stimulant, in doses of a
wine-glassful. That prepared without distillation forms an excellent
stomachic purge. With the exception of that from the 2nd formula, the
products may be regarded as agreeable cordial liquors rather than
medicines. It is much employed on the Continent.

=Elixir of Gold.= _Syn._ ELIXIR AURII, L.; ELIXIR D'OR, Fr. _Prep._ 1. De
la Motte's Golden Drops.

2. Terchloride of gold, 20 gr.; rectified spirit, 6 fl. dr.; ether, 3 fl.
dr.; dissolve.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 drops, taken in distilled water; in gout,
scrofula, nervous diseases, cancer, indurated glands, secondary syphilis,
&c. This last preparation is often confounded with the _gouttes d'or du
General de la Motte_; but the two are evidently distinct articles. See
DROPS.

=Elixir, Haller's.= See ELIXIR ACID (_above_).

=Elixir, Hoffman's Visceral.= _Syn._ ELIXIR HOFFMANNI, E. H. VISCERALE, L.
_Prep._ 1. As ELIXIR OF ORANGE-PEEL,--Ph. Bor. 1847.

2. Thin outside peel of orange (dried), myrrh, and centuary, of each 2
dr.; extracts of carduus benedictus, cascarilla, and gentian, of each 1
dr.; white wine (sherry), 1 quart. Aromatic and stomachic.--_Dose._ A
dessert-spoonful, or more.

=Elixir for Impotence in Males= (Dr Ludwig Tiedemann). Prepared from
directions given in the Puntsaou from genuine ginseng root. 135 grammes of
a dark brown aromatic vinous liquid, prepared by digesting orange berries
in wine. The embrocation is an equal quantity of a pleasantly-smelling
liquid consisting of spirit with tincture of storax and a small admixture
of volatile oils. (Hager.)

=Elixir of Ipecac'uanha.= _Syn._ ELIXIR IPECACUANHAE, L. _Prep._ (Cadet.)
Powdered ipecacuanha and balsam of tolu, of each 4 dr.; flowers of
benzoin, opium, and saffron, of each 2 dr.; oil of aniseed, 1 dr.;
camphor, 40 gr.; alcohol (rectified spirit), 1-1/2 pint; digest a week and
filter.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dr., as a stimulant, diaphoretic, expectorant, and
stomachic; in chronic coughs, asthmas, and old colds, and in certain forms
of deficient appetite, dyspepsia, diarrh[oe]a, &c.

=Elixir of Jal'ap.= _Syn._ ELIXIR JALAPAE COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._ From
jalap, 4 oz.; scammony, 4 dr.; gamboge, 2 dr.; proof spirit, 1
quart.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 3 dr., as a purgative; especially in worms.

=Elixir Karoly pour les Fourrures.= A solution of camphor and carbolic
acid in strong spirit, mixed with a clear brown acrid tincture, perhaps
tinct. pyrethri rosei. (Casselmann.)

=Elixir, Lettsom's.= _Prep._ (Augustin.) Oil of aniseed, 1 dr.; camphor,
1-1/2 dr.; benzoic acid, opium, and saffron, of each 2 dr.; ipecacuanha
and balsam of tolu, of each 4 dr.; rectified spirit, 2 lbs.; digest 10
days and filter.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 drops, for a child; 1/2 to 1
teaspoonful, for an adult; in ordinary coughs, hooping-cough, &c.

=Elixir of Life, Bitter= (Jacob Wolff). For strengthening the
constitution. A brandy prepared from 1 gramme aloes, 10 grammes cinnamon,
2.5 grammes sweet flag, 5 grammes angelica root, .6 grammes cake saffron,
10 grammes caramel, 215 grammes glycerin, 180 grammes spirit, 350 grammes
water. (Hager.)

=Elixir, Live-long.= _Syn._ ELIXIR OF LONG LIFE; E. LONGAE VITAE, L. _Prep._
1. See TINCTURE OF RHUBARB AND ALOES.

2. (ELIXIR VITAE MATTHIOLI.) A mixture of several aromatics and stimulants,
made with rectified spirit.

=Elixir of Myrrh.= _Syn._ ELIXIR MYRRHAE, L. See TINCTURE OF SAVINE
(Comp.),--Ph. L. 1788.

=Elixir d'Or.= See ELIXIR OF GOLD.

=Elixir of Or'ange Peel.= _Syn._ ELIXIR AURANTIORUM COMPOSITUM, L. _Prep._
1. (Ph. Bor. 1847.) Orange peel, 6 oz.; cinnamon, 2 oz.; carbonate of
potassa, 1 oz.; Madeira wine, 4 lbs.; macerate 6 days, express the
tincture, and add of extracts of buckbean, cascarilla, gentian, and
wormwood, of each, 1 oz.; dissolve, and after repose for subsidence,
decant and filter. An excellent aromatic bitter and stomachic.

2. (Moscati.) Orange peel, 1 oz.; cascarilla, 1/2 oz.; waters of citron
peel and wormwood, and rectified spirit, of each 1/2 pint; digest a week.
Resembles the last.--_Dose_ (of either). A table-spoonful to a
wine-glassful.

=Elixir, Parego'ric.= _Syn._ ELIXIR PAREGORICUM, L. See TINCTURE OF
CAMPHOR (Comp.).

=Elixir, Paregoric (Scotch).= _Syn._ ELIXIR PAREGORICUM SCOTICUM, L. See
TINCTURE OF OPIUM (Ammoniated).

=Elixir, Pec'toral.= _Syn._ ELIXIR PECTORALE, L. (Ph. E. 1745.) Balsam of
tolu, 2 oz.; gum benzoin, 1-1/2 oz.; saffron, 1/2 oz.; rectified spirit,
32 fl. oz.; digest in a gentle heat for 4 days and filter.--_Dose_, 1/2 to
1 teaspoonful. (See _above_.)

=Elixir, Pol'ychrest.= _Syn._ ELIXIR POLYCHRESTON, L. _Prep._ (Ph. E.
1745.) Guaiacum (gum), 6 oz.; balsam of Peru, 1/2 oz.; rectified spirit,
23 fl. oz.; digest as last, strain, and add oil of sassafras, 2 fl. dr.
Pectoral and anti-rheumatic.--_Dose_, 10 to 60 drops, or more.

=Elixir, Paracelsus's.= See ELIXIR PROPRIETATIS (_below_).

=Elixir Proprieta'tis.= [L.] _Syn._ PARACELSUS'S ELIXIR OF PROPRIETY;
ELIXIR DE PROPRIETE DE PARACELSE, Fr. An old preparation, nearly
corresponding to the compound tincture of aloes of modern pharmacy, and
which is now sold for it. _Prep._ 1. (Soubeiran.) Tincture of myrrh, 4
oz.; tinctures of aloes and saffron, of each 3 oz. ('Trait. Pharm.' 1847.)

2. (ELIXIR PROPRIETATIS CUM ACIDO.)--_a._ The last, slightly acidulated
with oil of vitriol, and filtered.

_b._--Ph. Bor. 1847.--Aloes and myrrh, of each 2 oz.; saffron, 1 oz.;
spirit (sp. gr. .900), 2 lbs.; dilute sulphuric acid (1 to 5), 2 oz.;
macerate 4 days, and filter.

3. (ELIXIR PROPRIETATIS TARTARIZATUM; E. P. ALKALIZATUM.) From elixir
proprietatis, alkalised with salt of tartar, and filtered. The last two
are old preparations, now seldom inquired for in this country, except in
places remote from London.

=Elixir, Radcliffe's.= _Prep._ 1. From socotrine aloes, 6 dr.; rhubarb, 1
dr.; cinnamon (cassia), cochineal, and zedoary root, of each 1/2 dr.;
syrup of buckthorn, 2 fl. oz.; brandy, 1-1/4 pint; digest 10 days and
strain.

2. As the last, but substituting proof spirit, 1 pint, and water, 1/4
pint, for the brandy. Aromatic, stomachic, and aperient.--_Dose_, 1 to 4
dr.; in similar cases to those in which 'DAFFY'S ELIXIR' is taken.

=Elixir of Ro'ses.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ROSAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Eau de rose, 2 fl.
oz.; spirits of horseradish and scurvy grass, of each 1 fl. oz.; otto of
roses, 3 drops; camphor and cochineal (both in powder), 12 gr.; powdered
sugar-candy, 1/2 oz.; digest, with frequent agitation, for a week, and
after repose decant the clear, and strain through a piece of muslin. Used
as an elegant application in scurvy of the gums, and also to perfume the
breath.

2. (Beasley.) Cinnamon, 3 oz.; ginger, 2 oz.; cloves, 1 dr.; essence of
peppermint, 1 oz.; oil of orange peel, 1 dr.; otto of roses, 15 (? 25)
drops; rectified spirit, 2-1/2 pints; digest 15 days and filter. Used as a
tooth cosmetic.

=Elixir Sa'crum.= Tincture of aloes and rhubarb.

=Elixir Salu'tis.= _Syn._ ELIXIR OF HEALTH. The compound tincture of senna
of old pharmacy. See ELIXIR, DAFFY'S.

=Elixir of Scam'mony.= _Syn._ ELIXIR SCAMMONII, L. _Prep._ (Guibourt.)
Scammony (pure), 2 dr.; proof spirit, 8 fl. oz.; mix in a suitable vessel,
apply heat, set the spirit on fire, and add of sugar, 4 oz.; when the
whole is dissolved (melted down), extinguish the flame, and further add of
syrup of violets, 2 fl. oz.; mix well, and after sufficient repose decant
the clear portion from the dregs. The product should be 12 oz., containing
12 gr. of scammony per oz.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dessert-spoonfuls in milk or
aromatised water; or made into an emulsion with aromatics; in worms, &c.

=Elixir, Squire's.= _Prep._ 1. (Original Formula.) Aurum musivum, 3 oz.;
opium, 2 oz.; camphor, 1 oz.; cochineal, 1/2 oz.; sweet fennel, 1/4 oz.;
tincture of serpentary, 1 pint (old meas.); spirit of aniseed, 1 gal. (old
meas.); sugar, 1 lb.; dissolved in water, 1 pint (old meas.); digest 10
days and filter.

2. Powdered opium, 2 oz.; ginger, red sanders wood, and camphor, of each 1
oz.; oil of aniseed, 1/2 oz.; oil of sweet fennel, 1/2 dr.; tincture of
serpentary, 1 pint; proof spirit, 5 pints; water, 1 quart; as last.
Stimulant, anodyne, diaphoretic, and pectoral.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
teaspoonfuls; in chest affections, nervous headaches, &c., in the absence
of inflammatory symptoms.

=Elixir, Stomach'ic.= Compound tincture of gentian was formerly so called.

=Elixir, Stoughton's.= _Prep._ 1. Raisins (stoned and bruised), 1 lb.;
gentian root, 3/4 lb.; dried orange peel, 6 oz.; serpentary, 1/4 lb.;
calamus aromaticus, 1-1/2 oz.; cardamoms, 1/2 oz.; sugar colouring, 1/4
pint; brandy or proof spirit, 2 galls.; digest a week and strain.

2. Tincture of gentian (compound), and brandy or proof spirit, of each 1
quart; tincture of serpentary and syrup of saffron, of each 1 pint;
tinctures of aloes and rhubarb, of each 1/4 pint; bitter almonds
(bruised), 8 in no.; digest as before.

3. (Foy.) Aloes and cascarilla, of each 1 dr.; rhubarb, 4 dr.; gentian,
germander, dried orange peel, and wormwood, of each 6 dr.; rectified
spirit, 32 fl. oz.; as before. Stimulant, tonic, and stomachic.--_Dose_,
20 drops to a teaspoonful.

=Elixir, Ton'ic.= _Syn._ ELIXIR ROBORANS. See TINCTURE OF CROWN BARK
(Comp.,--Ph. Bor. 1847).

=Elixir Tonique Antiglaireux de Guille.= A stomachic tonic for
diarrh[oe]a. Calumba root, 90 parts; orris root, 60 parts; gentian root, 8
parts; jalap root, 1500 parts; aloes, 13 parts; saffron, 60 parts;
sulphate of quinine, 16 parts; tartar emetic, 2 parts; nitre, 16 parts;
yellow sandal, 30 parts; syrup prepared from barley sugar, rectified
spirit, and water, of each 11,000 parts. Macerate the drugs in spirit for
24 hours, and dissolve the salts in the water. Filter the liquids, mix and
leave for 24 hours, then add the syrup, stand and filter next day. (Reveil
and Hager.)

=Elixir, Tooth.= _Syn._ ELIXIR DENTIFRICUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Lefandiniere's.) Guaiacum raspings and cloves, of each 1 oz.; pellitory
of Spain and nutmeg, of each 2 dr.; oil of rosemary, 20 drops; bergamotte,
10 or 12 drops; brandy, 1 quart; macerate a fortnight, and filter.

2. Cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg, of each, 1 dr.; vanilla, 1/2 dr.;
camphor, 10 gr.; tincture of pellitory, 2 fl. oz.; brandy or proof spirit,
1/2 pint; digest as before. See ANTISCROFULOUS and ROSE ELIXIRS (_above_).

=Elixir Valerianatis Ammonici (Goddard).= Valerianic acid, 3 grammes
dissolved in 40 grammes distilled water and neutralised with ammonium
carbonate. Add this to 35 grammes spirit, 50 grammes syrup, 1 drop bitter
almond oil, 2 drops oil of orange peel, 30 grammes diluted bitter almond
water, 12 grammes tincture of red sandal, 3 grammes tincture of orange
peel, 2 grammes burnt sugar, and filter.

=Elixir, Vis'ceral.= _Syn._ ELIXIR VISCERALE, L. See ELIXIRS, BOERHAAVE'S
and HOFFMAN'S (_above_).

=Elixir of Vit'riol.= 1. The old name for aromatic SULPHURIC ACID (which
_see_).

2. (Mynsicht's.) See TINCTURE (Acid Aromatic).

3. (Scourer's.) Dilute sulphuric acid 1 to 5). Used to scour metals.

4. (SWEET E. OF V.; E. VITRIOLI DULCI, L.) The old name for aromatic
SPIRIT OF ETHER (which _see_).

5. (Virgani's). _Prep._ From spirit of sulphuric ether, 2 lb.; aromatic
tincture, 3 lb.

=Elixir, Woroneje.= Capsicum, 1 oz.; nitre, 1/2 oz.; sal-ammoniac, 2 dr.;
nitro-hydrochloric acid, 2 fl. dr.; vinegar, 1-1/2 pint; native white or
rose naphtha, or petroleum, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; olive oil, 1 fl. oz.; oil of
peppermint (Mitcham), 15 fl. oz.; strongest rectified spirit, 6 quarts;
digest 12 days, with constant agitation, and filter.--_Dose_, 2
teaspoonfuls every 15 minutes; in cholera, diarrh[oe]a, &c.

=ELLAG'IC ACID.= HC_{7}H_{2}O_{4}.Aq. When an aqueous infusion of
nut-galls is left for some time exposed to the atmosphere, the tannic acid
gradually disappears, and is replaced by gallic acid, and an insoluble
grey powder, to which the term ellagic acid was applied by Chevreul. It is
soluble in alkalies, forming salts, and is precipitated by acids.

=ELM.= _Syn._ ULMUS, L. A genus of tree forming the type of the natural
order _Ulmaceae_. The interior bark of the _Ulmus campestris_, or _common
small-leaved elm_ (_Ulmi cortex_), is officinal in B. P. This substance is
demulcent, diaphoretic, and diuretic, and slightly febrifuge, astringent,
and tonic. It has been employed in agues, and as a substitute for
sarsaparilla in cutaneous eruptions, but is now little used. The leaves of
the elm-tree are reported to be vulnerary. See DECOCTION and ULMIN.

=ELUTRIA'TION.= Cleansing by washing. The term is commonly applied to the
operation of washing insoluble powders with water, to separate them from
foreign matter, or the coarser portion. It is usually performed by
grinding or triturating the mass with a little water until reduced to a
very fine powder, and this paste is suddenly diffused through a large
quantity of water, contained in a deep vessel, from which, after the
subsidence of the grosser portion, the liquid is poured into another
vessel, and allowed to deposit the fine powder it still holds in
suspension. When this has taken place, the clear supernatant liquor is
decanted, and the sediment drained and dried. The coarse sediment
deposited in the first vessel is now submitted to a fresh grinding and
diffusion through water, and the entire operation is repeated until the
whole of the pulverisable portion is washed over. The proper length of
time for the liquid to remain in the first vessel depends solely on the
density of the powder and the degree of fineness required in the product;
heavy powders subsiding almost immediately, while light ones often take
several minutes to deposit the coarser portion. Sometimes three or more
vessels are employed, and the muddy liquor, after remaining a short time
in the first, is poured into the next one, and this, in a short time
longer, into the third, and so on, until the last vessel is filled, by
which means powders of different degrees of fineness are obtained, that
deposited in the last vessel being in the minutest state of division. The
elutriated paste or moist powder is then drained, and dried. On the small
scale the trituration is performed with a stone and muller, or in a
mortar; on the large scale, in a mill, driven by either horse or steam
power. Antimony chalk, bistre, and other pigments, as well as various
other substances insoluble in or unacted on by water, are commonly
obtained in the state of an impalpable powder by elutriation, or 'washing
over,' as it is called by amateurs and operatives.

=ELYDOR'IC PAINTING.= A method of painting invented by M. Vincent, of
Montpetit, in which the pigments are mixed up with an emulsion of oil and
water. It is said to add the fresh appearance of water colours, and the
finish of miniature painting, to the mellowness of oil colours.

=EMBALM'ING.= _Syn._ MUMMIFICATION. The preservation of the dead bodies of
animals. See PUTREFACTION.

=EMBOS'SING.= The formation of ornamental figures in relief on cloth,
leather, paper, and wood, has now been brought to such perfection as to
place this species of decoration within the reach of almost every class of
society. EMBOSSED CLOTH and PAPER are now employed by the bookbinder to
cover even the low-priced volumes that pass through his hands; whilst the
EMBOSSED LEATHER that encloses the album or ornaments our furniture
frequently bears the richest patterns of the arabesque or moresque. Cloth
and paper are usually embossed by machinery; leather and wood more
frequently by hand labour.

=EMBROCA'TION.= _Syn._ EMBROCATIO, L. A fluid medicine for external and
local use. Embrocations do not differ, materially, from liniments and
lotions, and are applied in the same manner. (See those preparations, and
_below_.)

=Embrocation, Guestonian.= _Syn._ EMBROCATIO TEREBINTHINAE CUM ACIDO L.
_Prep._ (Dr Paris.) Oil of turpentine and olive oil, of each 1-1/2 oz.;
dilute sulphuric acid, 3 fl. dr.; agitate together until mixed. Used in
rheumatism, &c.

=Embrocation, Lynch's.= Olive oil (coloured with alkanet root), 5 fl. oz.;
oils of amber, rosemary, and turpentine, of each 1 dr. In bruises,
rheumatism, &c.

=Embrocation, Roche's.= _Prep._ 1. (Dr Paris.) Olive oil, mixed with half
its weight of the oil of cloves and amber.

2. Olive oil, 2 oz.; oil of amber, 1 oz.; oils of cloves and lemons, of
each 1 dr. For hooping-cough.

=Embrocation, Ward's.= See ESSENCE.

=Embrocation of Cantharides.= _Syn._ EMBROCATIO CANTHARIDES. (Dr Struve,
in _hooping-cough_.) _Prep._ Tartarized antimony, 1 scruple; water, 2 oz.;
tincture of cantharides, 1/2 oz. To be rubbed over the region of the
stomach, covering the part afterwards with flannel.

=Embrocation of Delphinia.= _Syn._ EMBROCATIO DELPHINIAE. (Dr Turnbull.)
_Prep._ Delphinia, 1 scruple to 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 2 oz.

=Embrocation of Quinine.= _Syn._ EMBROCATIO QUINIAE. (Dr Gustamacchia.)
_Prep._ Sulphate of quinine, 8 to 12 gr.; rectified spirit, 1 oz.

=Embrocation of Veratria.= _Syn._ EMBROCATIO VERATRIAE. (Dr Turnbull.)
_Prep._ Veratria, 1 scruple to 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 2 oz.

=EMBROID'ERY.= Gold and silver fancy work of this description may be
cleaned with a little spirit of wine, either alone or diluted with an
equal weight of water. Gin is frequently used for the same purpose. The
common practice of using alkaline or acid liquors is very injurious, and
frequently destroys the beauty of the articles instead of cleaning them.

=EM'ERALD.= _Syn._ SMARAGDUS; EMERAUDE [Fr.] This beautiful deep-green gem
ranks next to the diamond in value. The finest are brought from Peru, but
fair varieties are found in Bavaria, Siberia, and India. A fine emerald
weighing 4 or 5 gr. is worth as many pounds; one of 10 gr., about L2 per
gr.; one of 15 gr., L3 to L4 per gr.; and so on in proportion to the
increase in size. One of 24 gr., if of pure water, is worth about L100.
According to the analysis of Vauquelin, the purest specimens consists of
65 parts silica, 14 alumina, 13 glucina, 2.56 lime, and 3.50 oxide of
chromium, to which last the gem owes its rich green colour. See BERYL,
GEMS, PASTES, &c.

=Emerald Green.= See GREEN PIGMENTS.

=EMERY= is an impure, amorphous, compact, and opaque variety of corundum,
and consists of alumina, with a small per-centage of silica and peroxide
of iron. It occurs in Spain, the isles of Greece, and other localities,
and derives its name from Cape Emeri, in the island of Naxos. Its hardness
is so great, that it scratches and wears down nearly all minerals except
the diamond; hence the use of its powder for cutting and polishing glass
and various other hard substances. For commercial purposes, the lumps of
emery, as taken from the mine, are broken into pieces about the size of a
hen's egg, which are then crushed under stampers, similar to those used
for pounding metallic ores. The coarse powder is then sifted through
sieves covered with wire-cloth of different degrees of fineness, by which
it is sorted into different sizes. In this state it forms the emery of the
shops, or flour emery. For delicate purposes, it is afterwards prepared by
elutriation.

=Emery Cakes= are formed by melting emery flour with a little beeswax, and
after thorough admixture, forming it into solid lumps of suitable sizes.
Used to dress the edges of buff and glaze wheels.

=Emery Cloth= is prepared by brushing the surface of thin cotton cloth
over with liquid glue, and sifting the emery powder over the surface while
still warm.

=Emery Paper= is made in the same way as emery cloth. Both are used either
with or without oil, in the same way as glass paper.

=Emery Sticks= are made of pieces of wood in the same way, and are used
for the same purposes, as emery paper.

=Emery Stones= are formed of emery, of the requisite coarseness, mixed
with about half its weight of good Stourbridge loam, and water q. s. to
make a stiff paste, which is forced into metallic moulds by a powerful
press. The pieces, when thoroughly dry, are exposed in a muffle for a
short time to a temperature just under a full white heat. In this way
'discs' and 'laps' are generally made. For 'wheels,' only 1/4th of loam is
used. Another method, applicable for 'cutting stones' generally, is to
press the flour emery, previously moistened with water, into moulds, with
strong pressure, as before, without any other addition, and then to fire
it at nearly a full white heat.

=EMETIA.= _Syn._ EMETIN, EMETINA. A feebly basic or alkaloidal body,
existing in and forming the active principle of ipecacuanha.

_Prep._ 1. (Medicinal--EMETIC EXTRACT.)--_a._ Ipecacuanha (in coarse
powder) is digested first in ether, and then in rectified spirit for 3 or
4 days; the alcoholic tincture is next expressed and evaporated
(distilled) to dryness; the residuum is dissolved in distilled water, and
the solution precipitated with acetate of lead; the precipitate is then
diffused through distilled water, in a tall glass vessel, and sulphuretted
hydrogen is passed through it, to throw down the lead; after which the
liquor is decanted, filtered, evaporated to the consistence of a thick
syrup, and spread in a thin layer on warm plates of glass, and allowed to
dry in a current of warm air, or by a gentle heat in a stove. The
maceration in ether is frequently omitted.

_b._ Ipecacuanha, 1 part; rectified spirit (.835), 7 parts; make a
tincture, distil off the spirit, dissolve in cold distilled water, 5
parts; filter the solution, and evaporate, &c., as before. Inferior to the
last.

_c._ (P. Cod.) As the last, nearly.

_Obs._ Medicinal or impure emetia is brownish, red, deliquescent, and
emetic in doses of 1/4 to 1/2 gr.

2. (Pure.)--_a._ Ipecacuanha (in coarse powder), 1 part, is digested for
24 hours in distilled water, 10 parts; together with calcined magnesia,
added in slight excess; the deposit is then thrown on a filter, washed
carefully with very cold water, and dried; it is next dissolved in
rectified spirit and neutralised with dilute sulphuric acid; the filtered
solution is decoloured with animal charcoal, again filtered, and again
precipitated by digestion with magnesia; the last deposit forms a
colourless solution with rectified spirit, which, by gentle evaporation,
gives up its emetia as a yellowish white pulverulent mass, which may be
rendered perfectly white by redissolving it in alcohol, &c., as before.
The process is rendered easier by first digesting the powdered ipecacuanha
in ether.

_b._ (P. Cod.) Alcoholic extract of ipecacuanha, 1 part; water, 10 parts;
dissolve, filter; add calcined magnesia, 1 part; evaporate to dryness,
wash the product on a filter with very cold water, 5 parts; dry it again,
and dissolve it in boiling alcohol; evaporate the filtered tincture to
dryness, redissolve the residuum in a little water, acidulate (slightly)
with dilute sulphuric acid, decolour with animal charcoal, filter,
precipitate with liquor of ammonia, and dry the precipitate by a gentle
heat.

_c._ (Ph. Suec. 1845.) Powdered ipecacuanha, 1 part; water, acidulated
with sulphuric acid, 6 parts; digest, filter; add lime, 1 part, and
evaporate to dryness over a water bath; the residuum is then exhausted
with boiling rectified spirit, and otherwise treated as in the last
formula.

_Prop., &c._ Pure emetia is white, pulverulent, inodorous, and bitter;
fusible at 122 deg. Fahr.; very soluble in alcohol and boiling water, but only
slightly so in ether, oils, and cold water. It restores the blue colour of
reddened litmus, and partially neutralises the acids, forming scarcely
crystallisable salts. It is reddened by nitric acid, and this red colour
is deepened by ammonia. Tincture of iodine produces a reddish precipitate
in an alcoholic solution of emetia. With tincture of galls this solution
behaves like morphia; but, unlike the last substance, the salts of iron
produce no change of colour in it. These reactions, combined with its
emetic properties, are sufficient for its identification.--_Dose._ White
and pure emetia is emetic in doses of 1/20 to 1/16 gr. The large doses
ordered in certain pharmaceutical compilations, evidently in error of the
difference between the strengths of the pure and the impure or medicinal
emetia, have, in several cases which have been reported on, produced very
serious consequences.

The 'Journal de Pharmacie et de Chemie,' for September, 1875, contains a
new process for the extraction of emetia, by M. A. Glenard. This process
is based upon the combined use of lime and ether. It consists in treating
with ether a suitably prepared powder, or an extract of ipecacuanha and
lime, or the precipitate formed upon adding an excess of lime to a
solution obtained by treating ipecacuanha in the cold with water
acidulated by sulphuric acid. Either of these mixtures, or the
precipitate, when treated with ether, will yield all the alkaloid it
contains.

The alkaloid may be obtained from the ethereal solution by distilling it
to dryness, and treating the residue with acidulated water, or by at once
shaking the solution with acidulated water. A more or less acid aqueous
liquid is thus obtained, which upon the addition of ammonia, yields the
emetine almost colourless, and much more pure than that produced by the
process ordinarily employed.

_Preparation of Crystallised Hydrochlorate and Pure Emetine._--When water,
acidulated with hydrochloric acid, is employed to remove the emetine from
the ether, an acid solution is obtained, which, when sufficiently
concentrated by evaporation, forms a nearly colourless, solid, crystalline
mass. This mass is formed of extremely delicate needles, formed in
bundles that radiate around a central point, and form small spheres with
an embossed surface, resembling mulberries in appearance. Upon pressing
these crystals in a cloth the more or less coloured mother liquid runs
off, and the crystals redissolved in water give a colourless solution,
from which a fresh crystallisation of perfectly pure hydrochlorate of
emetine can readily be obtained.

The production of this crystallised hydrochlorate of emetine is worthy of
notice, since it does not accord with what has been stated by different
authors, who have all considered emetine to be incapable of forming
crystallisable salts. It is especially interesting in that it furnishes a
convenient and certain method of obtaining perfectly pure emetine, for
which it is only necessary to precipitate a solution of the hydrochlorate
with an alkali. But it is important to observe that ammonia does not
precipitate all the emetine of the hydrochlorate, and that the precipitate
is less in proportion as the salt is more acid.

It might appear from this that emetine is soluble in hydrochlorate of
ammonia. But the author finds that it is the result of a decomposing
action exercised by the emetine upon the hydrochlorate of ammonia, as is
shown by the following two experiments. If a little dry powdered emetine
be placed in a glass containing a solution of hydrochlorate of ammonia, it
may be observed to agglomerate and become transformed into a soft resinoid
mass, at the same time the disengagement of ammonia may be recognised, and
the resinoid mass gradually undergoes a kind of metamorphosis, and becomes
white and crystalline. Again, if emetine in powder be suspended in water,
and solution of hydrochlorate of ammonia be gradually added, the emetine
is dissolved, and upon evaporation of the solution crystals of double
hydrochlorate of emetine and ammonia is obtained.

The author believes the decomposition of hydrochlorate of ammonia by an
organic alkali to have been hitherto unobserved. It does not appear,
however, that emetine is alone in this action, as the author has observed
that quinine, under similar conditions, behaves in the same manner.

Zinoffsky ('Jour. de Pharm. d'Anvers,' xxix, 490) gives the following
process for the quantitative determination of emetia:--Treat fifteen grams
of powdered ipecacuanha with alcohol of 85 per cent., acidified with a few
drops of sulphuric acid, so as to form a volume of 150 cubic centimetres.
Filter, and after expelling the alcohol from 100 cubic centimetres of the
liquid by distillation, add to the residue a titrated solution of
iodo-hydrargyrate of potassium until a filtered portion ceases to be
affected by this reagent. The number of cubic centimetres of
iodo-hydrargyrate multiplied by 0.0189 (0.0001 of the equivalent of
emetine) gives the quantity of emetine contained in ten grains of the
root.

A normal solution of iodo-hydrargyrate is obtained by mixing aqueous
solutions of 13.546 grams of bichloride of mercury, and 49.8 of iodide of
potassium, adding water to make one litre. One cubic centimetre of this
solution precipitates 0.0001, or 0.00005 of an equivalent of alkaloid.

Wine of ipecacuanha can be titrated by the same process.

_Composition of Emetine and its Hydrochlorate._--These substances dried at
110 deg. C., gave upon analysis results corresponding with following
centesimal composition:

                       Hydrochlorate
            Emetine.   of Emetine.
  Carbon      72.25       63.00
  Hydrogen     8.61        8.15
  Nitrogen     5.36        4.75
  Oxygen      13.78       11.64
  Chlorine                12.46

From these figures the author has constructed the following formulae:

Emetine: C_{30}H_{22}NO_{4}. Hydrochlorate of Emetine:
C_{30}H_{22}NO_{4}HCl.

_Preparation and Composition of Emetine_ (J. Lefort and F. Wurtz, 'Comptes
Rendus,' lxxxiv, 1299). When ipecacuanha is dissolved in water, and a
concentrated solution of potassium nitrate added, a thick mass is
produced, consisting of emetine nitrate. It is washed with water,
dissolved in alcohol, and the solution poured into milk of lime. The
mixture is evaporated to dryness, and digested with ether, which dissolves
out the emetine, leaving it as a yellowish mass on evaporation. On
dissolving this mass in sulphuric acid, and pouring the solution into
dilute ammonia, the alkaloid is obtained as a white precipitate, which is
dissolved in alcohol, from which it separates in minute radiate groups of
needles. By analysis it gave numbers leading to the formula
C_{28}H_{40}N_{2}O_{3}.[275]

[Footnote 275: Note by the translator ('Journal of Chem. Soc,'): "This is
printed C_{28}N_{2}H_{40}O_{5} in the formula for emetine nitrate, and as
no data are given, it is impossible to tell which are correct."]

Pure emetine nitrate was prepared, and was found to have the formula
C_{28}N_{2}H_{40}O_{5}NOH; this in conjunction with Glenard's results,
shows that emetine does not form basic salts.

=EMET'ICS.= _Syn._ VOMITS, ANACATHARTICS; ANACATHARTICA, EMETICA,
VOMITORIA, L. Medicines which induce vomiting. The principal emetics are
ipecacuanha and tartarised antimony, and their preparations; and the
sulphates of zinc and copper. Of these the first is commonly employed
either in substance or infused in wine (ipecacuanha wine), when it is
merely wished to evacuate the contents of the stomach, when that organ is
in a disordered state or overloaded with food; and is the one most adapted
in ordinary cases for children and females. Tartar emetic (tartarated
antimony) (dissolved in water) and antimonial wine, either alone or
combined with ipecacuanha, are preferable at the commencement of fevers
and other inflammatory disorders, in consequence of the nausea,
relaxation, and depression of the muscular power and circulation which
commonly follow their use. When poison has been taken, sulphate of zinc is
generally preferred as an emetic, on account of the promptness and
completeness of its action, and its effects ceasing as soon as it is
ejected from the stomach. Sulphate of copper is employed in the same cases
as sulphate of zinc, but its action is more violent and disagreeable,
whilst its intense metallic taste is a great objection to its use. 25 to
30 gr. of either of the above sulphates are dissolved in 3 or 4 fl. oz. of
warm water, and a fourth of the solution is given every ten minutes, until
copious vomiting ensues. In the absence of other substances, when an
immediate emetic is required, a teaspoonful of flour of mustard (an
article always at hand), stirred up with half a pint of warm water, and
drank at a draught, will generally act easily and effectively, and relieve
the stomach before other remedies can be obtained and applied.

The operation of emetics is powerfully promoted by drinking copiously of
diluents, especially of warm or tepid water. The latter, in fact, is
itself an emetic, when taken in quantity. Its use will also prevent that
dreadful straining and retching which makes emetics so much dreaded by the
nervous and delicate.

The timely administration of an emetic at the commencement of fevers and
other inflammatory affections will frequently cause copious diaphoresis,
and produce a cure, or at least greatly mitigate the severity of the
symptoms. Dropsies have also been cured by vomiting; and swelled testicle,
bubo, and other glandular swellings, have occasionally been dispersed by
the action of emetics. Visceral obstructions, in both sexes, have also
yielded to the same treatment. Small and repeated doses of emetics are
frequently administered, with advantage, to produce nausea, in many
diseases of the lungs and stomach. Certain chronic and obstinate diseases,
as rheumatism and asthma, are sometimes relieved by emetics, when every
other line of treatment has failed.

Emetics should be avoided in plethoric habits, in hernia, pregnancy, and
whenever visceral inflammation is suspected. They should also be given
with great caution to young children and females, and to the nervous and
delicate. In such cases, wine or powder of ipecacuanha should alone be
employed.

=Emetic Cups.= _Syn._ ANTIMONIAL CUPS; POCULA EMETICA, CALICES VOMITORII,
L. Small cups made of metallic antimony. Wine left in them for 10 or 12
hours becomes emetic.

=Emetic Tartar.= See ANTIMONY, TARTARATED.

=EM'ETINE.= See EMETIA.

=EMMEN'AGOGUES.= _Syn._ EMMENAGOGA, L. Medicines which are considered to
have the power of promoting the menstrual discharge when either retained
or suspended. There are, probably, few remedies which exert this specific
power on the uterus, the majority of repeated emmenagogues acting rather
by their influence on the system generally, or on parts contiguous to the
uterus, than in the uterus itself. Among the substances usually arranged
under this class are--aloes, black hellebore, birthwort, borax, cubebs,
ergot, gamboge, gin, iodide of potassium, iodine, madder, mercurials, the
peppers, rue, savine, stimulants (generally), stimulating diuretics,
stinking goosefoot, stinking orache, wine, &c.

Of the above, ergot and madder are the only articles which exercise a
direct power on the uterus, and that rather in increasing its expulsive
energy than in promoting the menstrual function, though they are
advantageously employed for the latter purpose. Several of the other
substances named are drastic purgatives, or possess cerebro-spinal
properties, or local powers of irritation, by which they increase the
pelvic circulation, or produce excitement in the neighbouring parts, in
many cases of a dangerous and irreparable character. Hence many writers on
pharmacology deny the existence of emmenagogues.

To ensure the successful administration of this class of medicines, the
system must be previously prepared for their use by invigorating it, if
there is either relaxation or debility; and an opposite course should be
pursued when there is an undue degree of arterial action. In the majority
of cases, the restoration of the discharge is rather attributable to a
proper regulation of the system than to any specific power in the medicine
administered.

=EMOLL'IENTS.= _Syn._ EMOLLIENTIA, L. In _pharmacy_ and _therapeutics_,
demulcents of an oleaginous, saponaceous, or emulsive character, applied
to surfaces (generally external), to soften and relax the fibres. See
DEMULCENTS.

=EMUL'SIN.= _Syn._ SYNAPTASE. An azotised substance, forming a large
proportion of the white pulp of both bitter and sweet almonds. It is
yellowish-white, soluble in cold water, and coagulated by heat and
alcohol. Its most remarkable property is its action on amygdalin by which
the volatile oil of almonds and hydrocyanic acid, with other products are
formed. It has never been obtained in a state of purity.

=EMULSINES.= See EMULSION.

=EMUL'SION.= _Syn._ EMULSIO, L. A milky fluid, formed by the mechanical
admixture of oil and water, by means of some other substance that
possesses the power of combining with both. The emulsions of the
Pharmacop[oe]ia are in the 'British Pharmacop[oe]ia' included in the class
_Misturae_ (which _see_).

In the preparation of emulsions, the oily or resinous ingredients are
usually suspended by means of mucilage of gum arabic, almonds, or yolk of
egg. 1 dr. of the first, made with equal parts of gum and water; 1 oz. of
the second (usually 26 in number); and one in no. of the last, will form 2
dr. of any oil into an emulsion with about 1 oz. of water, gradually
added. In some cases, instead of the above substances, a little liquor of
potassa is employed, by which a saponaceous emulsion is formed. In all
cases the mucilage or other viscid substance should be put into the mortar
before anything else. The oil or resinous matter may then be very
gradually rubbed in, taking care not to add it more quickly than it can be
subdued by the pestle; and if, during this part of the manipulation, the
mixture should begin to assume a breaking or curdling appearance at the
edges, a few drops of water must be immediately incorporated with it,
before adding the remainder of the oil. From the want of this precaution,
it is common for an emulsion suddenly to lose its tenacious consistence in
the mortar, and it is then in vain to endeavour to restore it. After the
oil is thoroughly incorporated, some care is requisite to avoid separating
it again by too hasty an effusion of the water or other fluid of the
mixture. If any alcoholic or acid liquid is to be added, it must be at the
very end of the process. Indeed, the addition of an acid liquid, even a
slightly acescent syrup, will often entirely destroy an emulsion. Mixtures
of copaiba are frequently spoiled by the addition of spirit of nitric
ether; a misfortune which might be avoided by first diluting it with one
or two parts of water.

An excellent method of preparing emulsions of resins and gum-resins, is to
put the article into a marble or wedgwood mortar, and to pour over it
about 4 times its weight of rectified spirit, which is then to be ignited,
and the mixture triturated until an equal consistence is obtained. The
liquid is then to be added gradually, and the whole patiently triturated
or shaken until cold. Yolk of egg or mucilage may be added to the fluid
resin or gum-resin, if desired, as in the common method, but an excellent
emulsion may be made without them.

The presence of soluble salts in an emulsion is apt to occasion the
separation of the oleaginous portion. Spirit produces the same effect in
those which are made with yolk or mucilage; and acids in those made with
an alkali. The addition of these substances to emulsions should be
therefore avoided as much as possible. Emulsions of wax, spermaceti, oil
of turpentine, and balsam of copaiba, are the most readily and completely
formed with yolk of egg. Volatile oils are more readily made into
emulsions if mixed with an equal volume of some simple fixed oil, before
proceeding to operate on them. Scammony is generally formed into an
emulsion with milk; and resin of jalap, with almonds and water.

In a paper read before the American Pharmaceutical Association by Mr
Gregory, the author recommends the use of powdered gum instead of mucilage
in the preparation of emulsions. He thinks that three drachms of acacia in
fine powder are necessary to emulsify one ounce of any of the volatile
oils, and that a little less (about two drachms) will answer for the fixed
oils and balsams, and that to this quantity of gum four drachms and a half
of water must be added (no more and no less), and that either the water or
the oil may be added first to the gum, but it is quickest to add the oil
the first; and well triturate before adding the water. Less gum can be
made to yield a good result by a careful operator, but, as a general
practical working rule, it may be said that three drachms are necessary
for one ounce of oil.

The following formulae, for certain emulsions, are merely given here for
examples. Various others will be found under MIXTURE, LOTION, WASH, &c.

=Emulsion of Al'monds.= _Syn._ MILK OF ALMONDS, ALMOND MIXTURE; EMULSIO
AMYGDALAE, MISTURA A., L. _Prep._ 1. Blanched almonds, 1 oz.; beat them to
a smooth paste, add, gradually, water, 1/2 pint; and when the whole is
thoroughly incorporated, strain through a piece of gauze.

2. As the last, adding sugar, 1 oz.; or syrup (either simple or
flavoured), 1-1/2 fl. oz. See EMULSION OF OIL OF ALMONDS (_below_).

=Emulsion of Assaf[oe]t'ida.= _Syn._ EMULSIO ASSAF[OE]TIDAE, MISTURA A., L.
_Prep._ (Duclow.) Assaf[oe]tida, 1 oz.; powdered gum, 2 oz.; oil of
almonds, 3-1/2 fl. oz.; water, 6 fl. oz. Antispasmodic.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
table-spoonfuls; in hysterical affections, &c.

=Emulsion of Cam'phor.= _Syn._ EMULSIO CAMPHORAE, E. CAMPHORATA, MISTURA
CAMPHORAE (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. Castr. Ruth. 1840.) Camphor, 1/2
dr.; triturate with milk, 1/2 fl. oz., gradually added; then further add
of water, 7-1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Ph. E.) Camphor, 20 gr.; lump sugar, 1/2 oz.; triturate together, and
add of blanched almonds, 1/2 oz.; again triturate, then gradually add of
water, 1 pint. Stimulant, antispasmodic, and diaphoretic.--_Dose_, 1 fl.
oz. to 2 fl. oz.

=Emulsion of Cas'tor Oil.= _Syn._ EMULSIO OLEI RICINI, MISTURA O. R., L.
_Prep._ 1. Castor oil, 1 oz.; thick mucilage, 1-1/2 oz.; syrup of orange
peel, 1 fl. oz.; water, 6 fl. oz.

2. As the last, but using milk instead of water.--_Dose._ One third; as an
aperient for females who object to taking the unprepared oil.

=Emulsion of Copai'ba.= _Syn._ EMULSION OF CAPIVI; EMULSIO COPAIBAE,
MISTURA C., L. _Prep._ 1. Balsam of copaiba and syrup of orange peel, of
each 2 oz.; yolks of 5 eggs; milk, 14 fl. oz.

2. (Beral.) Copaiba and mucilage, of each 2 oz.; water, 12 fl.
oz.--_Dose_, 1/2 oz. to 1 oz., 2 or 3 times a day; where the use of
copaiba is indicated.

=Emulsion of Cubebs.= _Syn._ EMULSIO CUBEBAE. (Dublanc.) _Prep._ Essence of
Cubebs, 4 oz.; mucilage, 4 oz. Mix them.

=Emulsion of Gum.= _Syn._ EMULSIO ACACIAE, MISTURA ACACIAE (Ph. E.), L.
_Prep._ From sweet almonds (blanched), 10 dr.; white sugar, 5 dr.;
mucilage, 3 fl. oz.; water, 1 quart. Demulcent. In coughs, &c., _ad
libitum_.

=Emulsion of Indian Hemp.= _Syn._ EMULSIO CANNABIS INDICAE. (Mr Bromfield.)
_Prep._ Rub 1 scruple of extract of Indian hemp in warm water with 1 fl.
dr. of olive oil; then add gradually, still triturating the mixture, 4 dr.
of mucilage of acacia and 7-1/2 oz. of distilled water.

=Emulsion of Oil of Almonds.= _Syn._ EMULSIO OLEI AMYGDALAE, L. _Prep._
From oil of almonds, 3 dr.; thick mucilage and simple syrup, of each, 5
dr.; rose water, 1 fl. oz.; distilled water, 3 to 4 fl. oz. An elegant and
efficient substitute for almond milk. See EMULSION OF ALMONDS (_above_).

=Emulsion, Pancreatic.= See PANCREATIN.

=Emulsion of Peru'vian Balsam.= _Syn._ EMULSIO BALSAMICA, E. BALSAMI
PERUVIANI, L. _Prep._ 1. As emulsion of copaiba.

2. (Hosp. F.) Balsam of Peru, 1/2 oz.; oil of almonds, 6 dr.; powdered
gum, 1 oz.; triturate together, and add, gradually, rose water, 4 fl.
oz.--_Dose_, 1 or 2 table-spoonfuls; in old asthmas, chronic coughs,
winter coughs, &c.

=Emulsion of Poppies.= _Syn._ EMULSIO PAPAVEUS. _Prep._ Poppy seeds, 2
drachms; water, 8 oz. Make into an emulsion and strain.

=Emulsion of Raw Meat.= (Yvon.) Raw meat 250 grammes; sweet almonds, 75
grammes; bitter almonds, 5 grammes; white sugar, 80 grammes. After
blanching the almonds beat them up with the rest of the ingredients in a
marble mortar until a rose-coloured uniform paste is obtained. This may be
easily made into an emulsion with water, and will not unmix for 24 hours.
It can be made still more nourishing by the addition of the yolks of two
eggs, and by the substitution of milk for water. This emulsion is
frequently prescribed by continental physicians.

=Emulsion of Resin of Jalap.= _Syn._ EMULSIO PURGANS CUM RESINAE JALAPAE.
(Par. Pharm.) _Prep._ Resin of jalap, 8 gr.; white sugar, 1 oz.;
orange-flower water, 2 dr.; water, 4 oz. Triturate the resin with a little
of the sugar, add gradually half the yolk of an egg, triturate for a long
time, then add gradually the rest of the sugar and the water.

=Emulsion of Scam'mony.= _Syn._ EMULSIO SCAMMONII, MISTURA S. (Ph. E.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ph. E.) Resin of scammony, 7 gr.; new milk, 3 fl. oz. For a
dose.

2. (Planche.) Aleppo scammony, 7 gr.; sugar, 2 dr.; new milk, 3 fl. oz.;
cherry-laurel water, 5 drops. For a dose. Purgative; in torpor of the
intestines, dropsy, worms, &c. The formula of the Paris Codex is similar.

=Emulsion of Spermace'ti.= _Syn._ EMULSIO CETACEI, MISTURA C., L. _Prep._
As emulsion of wax. Demulcent.

=Emulsion of Tur'pentine.= _Syn._ EMULSIO TEREBINTHINAE, MISTURA T., L.
_Prep._ 1. Chio turpentine, 2 dr.; white sugar, 1 oz.; yolk of 1 egg; milk
of almonds, 4 fl. oz. In gleets.--_Dose_, 2 table-spoonfuls, 3 or 4 times
a day.

2. (Clossius.) Venice turpentine, 1-1/2 dr.; yolk of 1 egg; peppermint
water, 4-1/2 fl. oz. (See _below_.)

=Emulsion of Oil of Turpentine.= _Syn._ EMULSIO OLEI TEREBINTHINAE, MISTURA
O. T., L. _Prep._ (Carmichael.) Rectified oil of turpentine, 1 fl. oz.;
yolk of 2 eggs; emulsion of almonds, 4 fl. oz.; syrup of orange peel, 2
fl. oz.; spirit of lavender, 4 fl. dr.; oil of cinnamon, 5 or 6
drops.--_Dose_, 1 fl. oz., twice or thrice a day; in nephritic pains, and
that variety of ophthalmia termed iriditis. (See _above_.)

=Emulsion of Wax.= _Syn._ EMULSIO CERAE, E. CERAE ALBAE, MISTURA C., LAC C.,
L. _Prep._ (Guibourt.) White wax, 1 oz.; powdered gum, 1-1/2 dr.; water,
24 fl. oz.; simple syrup, 4 fl. oz.; put the syrup and gum into a warm
mortar, add the wax, and triturate with a warm pestle until united; then
add the water (warm) gradually, and continue the agitation till the whole
is quite cold. Demulcent. _Ad libitum._

=ENAM'EL.= A species of vitreous varnish, coloured with metallic oxides,
applied in a thin stratum to brightly polished metallic surfaces (copper
or gold), on which it is fused by the flame of a lamp urged by the
blowpipe, or by the heat of a small furnace.

The basis of all enamels is a highly transparent and fusible gloss, called
'frit,' 'flux,' or 'paste,' which readily receives a colour on the
addition of metallic oxides. It may be made by one or other of the
following formulae:

_Prep._ 1. Red lead, 16 parts; calcined borax, 3 parts; powdered flint
glass, 12 parts; powdered flints, 4 parts; fuse in a Hessian crucible for
12 hours, then pour it out into water, and reduce it to a powder in a
biscuit-ware mortar.

2. Tin, 3 parts; lead, 10 parts; mix, calcine in an iron pot at a dull
cherry-red heat, and scrape off the oxide as it forms, observing to obtain
it quite free from undecomposed metal; then reduce it to fine powder by
grinding and elutriation. In this state it is known among enamellers as
'flux' or 'calcine.' 4 parts of this 'calcine' are next mixed with an
equal weight of pure sand or powdered flints, and 1 part of sea salt, or
other alkaline matter; the mixture is then partially fused in a Hessian
crucible, by which it undergoes semi-vitrification.

3. (Chaptal.) Lead and tin, equal parts; calcine as above, and take off
the mixed oxides or 'calcine' and ground flints, of each, 1 part; pure
carbonate of potash, 2 parts; and proceed as before.

4. (Wynn.) Flint glass, 3 oz.; red lead, 1 oz.; as last.

5. (Wynn.) Red lead, 18 parts; borax (not calcined), 11 parts; flint
glass, 16 parts; as last.

6. (Wynn.) Powdered flints, 10 parts; nitre and white arsenic, of each, 1
part; as last.

_Obs._ The precise qualities of the products of the above processes depend
greatly upon the duration and degree of heat employed. By increasing the
quantity of sand, glass, or flux, the enamel is rendered more fusible, and
the opacity and whiteness is increased by the addition of oxide of tin.
The use of borax should be avoided, or it should be used sparingly, as it
is apt to make the enamel effloresce and lose colour.

=Enamel, Black.= _Prep._ 1. Calcined iron (protoxide), 12 parts; oxide of
cobalt, 1 part; mix, add an equal weight of white flux, and fuse as
before.

2. (Clouet.) Pure clay, 3 parts; protoxide of iron, 1 part. A fine black.

3. Peroxide of manganese, 3 parts; zaffre, 1 part; mix, and add it, as
required, to white flux.

=Enamel, Blue.= _Prep._ 1. White 'frit' or 'flux,' coloured with oxide of
cobalt.

2. Sand, red lead, and nitre, of each 10 parts; flint glass or ground
flints, 20 parts; oxide of cobalt, 1 part, more or less; depending on the
desired depth of colour.

=Enamel, Brown.= _Prep._ 1. Manganese, 5 parts; red lead, 16 parts; flint
powder, 8 parts; as before.

2. (Wynn.) Manganese, 9 parts; red lead, 34 parts; flint powder, 16 parts.

3. Red lead and calcined iron, of each, 1 part; antimony, litharge, and
sand, of each, 2 parts. To be added in any required proportion to white
'frit,' according to the colour desired. A little oxide of cobalt or
zaffre is frequently added to alter the shade.

=Enamel, Green.= _Prep._ 1. 'Flux' or 'frit,' 2 lbs.; black oxide of
copper, 1 oz.; as before.

2. As the last, but adding red oxide of iron, 1/2 dr. Less decisive.

3. Copper dust and litharge, of each 2 oz.; nitre, 1 oz.; sand, 4 oz.;
'flux' or 'frit,' q. s.

4. From transparent 'frit,' any quantity; oxide of chromium, q. s. to
colour. Colour superb; it will stand a great heat; in common hands,
however, it frequently turns on the dead-leaf tinge.

5. Transparent 'flux,' 5 oz.; black oxide of copper, 20 to 40 gr.; oxide
of chromium, 2 gr. Resembles the emerald.

6. From blue and yellow enamel mixed in the required proportions.

=Enamel, Ol'ive.= _Prep._ Blue enamel, 2 parts; black and yellow enamel,
of each, 1 part. See ENAMEL BROWN.

=Enamel, Or'ange.= _Prep._ 1. Red lead, 12 parts; red sulphate of iron and
oxide of antimony, of each, 1 part; flint powder, 3 parts; calcine
together, powder, and melt with 'flux,' 50 parts.

2. (Wynn.) Red lead, 12 parts; oxide of antimony, 4 parts; flint powder, 3
parts; red sulphate of iron, 1 part; calcine, then add 'flux,' 5 parts, to
every 2 parts of this mixture.

=Enamel, Pur'ple.= _Prep._ 1. 'Flux' or 'frit,' coloured with oxide of
gold, purple precipitate of cassius, or peroxide of manganese.

2. Sulphur, nitre, green vitriol, antimony, and oxide of tin, of each, 1
lb.; red lead, 60 lb.; mix, fuse, cool, powder, and add rose copper (red
oxide), 19 oz.; zaffre, 1 oz.; crocus martis, 1-1/2 oz.; borax, 3 oz.; and
of a compound formed of gold, silver, and mercury, 1 lb.; fuse, stirring
the melted mass with a copper rod all the time, then place it in
crucibles, and submit them to the action of a reverberatory furnace for 24
hours. This is said to be the purple enamel used in the mosaic pictures in
St. Peter's at Rome.

=Enamel, Red.= _Prep._ 1. 'Paste' or 'flux,' coloured with the red oxide
or protoxide of copper. Should the colour pass into the green or brown,
from the partial peroxidation of the copper, from the heat being raised
too high, the red colour may be restored by the addition of any
carbonaceous matter, as tallow, or charcoal.

2. By tinging the glass or 'flux' with the oxide or salts of gold, or with
the purple precipitate of cassius. These substances produce shades of red,
inclining to crimson or purple of the most exquisite hue. The enamel often
comes from the fire quite colourless, and afterwards receives its rich hue
at the lamp.

3. (Wynn.) Sulphate of iron (calcined dark), 1 part; a mixture of 6 parts
of 'flux' (No. 5), and 1 of colcothar, 3 parts. Dark red.

4. (Wynn.) Red sulphate of iron, 2 parts; 'flux' (No. 1), 6 parts; white
lead, 3 parts. Light red.

=Enamel, Rose-col'oured.= _Prep._ Purple enamel (or its elements), 3
parts; 'flux,' 90 parts; mix, and add silver leaf or oxide of silver, 1
part, or less.

=Enamel, Transpa''rent.= The 'frit' or 'flux' described _above_.

=Enamel, Vi'olet.= _Prop._ 1. Purple enamel, 2 parts; red enamel (No. 2),
3 parts; 'frit,' 6 parts.

2. Saline or alkaline 'frit' or 'flux,' any quantity; peroxide of
manganese, q. s. to colour. As the tint depends on the metal being at the
maximum of oxidation, contact with oily or carbonaceous substances should
be particularly avoided.

=Enamel, White.= _Prep._ 1. 'Calcine' (from 2 parts of tin and 1 part of
lead), 1 part; fine crystal glass or 'frit,' 2 parts; manganese, a few
grains; powder, mix, melt, and pour the fused mass into clean water; again
powder, and fuse, and repeat the whole process 3 or 4 times, avoiding
contamination with smoke, dirt, or oxide of iron. A fine dead white.

2. Washed diaphoretic antimony, 1 part; fine glass (free from lead), 3
parts; mix, and proceed as before. Very fine.

3. Lead, 30 parts; tin, 33 parts; calcine as before, then fuse 50 parts of
this 'calcine' with an equal weight of flints, in powder, and 100 parts of
salt of tartar. A fine dead white enamel.

_Obs._ For white enamel, the articles must be perfectly free from foreign
admixture, as this would impart a colour. When well managed, either of the
above forms will produce a paste that will rival the OPAL.

=Enamel, Yellow.= Superior yellow enamels are less easily produced than
those of most other colours; they require very little flux, and that
mostly of a metallic nature. The following come highly recommended by
experienced artists:--

_Prep._ 1. From 'frit' or 'flux,' fused with oxide of lead, and a little
red oxide of iron.

2. Lead, tin, ashes, litharge, antimony, and sand, of each 1 oz.; nitre, 4
oz.; mix, fuse, and powder; and add the product to 'flux' or 'frit,' q. s.

3. White oxide of antimony, alum, and sal-ammoniac, of each 1 part; pure
carbonate of lead, 1 to 3 parts, or q. s. (all in powder); mix, and expose
them to a heat sufficiently high to decompose the sal-ammoniac. Used as
the last. Very bright coloured.

4. (Wynn.) Red lead, 8 oz.; oxide of antimony, and tin, calcined together,
of each 1 oz; mix, and add of 'flux' (No. 5), 15 oz.; mix well and fuse.

5. Pure oxide of silver added to the metallic 'fluxes.' The salts of
silver are also used, but are more difficult to manage. If a thin film of
oxide of silver be spread over the surface of the enamel to be coloured,
exposed to a moderate heat, then withdrawn, and the film of reduced silver
on the surface removed, the part under will be found tinged of a fine
yellow. (Clouet.)

=Enamelling of Cast-Iron.= Wagner in his 'Chemical Technology' gives the
following account of this process:--The surface of the cast-iron to be
enamelled is first carefully cleaned by scouring with sand and dilute
sulphuric acid, next a somewhat thickish magma, made of pulverised quartz,
borax, feldspar, kaolin and water is brushed over the clean metallic
surface as evenly as possible, and immediately after a finely powdered
mixture of feldspar, soda, borax, and oxide of tin, is dusted over, after
which the enamel is burnt in by the heat of a muffle. In France an enamel
is applied which consists of 130 parts of flint glass, 20-1/2 parts of
carbonate of soda, and 12 parts of boric acid fused together, and
afterwards ground to a fine powder.

It would appear, however, from the statements contained in a paper read by
Mr Tatlock, F.R.S.E., F.C.S., that the enamel used for iron vessels is
frequently of a less harmless kind than that described by Wagner. Mr
Tatlock states that in some instances the milk-white porcelainous enamel,
with which cast-iron cooking vessels are now so commonly prepared, has a
composition such as to render it highly objectionable, on account of the
facility with which it is acted upon by acid, fruits, common salt, and
other ordinary dietetic substances, by which means lead, and even arsenic,
are dissolved out in large quantity during cooking processes.

Mr Tatlock gives the analysis of three samples of enamel from the interior
of three cast-iron pots obtained from different manufacturers. These iron
vessels were all employed for cooking:--

                No. 1.    No. 2.     No 3.
              per cent.  per cent.  per cent.

  Silica         61.00     42.40     42.00
  Alumina         8.00      2.88      6.06
  Oxide of iron   1.10      2.04      4.04
  Lime            3.02      0.16      0.78
  Magnesia        0.28      0.10      0.21
  Oxide of lead   absent   25.89     18.48
  Potash          5.61      7.99      6.46
  Soda           20.67     14.67     19.25
  Phosphoric acid trace    trace     trace
  Arsenious acid  0.02      0.42      1.02
  Carbonic acid   0.30     absent    absent
  Borax          absent     3.45      1.70

                100.00    100.00    100.00

  Total bases    38.58     53.73     55.28

The author showed that it was not so much on account of the presence of
large proportions of lead and arsenic that the enamels are so dangerous,
but because they are so highly basic in character, that they are acted
upon with facility by feebly acid solutions, the lead and arsenic being
thereby easily dissolved out.

He demonstrated that the ratio of the bases to the silica in No. 1 was 1
to 1.58; in the No. 2, as 1 to 0.79; and in the No. 3, as 1 to 0.76. A one
per cent. solution of citric acid boiled in the No. 1 did not affect it in
the slightest, while in the case of the No. 3, the glassy surface of the
enamel was at once roughened and destroyed, and lead dissolved out to such
an extent as to give immediately a dense black precipitate with
sulphuretted hydrogen. He thought that no enamel was fit to be used unless
it were totally unaffected by boiling with a one per cent. solution of
citric acid, which was a very moderate test, and gave it as his opinion
that either the use of such poisonous ingredients as lead and arsenic in
large quantity should be entirely abandoned, or that the composition
otherwise of the enamel should be of such a character as to ensure that
none of the poisonous substances could be dissolved out, in the
circumstances under which the enamelled vessels are used.

=ENCAU'STIC.= See PAINTING (Encaustic).

=ENDEMIC.= Indigenous. Peculiar to a district. Those are called endemic
diseases, which are produced by causes more or less local. The word is
often confounded with epidemic.

=ENE'MA.= _Syn._ CLYSTER; EN'EMA (pl. ENEM'ATA), L. A medicine, usually
liquid (sometimes gaseous), thrown into the rectum or lower bowels.

Clysters usually consist of some weak glutinous or mucilaginous fluid, to
which the active ingredients are added; or a decoction or infusion is made
of the medicaments, which is then used, either alone, or after the
addition of a little gum, starch, or sugar. The proper vehicle for
astringent vegetable matter, metallic salts, and the mineral acids, is
pure water. Oleaginous and resinous substances are made into emulsions
before being employed for enemas. In all cases the fluid is administered
warm. The quantity of fluid forming a clyster, for an adult, may vary from
1/2 to 3/4 pint; that for an infant within a month old, should be about 1
fl. oz.; for a child of one year, about 2-1/2 fl. oz.; from one to seven
years, from 3 or 4 fl. oz.; and from seven to twelve or fourteen, 6 or 7
fl. oz.; after that age to puberty, 1/2 pint may be employed.

The quantity or dose of the active ingredients in a clyster should be 4 or
5 times as great as that of the same medicines when taken by the mouth; as
it is generally regarded that the susceptibility of the rectum is only
1/5th that of the stomach, and that to exert a like absorbent action it
occupies 5 times as long as the latter viscus. The dose, and the interval
between its repetition, should, therefore, be proportionately increased.
Narcotics, as opium, tobacco, &c., should, however, be given in only twice
or thrice the quantity that would be exhibited in the usual manner.

Enemata are usually administered by means of a syringe, bladder, or
elastic bag, furnished with a rectum tube; but many ingenious and elegant
pieces of mechanism, adapted for self-administration, are made by the
instrument makers. Great care should be taken to avoid injuring the coats
of the rectum by the use of a rough or improperly shaped pipe, or one that
is too long. The extremity of the pipe or tube should also be perfectly
smooth and well rounded (rather spherical than pointed), and in using it
no force should be employed. A neglect of this point often produces very
serious consequences, especially in young children.

Tobacco smoke may be administered by means of a double pair of bellows,
supplied with air from a small funnel under which the herb is
burning,--and gaseous matter, by connecting the rectum tube with a small
gasometer, exerting a trifling pressure on the confined gas.

The number of substances employed in the preparation of enemata is very
great. The following are some of them, arranged according to their
effects:--

1. (Anodyne and Narcotic.) Opium, henbane, &c., are employed to allay
spasms of the bowels, stomach, uterus, bladder, &c.

2. (Aperient or Cathartic.) Aloes, colocynth, senna, various purging
salts, gruel, decoction of marshmallows, decoction of linseed, warm water,
&c., are commonly employed to promote the peristaltic action of the
bowels, or to destroy worms.

3. (Demulcent and Emollient.) Decoction of starch, gum, isinglass, glue,
&c., either alone or combined with opium, are used to protect the coats of
the intestines, and to allay irritation; and also to restrain diarrh[oe]a,
especially when combined with astringents, as logwood, catechu, or oak
bark.

4. (Nutrient.) Animal jelly, soups, broths, milks, &c., are frequently
used as injections to convey nourishment to the body.

5. (Sedative.) Tobacco infusion or smoke, and tartar emetic (in solution),
are employed to relax the powers of the body, to remove spasms, depress
the circulation, and to produce syncope.

Enemata or clysters are now very frequently employed in our large towns,
especially among the higher classes; but a great prejudice exists among
many persons against their use, arising from a fastidious and mistaken
delicacy. The introduction of improved apparatus of late years, by which
the administration of these remedies is attended with less difficulty and
exposure than formerly, has removed much of the repugnance which
previously existed.

Clysters are invaluable when it is necessary to evacuate the bowels as
speedily as possible, and when the stomach will not bear the
administration of a purgative by the mouth, as well as in cases requiring
a direct medication of the lower bowels, as in dysentery, colic, &c. As a
mere laxative, an injection of tepid water, milk-and-water, or water
gruel, will generally be found sufficient. By the addition of 1 or 2
table-spoonfuls of common salt, Epsom salts, salad oil, or molasses, to
this laxative enema, it will form an excellent purgative one, which will,
in most cases, induce a full discharge. In all cases, the patient should
be directed to retain the injection for as long a time as possible, and
not to attempt to empty his bowels immediately after the reception of the
medicine. "In irritation of the bladder, rectum, or uterus, an anodyne
injection or enema often affords much relief. In diseases of the lower
bowels, clysters are also of almost indispensable utility, as also in the
dislodgment of ascarides seated in the rectum; nor are they less
beneficial in those cases of sudden sinking of the powers of life where
deglutition is impossible, and yet a prompt stimulating impression is
requisite to save the patient; under such circumstances, clysters of some
of the diffusible stimuli have proved of the greatest benefit."

The injection of large quantities of liquid matter into the bowels, as
well as the constant use of clysters (even of warm water only), is deemed
by the highest medical authorities to be injurious, and occasionally
dangerous. The practice should not, therefore, be allowed to grow into a
habit. The bowels continually accustomed to a stimulant cease to act
without one. The same remarks apply to aperients taken by the mouth.

The following formulae embrace the whole of the enemas (ENEMATA) of the
'British Pharmacop[oe]ia,' as well as a few others in common use:--

=Enema of Albu'men.= _Syn._ ENEMA ALBUMINIS, L. _Prep._ (Ricord) Infusion
of linseed, 12 oz.; whites of 2 or 3 eggs; mix. In chronic diarrh[oe]a,
and as a nutritient clyster in debility from stomach diseases. The reason
for rejecting the yolks of the eggs is not very obvious, as the
preparation is much more effective with them.

=Enema of Al'oes.= _Syn._ ENEMA ALOES (B. P.), L. _Prep._ From aloes, 2
scrup.; carbonate of potassa, 15 gr.; mucilage of starch, 1/2 pint. In
ascarides, atonic amenorrh[oe]a, &c. It should not be employed when
irritability of the rectum, bladder, or genitals, exists; nor in piles, or
when there is a tendency to prolapsus ani or prolapsus uteri.

=Enema, An'odyne.= See ENEMA OF OPIUM.

=Enema, Antispasmod'ic.= _Syn._ ENEMA ANTISPASMODICUM, L. _Prep._ From
tincture of assaf[oe]tida, 3 fl. dr.; laudanum, 30 to 60 drops; water
gruel or barley water, 1/2 pint. In spasmodic affections of the bowels.
(See _below_.)

=Enema of Assaf[oe]t'ida.= _Syn._ FETID CLYSTER, ANTISPASMODIC C.; ENEMA
ASSAF[OE]TIDA (B. P.), E. F[OE]TIDUM (Ph. E. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.)
Assaf[oe]tida, 30 gr.; water, 4 oz.; rub together until mixed.

2. (Ph. E.) To cathartic enema (Ph. E.), add of tincture of assaf[oe]tida,
2 fl. dr.

3. (Ph. D.) Warm water, 12 fl. oz.; tincture of assaf[oe]tida, 2 fl. dr.

4. (St. B. Hosp.) Assaf[oe]tida, 2 dr.; yolk of an egg; barley water, 7
fl. oz. Stimulant, antispasmodic, and carminative. An excellent remedy in
hysteria, flatulent colic, hooping-cough, infantile convulsions, worms in
the lower bowels, &c. See ENEMA HOOPING-COUGH.

=Enema, Astrin''gent.= _Syn._ ENEMA ASTRINGENS, L. _Prep._ 1. Tincture of
catechu, 1 fl. oz.; barley water, 9 fl. oz.

2. Extract of rhatany, 2 dr.; syrup, or made starch, 2 oz.; water, 7 fl.
oz.

3. Decoction of galls, oak-bark, pomegranate, or other like astringent
substance, 3 or 4 fl. oz.; water or barley water, 6 or 7 fl. oz.

4. (Hosp. F.) Electuary of catechu, 2 dr.; water and lime water, of each
4-1/2 fl. oz. In diarrh[oe]a, &c., arising from a relaxed condition of the
coats of the lower bowels; and in fissures of the anus, &c.

=Enema of Bark.= _Syn._ ENEMA CINCHONAE. Decoction of bark is used.

=Enema of Belladonna.= _Syn._ ENEMA BELLADONNAE (Ratier.) _Prep._
Belladonna, 10 gr.; water, 6 oz.; infuse.

=Enema of Cam'phor.= _Syn._ ENEMA CAMPHORAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Camphor
liniment, 4 fl. dr.; yolks of 2 eggs; water gruel, 7 fl. oz.

2. Camphor, 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 2 dr.; triturate till dissolved, then
add, gradually, of simple syrup, 1 oz.; when thoroughly incorporated,
further add of thin gruel, 7 fl. oz. Anodyne, antispasmodic, and diuretic.
In difficult or obstructed micturition.

=Enema of Cas'tor Oil.= _Syn._ ENEMA OLEI RICINI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Hosp. F.)
Castor oil and mucilage, of each, 1 oz.; gruel, 1/2 pint.

2. Castor oil, 1 oz.; liquor potassa, 2 fl. dr.; triturate, and add of
honey, 1 oz.; when mixed, further add of hot gruel, 1/2 pint; and agitate
until cool enough to be administered.

=Enema, Cathar'tic.= _Syn._ PURGATIVE CLYSTER; ENEMA CATHARTICUM (B. P.,
Ph. E. & D.), E. LAXATIVUM, E. PURGATIVUM, L. These have been already
alluded to. By increasing the quantity of the active ingredients, a mild
laxative or aperient clyster is converted into an active purgative or
cathartic one.

_Prep._ 1. (Ph. E.) Senna, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz.; infuse an
hour, then add of Epsom salts, 1/2 oz.; sugar, 1 oz.; when dissolved,
further add of olive oil, 1 oz.; and mix them by agitation.

2. (Ph. D.) Epsom salts, 1 oz.; olive oil, 1 fl. oz.; mucilage of barley.
16 fl. oz. Same as enema of sulphate of magnesia, B. P., except that in
the latter mucilage of starch is substituted for mucilage of barley.

3. (Ph. D. 1826.) Manna, 1 oz.; compound decoction of chamomile, 1/2 pint;
dissolve, and add, of olive oil, 1 oz.; Epsom salts, 1/2 oz.

4. Compound decoction of mallows, 1/2 pint; Epsom salts, 3/4 oz.; sweet
oil, 2 fl. oz.; mix, as above.

_Obs._ The above are employed in all ordinary cases where the use of an
immediate cathartic is indicated.

=Enema of Cevidina.= _Syn._ ENEMA CEVIDINAE (Soubeiran.) Cevadilla, 2 dr.;
water, 10 oz.; boil to 7 oz.; strain and add milk, 8 oz. To destroy
ascarides.

=Enema of Chlo''ride of Lime.= _Syn._ ENEMA CHLORIDI CALCIS, E.
ANTIPUTRESCENS, L. _Prep._ 1. Chloride of lime, 10 gr.; tepid water, 1 fl.
oz.; triturate, then add of barley water, or plain tepid water, 7 fl. oz.

2. (Pereira.) Chloride of lime, 10 to 15 gr., added to a common enema. As
a deodoriser, when the alvine evacuations are unusually fetid.

=Enema of Chloride of Soda.= _Syn._ ENEMA SODAE CHLORINATAE. _Prep._
Labarraque's solution, 24 drops; decoction of mallows, 16 oz.

=Enema of Chloride of Sodium.= _Syn._ ENEMA SODII CHLORIDI. _Prep._ Common
salt, 1 oz.; barley water, 1/2 pint; olive oil, 1 oz.

=Enema for Col'ic.= _Syn._ ENEMA ANTICOLICUM, L. _Prep._ From oil of
cajeput or peppermint, 15 drops; dissolved in sweet spirit of nitre, 60
drops; laudanum, 35 drops; infusion of chamomile, 1/2 pint.

=Enema of Col'ocynth.= _Syn._ ENEMA COLOCYNTHIDIS (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ 1.
(Ph. L.) Extract of colocynth, 1/2 dr.; soft soap, 1 oz.; triturate, and
add of water, 1 pint.

2. (Ph. L. 1836.) As the last, but using compound extract of colocynth.

3. (Guy's Hosp.) Colocynth pulp, 1 dr.; water, 3/4 pint; boil so as to
strain 1/2 pint; and add of common salt, 1/2 oz.; syrup of buckthorn, 1
fl. oz. An efficient enema in colic and obstinate constipation, in the
absence of spasms and inflammatory symptoms.

=Enema, Com'mon.= _Syn._ ENEMA COMMUNE, L. Gruel or barley water, either
with or without the addition of a little common salt or oil, are generally
so called. The first are simply laxative; the latter, purgative. Decoction
of mallows, linseed tea, or water gruel, are also commonly used as the
vehicle.

_Prep._ 1. (St. Bar. Hosp.) Barley water, 1 pint; common salt, 1 oz.;
dissolve.

2. (Guy's Hosp.) Water gruel, 10 to 15 fl. oz.; common salt, 1 oz.

3. (U. C. Hosp.) Water gruel, 8 to 12 fl. oz.; salt, 1 oz.; linseed oil, 2
fl. oz.

=Enema of Copai'ba.= _Syn._ ENEMA COPAIBAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From balsam of
copaiba, 2 dr.; liquor opii sedativus, 15 drops; yolk of egg, q. s.;
barley water, 7-1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Collier.) To the last add, of extract of opium, 1 gr.; oil of
turpentine, 4 fl. dr.

3. (Velpeau.) Copaiba, 2 dr.; laudanum, 20 drops; yolk of 1 egg; water
gruel, 8 fl. oz. In ascarides, gonorrh[oe]a, and some affections of the
lower bowels and bladder, when the stomach rejects the balsam.

=Enema of Creosote.= _Syn._ ENEMA CREOSOTI. (Dr Wilmot.) Creasote, 1 dr.;
decoction of starch, 12 oz. In epidemic dysentery.

=Enema of Croton Oil.= _Syn._ ENEMA OLEI CROTONIS. (Sundelin.) _Prep._
Croton oil, 2 to 4 drops; linseed oil, 2 oz.; gruel, 4 oz.

=Enema of Cubebs.= _Syn._ ENEMA CUBEBAE. (Velpeau.) _Prep._ Decoction of
mallow, 10 oz.; powdered cubebs, 6 dr.

=Enema, Domes'tic.= _Syn._ ENEMA DOMESTICUM, L. This name has been applied
to an enema of warm water, either with or without the addition of a little
sugar, honey, or milk. The effect is laxative.

=Enema, Emoll'ient.= _Syn._ ENEMA EMOLLIENS, E. DEMULCENS, L. _Prep._ From
decoction of linseed, barley, or starch, 1 pint; linseed or olive oil, 1
oz. Soothing and laxative; in excoriations of the lower bowels. 20 to 40
drops of laudanum may be added when there is much pain or looseness.

=Enema of Ergot.= _Syn._ ENEMA ERGOTAE. (Boudin.) _Prep._ Infuse 1 dr. of
ergot in 8 oz. of hot water and strain.

=Enema, Feb'rifuge.= _Syn._ ENEMA FEBRIFUGUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (Collier.)
Water gruel, 12 fl. oz.; sugar, 1 fl. oz. In low fevers.

2. (Brande.) Vinegar, 2 fl. oz.; infusion of chamomile, 5 or 6 fl. oz. In
typhus.

=Enema, Fe'tid.= See ENEMA OF ASSAF[OE]TIDA.

=Enema of Galls and Opium.= _Syn._ ENEMA GALLAE ET OPII. (Dr Ryan.) _Prep._
Decoction of galls, 8 oz.; tincture of opium, 1/2 dr.

=Enema for Hoo'ping-cough.= _Syn._ ENEMA PERTUSSICULAIRE, L. _Prep._ 1.
See ENEMA ASSAF[OE]TIDA.

2. (M. Reiken). Assaf[oe]tida, 8 gr.; yolk of 1 egg; water, 1/2 pint.

_Obs._ This quantity is sufficient for 10 or 12 clysters for children
under 1 year; 5 or 6 for those under 3 years; and 2 or 3 for those under
7. Two clysters are prescribed daily in hooping-cough. According to M.
Reiken, this is more successful in removing hooping-cough than any other
remedy. To ensure success, it should not be administered until the
feverish symptoms have passed. M. Reiken sometimes uses an ointment of
assaf[oe]tida as well as the clyster.

=Enema of Ipecacuanha.= _Syn._ ENEMA IPECACUANHAE. (U. C. Hosp.)
Ipecacuanha root (bruised), 1 dr.; boiling water, 8 oz. Macerate for an
hour and strain.

=Enema, Lax'ative.= See ENEMAS (Cathartic, Common, &c.).

=Enema of Lead.= _Syn._ ENEMA PLUMBI, L. _Prep._ (Dr Newbold.) Acetate of
lead, 6 gr.; tepid distilled water, 6 fl. oz. In strangulated hernia;
repeated in two or three hours.

=Enema of Morphia.= _Syn._ ENEMA MORPHIAE. (Beera.) _Prep._ Morphia, 1 gr.;
oil of almonds, 1 oz. Triturate and add infusion or decoction of linseed,
q. s.

=Enema, Nitrate of Silver.= _Syn._ ENEMA ARGENTI NITRATIS. (Boudin.)
_Prep._ Nitrate of silver, 1 to 3 gr.; distilled water, 5 oz.

=Enema, Nu'trient.= _Syn._ FEEDING CLYSTER; ENEMA NUTRIENS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Strong beef tea, 12 fl. oz.; thickened a little with arrow-root or
hartshorn shavings.

2. (M. Nasse). Strong meat soup, 3/4 pint; dilute hydrochloric acid, 1/2
fl. dr.

3. Yolks of 2 eggs; brown sugar and salad oil, of each 1 oz.; mutton
broth, 12 fl. oz. To nourish the body, when aliments cannot be taken or
retained by the stomach.

=Enema, Oi''ly.= See ENEMA (Emollient).

=Enema of O'pium.= _Syn._ ENEMA OPIATUM, E. OPII (B. P. and Ph. L.), E.
OPII vel ANODYNUM (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Mucilage of starch, 2
fl. oz.; tincture of opium, 1/2 dr.

2. (Ph. E.) Starch, 1/2 dr.; water (boiling), 2 fl. oz.; mix, and when
cool enough add of tincture of opium, 1/2 to 1 fl. dr.

3. (Ph. D. 1826.) Laudanum, 1 dr.; warm water, 6 fl. oz.

_Obs._ The above are the orders of the colleges, but in practice the
quantity of laudanum is frequently doubled; this should, however, be done
with great care. Opium clysters are used in dysentery, colic, cholera, and
various painful affections of the intestines, bladder, &c. The bowels
should be emptied before their administration, and in inflammatory
complaints they should not be used for the first 48 hours. Clysters
containing opium, even in small quantities, are dangerous remedies for
young children; yet there are cases in which they sometimes succeed when
every other remedy has failed. This is particularly so in the low chronic
diarrh[oe]a of infancy and early childhood. A case of this kind occurred
in the family of the writer. The family medical attendant, as well as the
physician he consulted, abandoned the little sufferer to apparently
inevitable death, as beyond the reach of further assistance. A small opium
clyster was given, and the child recovered.

=Enema of Ox-gall.= _Syn._ ENEMA FELLIS, E. F. BOVIS, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Allnatt.) Fresh ox-gall, 2 fl. oz.; water gruel, 8 fl. oz.

2. (Dr Clay.) Ox-gall, 2 fl. oz.; water, 4 or 5 fl. oz. To soften
indurated faeces, and in costiveness arising from deficiency of bile.

=Enema of Percyanide of Iron.= _Syn._ ENEMA FERRI PERCYANIDI. _Prep._
Triturate 5 gr. of Prussian blue, with 2 oz. of water; to be used daily,
increasing the dose if necessary. An American remedy for ascarides.

=Enema of Pop'pies.= _Syn._ ENEMA PAPAVERIS, L. _Prep._ 1. DECOCTION OF
POPPIES.

2. Poppy-heads (with the seeds), 5 dr.; water, 3/4 pint; boil to 12 fl.
oz., and strain. Anodyne; as a substitute for opium clyster.

=Enema, Pur'gative.= See ENEMA CATHARTIC.

=Enema of Quinine.= _Syn._ ENEMA QUINIAE. Sulphate of quinine, 5 to 15 gr.;
decoction of starch, 6 oz.

=Enema of Rue.= _Syn._ ENEMA RUTAE. _Prep._ Confection of rue, 20 to 60 gr;
thin gruel, 6 oz. to 8 oz.

=Enema, Sim'ple.= Barley water, rice water, thin-made starch, and
decoction of mallows, are frequently so called, from being used either for
simple laxative enemas, or as the vehicle for more active substances.

=Enema of Soap.= _Syn._ ENEMA SAPONIS, L. _Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.) Soft
soap, 6 dr.; hot water, 1 pint; dissolve. To soften indurated faeces, &c.;
and as a detergent in certain ulcerations of the rectum.

=Enema of Soot.= _Syn._ ENEMA FULIGINIS. Wood soot, 4 oz.; water, 1-1/2
pints; boil to a pint.

=Enema of Starch.= _Syn._ ENEMA AMYLI, L. See ENEMA SIMPLE (_above_).

=Enema, Stim'ulant.= _Syn._ ENEMA STIMULANS, L. The ordinary cathartic
clysters are often so called. The following belong to a different class:--

_Prep._ 1. Tincture of capsicum, 1 fl. oz.; barley water or thin
arrow-root, 1/2 pint; mix. In cholera, especially the cold stages.

2. To the last add, of ether, 2 fl. dr.; laudanum, 30 drops.

3. Decoction of poppies, 1/2 pint; tincture of capsicum, 3 fl. dr.; oil of
nutmeg, 10 drops. In diarrh[oe]a.

=Enema of Tobac'co.= _Syn._ ENEMA TABACI (Ph. L. E. & D.), INFUSUM TABACI
(Ph. D. 1826), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Tobacco leaf, 20 gr.; boiling water,
8 oz.; infuse half an hour, and strain.

2. (Ph. E.) Tobacco, 15 to 30 gr.; boiling water, 8 fl. oz.; as last.

3. (Ph. D.) Tobacco, 1 scrup.; boiling water, 8 fl. oz.

4. (Ph. L. 1836.) Tobacco, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint.

_Obs._ Tobacco clyster is used in strangulated hernia, obstinate
constipation, retention of urine, &c. It is violently depressing and
relaxing; producing fainting, and even death, when improperly or
injudiciously administered. "It is not to be forgotten that 2 dr., 1 dr.,
and even 1/2 dr., of tobacco, infused in water, have proved fatal." "The
cautious practitioner, therefore, will not use more than 15 or 20 gr."
(Pereira.) Three parts of Virginia tobacco are equal to seven parts of any
other kind. (Davy.)

=Enema of Tur'pentine.= _Syn._ TURPENTINE CLYSTER; ENEMA TEREBINTHINAE (Ph.
L.), E. OLEI T., L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Oil of turpentine, 1 oz.; mucilage
of starch, 15 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Oil of turpentine, 1 fl. oz.; yolk of 1 egg; triturate
together, then add of decoction of barley, 19 fl. oz.

3. (Ph. E.) As the last, but using simple water instead of barley water.

4. (Ph. D.) Oil of turpentine, 1 fl. oz.; mucilage of barley, 16 fl. oz.

5. (Dr Neligan.) Oil of turpentine, 1/2 fl. oz.; syrup of garlic, 1 fl.
oz.; barley water, 6 or 7 fl. oz. In ascarides, and as an antispasmodic
and purgative in colic, obstinate constipation, calculus, peritonitis,
tympanitis (DRUM-BELLY), &c.

=Enema, Ver'mifuge.= _Syn._ ENEMA ANTHELMINTICUM, E. VERMIFUGUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. Castor oil, 1 oz.; mucilage, 3/4 oz.; decoction of the root of
male fern, 7 fl. oz. In worms, especially tape-worm.

2. (Collier.) Oil of turpentine, 1 fl. oz.; olive oil (warm), 1/2 pint. In
ascarides.

3. (Dr Darwall.) Tincture of sesquichloride of iron, 1 dr.; water, 7 or 8
fl. oz. In ascarides, especially when occurring in childhood; the quantity
used being proportionately lessened. See ENEMAS of ALOES, ASSAF[OE]TIDA,
TURPENTINE, &c.

=Enema of Vinegar.= _Syn._ ENEMA ACETICI. (Brande.) _Prep._ Vinegar, 2
oz.; infusion of chamomile, 4 oz. In typhus fever.

=Enema of Wine.= _Syn._ ENEMA VINOSUM, L. _Prep._ From sherry wine and hot
water, of each 7 fl. oz. In suspended animation. Sometimes a wine-glassful
of brandy is added.

=ENERGY, relative values of Food as sources of.= Chemists and
physiologists, although they agree that muscular power is derived from the
action of the oxygen supplied during respiration upon the digested
portions of the food, differ in their conclusions as to whether the
nitrogenous or non-nitrogenous principles of the food, form the chief
source of this power or not. The opinion of Liebig, Playfair, Ranke, and
others, that the oxidation and metamorphosis of the nitrogenous tissue is
the fountain of muscular force has of late years been contested, and on
the opposite view adduced, viz. that it is principally to the oxidation of
the carbonaceous or non-nitrogenous constituents of the food, that animal
dynamic power is due.

This latter view has received support from the experiments of Frankland,
Lawes, and Gilbert (from their observations on the feeding of cattle),
Edward Smith, Meyer, Pettenkofer, Voit, Wislicenus, Fick, Parkes, and
others.

The data upon which it is based are those derived from the observation of
the amount of heat generated by the combustion of a definite quantity of
food out of the body; which, it is affirmed with certain deductions,
represents the quantity of heat evolved by the oxidation of the same food
within the body; and as heat is the equivalent of muscular force or
energy, that aliment which, in burning, gives off the most heat, must, it
is supposed, necessarily be the richest in the production of animal motive
power. Of course these conditions will, amongst others, be very
considerably modified by the extent to which the processes of the animal
economy, such as digestion, assimilation, &c., can liberate the elements
of the food so as to become available as sources of this energy.

Were these processes perfect, all the carbon of the carbonaceous, as well
as that of the nitrogenous constituents of the diet, after deducting the
carbon which passes off as urea (one part of dry nitrogenous matter
yielding about a third of its weight of urea) would be utilised and
converted into heat-producing power. But even under these circumstances a
considerable portion of this thermotic power would be expended in
sustaining the internal movements of the body, such as respiration and the
heart's action, which it has been computed are daily maintained by a force
capable of raising 600,000 pounds a foot high.

No wonder if, with such varying factors introduced into the problem,
physiologists and physicists should differ so widely in their
calculations; and that, whilst one inquirer believes that food practically
yields only about half the force which, according to theory, it actually
contains; another estimates it at only one fifth.

The following table by Dr Frankland shows the amount of force which
different foods yield when burned. The results agree very closely with
those theoretically given by Playfair and others.

_Energy developed by one gramme, or one ounce of the following substances,
when oxidised in the body._

  -------------------+-----------+--------------+---------------
                     |           |              |  1 ounce will
                     |           |              | equal foot-tons
                     |    Per    |   1 gramme   |   of energy, or
  Name of Substance  |  cent. of |   will equal |   in other words,
                     |   Water   |  kil.-metres |  would raise the
                     |           |    of energy.|    under-given
                     |           |              |  number of tons,
                     |           |              |  1 foot high.[276]
  -------------------+-----------+--------------+-----------------
  Beef (lean)        |    70.5   |       604    |      55.0
  Veal (lean)        |    70.9   |       496    |      45.3
  Ham (lean,         |           |              |
  boiled)            |    54.4   |       711    |      64.9
  Bread crumb        |    44.0   |       910    |      83.0
  Flour              |    ...    |      1627    |     148.5
  Ground rice        |    ...    |      1591    |     145.3
  Oatmeal            |    ...    |      1665    |     152.0
  Pea meal           |    ...    |      1598    |     146.0
  Potatoes           |    73.0   |       422    |      38.5
  Carrots            |    86.0   |       220    |      20.0
  Cabbage            |    88.5   |       178    |      16.2
  Butter             |    ...    |      3077    |     280.9
  Egg (white of)     |    86.3   |       244    |      22.3
  Egg (yolk)         |    47.0   |      1400    |     127.0
  Cheshire cheese    |    24.0   |      1846    |     168.5
  Arrowroot          |    ...    |      1656    |     151.3
  Milk               |    87.0   |       266    |      24.3
  Sugar (lump)       |    ...    |      1418    |     129.5
  Ale (Bass' bottled)|    88.4   |       328    |      30.0
  Porter (Guinness'  |           |              |
  stout)             |    88.4   |       455    |      41.5


[Footnote 276: The amount of work done is generally estimated in this
country as so many lbs. or tons lifted 1 foot. In France it is expressed
as so many kilogrammes lifted 1 metre,--and called 'the kilogrammemetre,'
as above.]

"A table of this kind," says Dr Parkes, "is useful in showing what can be
obtained from our food, but it must not be supposed that the value of food
is in exact relation to the energy which it can furnish. In order that the
force shall be obtained, the food must not only be digested and taken into
the body properly prepared, but its energy must be developed in the place
and in the manner proper for nutrition. The mere expression of potential
energy cannot fix dietetic value, which may be dependent on conditions in
the body unknown to us. For example, it is quite certain, from
observation, that gelatin cannot take the place of albumen, though its
potential energy is little inferior, and it is easily oxidised in the
body. But, owing to some circumstances yet unknown, gelatin is chiefly
destroyed in the blood and gland-cells, and its energy, therefore, has a
different direction from that of albumen. So also of the potential
energy, it is quite possible that all is not usefully employed. The tables
of energy give broad indications, and can be used in a general statement
of the value of a diet; but at present they do not throw light upon the
intricacies of nutrition."

=ENFLURAGE.= See POMMADE.

=ENGRA''VING.= The art of producing designs or figures on metal, wood,
&c., by incision or corrosion, usually for the purpose of being
subsequently printed on paper, calico, or other materials. The mechanical
operations of the engraver do not come within the province of this work.
Several of the materials which he employs in his trade will, however, be
found noticed under their respective heads.

There is this important difference between engraving on metal plates and
wood-engraving: in the former all the lines and dots that are to print
black are hollowed out with a graving-tool, or 'bitten in' by acid; in the
latter all the parts that are to appear white in the impression are cut
away, and the lines which produce the imprint are left on the face of the
block.

Casts of wood-blocks, or 'stereos.' are often used instead of the original
blocks when a great number of impressions is required. To produce them
stucco moulds are prepared, and from these the casts in type metal are
taken. The casts are usually about 1/8 in. thick, and have to be screwed
upon wooden blocks to bring them to the height of the types which are
printed with them. As soon as one cast is worn out another may be taken,
and the original block is thus preserved in the state in which it left the
engraver's hands.

For the reproduction of engraved metallic plates the ELECTROTYPE PROCESS
is commonly employed. Woodcuts are also copied, though less frequently, by
this process. The mode by which the postage-stamp plates are multiplied is
as follows:--240 'queen's heads' or stamps (a pound's worth) are engraved
on one steel plate. This plate is then hardened, and an impression of it
taken on a softened steel roller. This roller, in its turn, is also
hardened, and softened steel plates being passed under it, an impression
precisely like that of the original plate is produced on each of them.
These plates are then hardened and employed for printing the penny postage
stamps for sale. They last a long time; and when they are worn out they
are destroyed, and their place is supplied by fresh ones, which are
produced by the cylinder before referred to, which continues ready to
supply any number that may be required. Bank-note plates are reproduced in
the same manner. See ELECTROTYPE, ETCHING, &c.

=Engravings, to Clean.= Place the engraving on a smooth board, and cover
it thinly with finely powdered and very clean common salt. Next squeeze
lemon-juice upon the salt so as to dissolve a considerable portion of it.
Now elevate one end of the board so that it may form an angle of about
forty-five or fifty degrees. Next pour on the engraving boiling water from
a tea-kettle until all the salt and lemon-juice are washed off. The
engraving will then be found to be perfectly clean and free from stains.
Care must be taken to dry it on the board or on some smooth surface very
gradually. It will acquire a yellow tint if dried by the sun or before a
fire.

=Engravings, to Mount.= Strain thin calico on a frame, then carefully
paste on it the engraving, so as to be free from creases; afterwards, and
when dry, give the engraving two coats of thin size (made by putting a
piece of glue the size of a small nut into a small cupful of hot water);
finally, when this dries, varnish the engraving with a varnish known as
'white hard.'

=ENTERI'TIS.= See INFLAMMATION OF THE BOWELS.

=ENTOZO'A.= Parasitic animals which infest the bodies of other animals.
See WORMS.

=ENTRY, Powers of.= The Public Health Act thus defines the power of any
local authority to enter into premises whereon a nuisance is supposed to
exist; and the conditions under which this power is to be exercised.

"The local authority or their officer shall be admitted to any premises
for the purpose of examining as to the existence of a nuisance thereon, or
of enforcing the provisions of any Act in force within the district
requiring fireplaces and furnaces to consume their own smoke at any time
between the hours of nine in the forenoon and six in the afternoon, or in
the case of a nuisance arising in respect of any business, then at any
hour when such business is in progress or is usually carried on.

"Where under the Public Health Act a nuisance has been ascertained to
exist, or an order of abatement or of prohibition has been made, the local
authority or their officer shall be admitted from time to time into the
premises between the hours aforesaid until the nuisance is abated or the
works ordered to be done are completed, as the case may be.

"Where an order of abatement or prohibition has not been complied with or
has been infringed, the local authority or their officer shall be admitted
from time to time at all reasonable hours or at all hours during which
business is in progress or is usually carried on into the premises where
the nuisance exists, in order to abate or remove the same.

"If admission to premises for any of the purposes of this section is
refused, any justice on complaint thereof on oath by any officer of the
local authority (made after reasonable notice in writing of the intention
to make the same has been given to the person having custody of the
premises) may, by order under his hand, require the person having custody
of the premises to admit the local authority or their officer into the
premises during the hours aforesaid; and if no person having custody of
the premises can be found, the justice shall, on oath made before him of
that fact, by order under his hand, authorise the local authority or their
officer to enter such premises during the hours aforesaid.

"Any order made by a justice for admission of the local authority or their
officer on premises shall continue in force until the nuisance has been
abated, or the work for which the entry was necessary has been done.

"Any person refusing to obey a justices' order for admission of the local
authority or their officers is liable to a penalty not exceeding five
pounds. Power of entry at _reasonable times_ is given to the medical
officers of health and inspector of nuisances to inspect food, &c. Penalty
for obstruction, five pounds and under."

=ENURE'SIS.= See URINE.

=EPHESTIA ELETELLA--The Chocolate Moth.= The larvae of this moth frequently
cause serious damage to cocoa, flour, or biscuits when these are stored.
Professor Huxley proposes to guard against the ravages of the insect by
the adoption of the following precautions--

1. Have no cocoa stored in any place in which biscuits are manufactured.

2. Lead up all biscuit puncheons as soon as they are full of the
freshly-baked biscuit.

3. Coat puncheons with tar after they are leaded up, or at least work
lime-wash well into the joints and crevices.

4. Line the bread-rooms of the ships with tin, so that if the Ephestia has
got into a puncheon it may not infest the rest of the ship.

5. If other means fail, expose the woodwork of puncheons to a heat of 200 deg.
F. for two hours, or they might be destroyed by driving into the puncheon
a stream of carbonic oxide, and afterwards exposing it well to the air.
Weevils in biscuit have frequently been exterminated by this method, and
there appears to be no reason why this treatment should not be equally
efficacious for getting rid of the larvae of the _Ephestia Eletella_.

=EPHIAL'TES.= See NIGHTMARE.

=EPIDEM'IC.= Common to many people. In _pathology_, an epidemic disease
(EPIDEMIC; EPIDEMY) is one which seizes a number of people at the same
time and in the same place, but which is not dependent on any local cause,
but on some extraordinary condition of the air. When a disease is peculiar
to a people or nation, and appears to depend on local causes, it is said
to be 'ENDEMIC' or 'ENCHORIAL,' Thus, Asiatic cholera may be taken as an
example of the first, and the agues of low countries, and the goitre of
the Alps, as examples of the other.

Epidemics may be divided into indigenous and exotic. Amongst the former
may be included scarlet fever, measles, hooping-cough, influenza, typhoid;
whilst the latter embrace such as are imported, viz. Asiatic cholera,
plague, &c.

No year passes without the prevalence of an epidemic of one kind or the
other in this country.

The following enactments for the prevention of epidemic diseases are now
in force:--

"Whenever any part of England appears to be threatened with, or is
affected by, any formidable epidemic, endemic, or infectious disease, the
Local Government Board may make, and from time to time alter and revoke,
regulations for all or any of the following purposes, viz.:--

"(1) For the speedy interment of the dead; and--

"(2) For house-to-house visitation; and--

"(3) For the provision of medical aid and accommodation, for the promotion
of cleansing, ventilation, and disinfection, and for guarding against the
spread of the disease;--

"and may by order declare all or any of the regulations so made to be in
force within the whole or any part or parts of the district of any local
authority, and to apply to any vessels as well as arms or parts of the sea
within the jurisdiction of the Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom, or
the Commissioners for executing the office of the Lord High Admiral for
the time being, for the period in such order mentioned, and may by any
subsequent order abridge or extend such period." (P. H., s. 134.)

"All such regulations, &c., made by the Local Government Board are to be
published in the 'London Gazette,' and such publication is to be held as
conclusive evidence." (P. H., s. 135.)

"The local authority of any district within which, or part of which,
regulations so issued by the Local Government Board are declared to be in
force, shall superintend and see to the execution thereof, and shall
appoint and pay such medical or other officers or persons, and do and
provide all such acts, matters, and things as may be necessary for
mitigating any such disease, or for superintending or aiding in the
execution of such regulations, or for executing the same, as the case may
require. Moreover, the local authority may from time to time direct any
prosecution or legal proceedings for or in respect of the wilful violation
or neglect of any such regulation." (P. H., s. 136.)

"The local authority and their officers shall have power of entry on any
premises or vessel for the purpose of executing or superintending the
execution of any regulations so issued by the Local Government Board as
aforesaid." (P. H., s. 137.)

"Whenever, in compliance with any regulation so issued by the Local
Government Board as aforesaid, any poor-law medical officer performs any
medical service on board any vessel, he shall be entitled to charge extra
for such service, at the general rate of his allowance for services for
the union or place for which he is appointed, and such charges shall be
payable by the captain of such vessel on behalf of the owners thereof,
together with any reasonable expenses for the treatment of the sick.

"Where such services are rendered by any medical practitioner who is not a
poor-law medical officer, he shall be entitled to charges for any service
rendered on board, with extra remuneration on account of distance, at the
same rate as those which he is in the habit of receiving from private
patients of the class of those attended and treated on shipboard, to be
paid as aforesaid. In case of dispute in respect of such charges, such
dispute may, where the charges do not exceed _twenty pounds_, be
determined by a court of summary jurisdiction; and such court shall
determine summarily the amount which is reasonable, according to the
accustomed rate of charge within the place where the dispute arises for
attendance on patients of the like class as those in respect of whom the
charge is made." (P. H., s. 138.)

"The Local Government Board may, if they think fit, by order authorise or
require any two or more local authorities to act together for the purposes
of the provisions of this Act relating to prevention of epidemic diseases,
and may prescribe the mode of such joint action, and of defraying the
costs thereof." (P. H., s. 139.)

"Any person who--

"(1.) Wilfully violates any regulation so issued by the Local Government
Board, as aforesaid; or,

"(2.) Wilfully obstructs any person acting under the authority or in the
execution of any such regulation shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding five pounds." (P. H., s. 140.)

=EPIGAS'TRIC.= In _anatomy_, pertaining to the EPIGAS'TRIUM, or the part
of the abdomen over the stomach.

=EPILEP'SY.= _Syn._ FALLING SICKNESS; EPILEPSIA, MORBUS CADUCUS, L. The
popular name of this disease arises from the patient, when attacked by it,
suddenly falling to the ground. The other leading symptoms consist of
convulsions, stupor, and, generally, frothing at the mouth. It comes on by
fits, which after a time go off, leaving a certain amount of lassitude and
drowsiness behind. Sometimes certain peculiar symptoms precede the attack.
Among these, a sensation of coldness or of a current of cold air from the
extremities of the body towards the head (AURA EPILEPTICA), palpitation,
flatulency, stupor, and an indescribable cloud or depression, are the most
common. The occurrence of these symptoms are not, however, uniform, even
in the same patient; but it generally happens that the party falls down
suddenly, and without the slightest warning.

Epilepsy is often symptomatic of other affections, as excessive irritation
of the primae viae from worms, indigestible or noxious food, or poison; or
it depends on local injuries, particularly those of the head, accompanied
with lodgments of water on the brain, tumours, pressure, &c. Violent
affections of the nervous system, sudden frights or fits of passion,
violent mental emotions, the sudden suppression of old evacuations, and,
in childhood, difficult teething, are also common causes of sympathetic
epilepsy. Occasionally it arises from mobility of the sensorium, induced
by plethora, or by excessive debility. In such cases the treatment must be
energetically directed to the removal of the exciting cause.

When epilepsy occurs as an idiopathic or primary affection, or when it
cannot be referred to any apparent cause, more especially when the attack
commences about the age of puberty, and the fits are frequent, it is
generally hereditary, and there is great danger of its terminating either
in apoplexy, or lunacy, or imbecility.

The treatment of idiopathic epilepsy is principally directed to the
improvement of the general health, and the diminution of nervous
irritability by sedatives and tonics. Among the first, camphor, ether,
henbane, hemlock, musk, oil of cajeput, opium, and morphia, and, more
recently, hydrocyanic acid, have been principally relied on. Among the
second, bark, cascarilla, quinine, strychnia, valerian, the sulphate of
iron, zinc, and copper, arsenious acid, and nitrate of silver, have each
their zealous advocates. The objection against the last preparation is the
danger of its disfiguring the patient, by tinging the skin of a permanent
dull, leaden hue. In cases accompanied with plethora, a low diet, daily
out-of-door exercise, and the frequent use of aperients, with occasional
blistering, cupping, and other depletive measures, are indicated; whilst
in those marked by inanition and debility, an entirely opposite course
must be adopted. When the disease is complicated with syphilis, a mild
course of mercury may be given; and when with scrofula, iodine, iodide of
potassium, or cod-liver oil, assisted by sea-bathing, will be proper.

Among other methods of treatment may be mentioned the administration of an
active emetic or purgative, twice weekly, in the morning, when the stomach
is empty. The first has now few supporters; but the second is said to be
often productive of great benefit.

During a fit of epilepsy the only thing that can be done for the patient
is to prevent the sufferer injuring himself, and to loosen every part of
his dress that presses on his head, neck, or chest. When premonitory
symptoms occur, a brisk emetic, a large dose of laudanum and ether, a cold
plunge or shower bath (when not contra-indicated), or anything else which
gives a sudden shock to the system or raises its tone, frequently prevents
the accession of the fit.

Epilepsy more commonly attacks children than adults, and boys than girls.
"Its returns are frequently periodical, and its paroxysms commence more
frequently in the night than in the day, being somewhat connected with
sleep. It is sometimes counterfeited by street impostors in order to
excite the charity of the passers-by.

_For Animals._ All animals are subject to attacks of epilepsy, more
particularly dogs and pigs. The animal seized with the fit loses the
senses of sight and hearing, and falling down exhibits the same symptoms
as those which accompany the disease in human beings. Cattle, although
they bellow greatly during an attack, rarely die from it; but it not
infrequently suffocates dogs, and is in them a not unusual cause of sudden
death. The fit, which lasts from ten to fifty minutes, when it passes off,
leaves the animal dull, and is apt to return. Epileptic fits are a
frequent accompaniment of distemper in dogs. They are often induced in
cattle by tough and indigestible food, and in these as well as in dogs, by
intestinal worms. Hot weather and excitement, especially in dogs, are a
frequent cause of an epileptic fit. By energetic treatment after the first
attack the further course of the malady may often be arrested. The best
treatment is to give, when the fit is over, a brisk purge, with an ounce
of oil of turpentine in horses or cattle, and twenty to forty drops in
dogs. If the disease is caused by worms give the medicines ordered in such
cases.

=EPISPAS'TICS.= See BLISTER and VESICANT.

=EP'ITHEM.= _Syn._ EPITHEMA, L. Any external liquid medicine for local
application; as an embrocation or lotion. Some writers confine the term to
those preparations which are intended to be applied by means of a cloth
dipped into them. See LINIMENT, LOTION, &c.

=Epithem, Astrin''gent.= _Syn._ EPITHEMA ASTRINGENS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Powdered ice, 7 dr.; powdered catechu, 1 dr.; mix.

2. (Brera.) Powdered bole and rhatany, of each 1 oz.; vinegar of roses, q.
s. to form a paste. Both are applied to the nostrils and forehead to stop
bleeding at the nose.

=Epithem, Gly''cerin.= _Syn._ EPITHEMA GLYCERINAE, L. _Prep._ (Mr Startin.)
Glycerin, 1 oz.; rose water and lime water, of each 3 or 4 fl. oz.;
powdered gum tragacanth, q. s. to form a thin mucilage. In scalds, burns,
and excoriations.

=Epithem, Vermifuge.= _Syn._ EPITHEMA VERMIFUGUM, L. (Hoffmann). Wormwood
and centaury, beaten up with aloes and colocynth, and applied over the
belly.

=Epithem, Vesica'ting.= _Syn._ EPITHEMA VESICATORIUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Alibert.) Rye or barley meal, made into a paste with vinegar, and 30 to
40 gr. or more of powdered Spanish flies sprinkled over the surface.

2. (Ph. L. 1746.) Spanish flies (in fine powder) and wheat flour, equal
parts, made into paste with vinegar, q. s. As a blister.

=Epithem, Vol'atile.= _Syn._ EPITHEMA VOLATILE, E. AMMONIAE, L. _Prep._
(Ph. L. 1764.) Common turpentine and water of ammonia, equal parts. An
excellent counter-irritant; either with or without the addition of a
little olive oil.

=EPIZOOTIC DISEASES.= These are diseases which attack different species of
domestic animals in the same manner that epidemics do man. These maladies
ravage large tracts of country, frequently causing great mortality amongst
the various animals inhabiting the localities visited by them; different
animals being assailed by different forms of epizootic disease.

For instance, there is the rinderpest, or plague peculiar to cattle, the
typhoid or gastric fever which prevailed so largely amongst horses in this
country in 1854, and 1861 and 1862; the smallpox of sheep; the diphtheria
affecting oxen, sheep, goats, and pigs; the influenza of horses, and the
charbon of pigs. Dogs, cats, tame and wild birds, fish,[277] silkworms and
bees, each suffers from a special variety of epizootic disease.

[Footnote 277: Great mortality has prevailed amongst the salmon during the
present year, owing to the attacks of a peculiar white fungus, called the
_Saprolegnia ferox_, a parasite that multiplies so rapidly as speedily to
envelope any fish it attacks.]

Epizootic diseases are met with in most European countries. They are very
common in Russia, where they commit great devastation amongst the horned
cattle, 400,000 of which are said to die annually from their ravages. Of
epizootics, Mr Finlay Dun says:--"They extend at the same time over large
tracts of country, attack in a similar manner great numbers of animals,
tend to assume a typhoid form, and withstand badly all depletive
treatment. They depend upon some general causes as yet unknown, but which
it has usually been thought sufficient to term "atmospheric;" but are
always most common and fatal amongst animals breathing impure air, densely
crowded, badly fed, or exposed to cold winds; and are generally prevented
or robbed of their virulence by guarding against such debilitating causes,
and maintaining a high standard of health."

=EQUISE'TIC ACID.= In _chemistry_, a substance identical with ACONITIC
ACID (which _see_).

=EQUIV'ALENT.= (EQUIVALENCY.) In modern _chemistry_, the equivalent of a
body is that weight of it which will exactly replace in a compound 1 atom
of hydrogen or 1 atom of either of the other monivalent elements (_see_
Table, _below_).

Monivalent elements are those which replace one atom of hydrogen in
chemical combinations in the ratios of their atomic weights.

One atom of a divalent, trivalent, tetrivalent, pentivalent, and
hexivalent element replaces respectively, or is equivalent to, two, three,
four, five, or six atoms of hydrogen or of any other monivalent element.
(For further information on this subject consult the works on chemistry
by Fownes, Miller, Kay-Shuttleworth, &c.)

_Table of the Elements, arranged according to their Equivalency_.

  -----------+-----------+----------+-------------+------------+------------
  Monivalent.| Divalent. |Trivalent.| Tetrivalent.|Pentivalent.| Hexivalent.
  -----------+-----------+----------+-------------+------------+------------
  Hydrogen   | Oxygen    |Boron     | Carbon      |Nitrogen    | Sulphur
  Fluorine   | Barium    |Gold      | Silicon     |Phosphorus  | Selenium
  Chlorine   | Strontium |          | Tin         |Vanadium    | Tellurium
  Bromine    | Calcium   |          | Titanium    |Arsenic     | Tungsten
  Iodine     | Magnesium |          | Thorium     |Antimony    | Molybdenum
  Caesium     | Zinc      |          | Niobium     |Bismuth     | Osmium
  Rubidium   | Didymium  |          | Tantalum    |            | Iridium
  Potassium  | Lanthanium|          | Zinconium   |            | Ruthenium
  Sodium     | Yttrium   |          | Aluminium   |            | Rhodium
  Lithium    | Glucinum  |          | Platinum    |            | Chromium
  Thallium   | Cadmium   |          | Palladium   |            | Manganese
  Silver     | Mercury   |          | Lead        |            | Iron
             | Copper    |          |             |            | Cobalt
             |           |          |             |            | Nickel
             |           |          |             |            | Uranium
             |           |          |             |            | Cerium
  -----------+-----------+----------+-------------+------------+------------

=ERB'IUM.= According to Prof. Mosander, the substance usually called
yttria is a mixture of the oxides of three metals--yttrium, erbium, and
terbium, which differ in the character of their salts, and in some other
important particulars. The first is a powerful base; the others, very weak
ones. The latter are separated with extreme difficulty, and possess no
practical importance.

[Illustration]

=ERDMAN'S FLOAT.= This useful little instrument, invented as its name
implies, by Erdman, is used to ensure accuracy in the readings of Mohr's
burette.

It is in the form of an elongated glass bulb, loaded with a globule of
mercury at the bottom, the same as a hydrometer, and with a glass hook at
the top, by means of which it can be placed in or removed from the liquid
in the burette at pleasure. The float has a circular mark scratched by a
diamond, running round the middle, which, when the instrument is placed in
the fluid in the burette, should correspond with the graduation or degree
on the burette at which the fluid stands. The actual height of the fluid
in the burette is of no consequence, since, if the operation be commenced
with the line on the float opposite the 0 gradation on the burette, the
same proportional division is always maintained. It is most essential
that, when the fluid is being drawn off, the float should accompany it in
its descent without wavering, and that the circular mark upon it should
always be parallel to the graduations of the burette. Another condition
is, that when the float has been pressed down in the fluid of the closed
burette it should slowly rise again. A correspondent in Liebig's 'Annalen
der Chemie und Pharmacie' for April, 1875, states that Erdman's floats
generally become lined internally with a green or yellow layer, from the
oxidation of the mercury, and are thus rendered opaque and consequently
useless. He proposes to place the mercury in a distinct cell, hermetically
sealed from the upper part of the float which carries the circular mark.
He has had floats of this construction in use for years.[278] See BURETTE.

[Footnote 278: 'Chemical News.']

=EREMACAU'SIS.= Slow burning; decay. This expression was applied by Liebig
to the peculiar decomposition which moist organic matter undergoes, when
freely exposed to the air, by the oxygen of which it is gradually burned
or destroyed, without any sensible elevation of temperature. See
PUTREFACTION.

=ER'GOT.= _Syn._ ERGOT OF RYE, SPURRED RYE, HORNED R., COCKSPUR R.,
OBSTETRICAL R. ERGOTA (B. P.), L. The diseased seeds of _Secale cereale_
(Linn.), or common rye.

Ergot of rye deteriorates greatly by age, being subject to the attacks of
a description of acarus resembling the cheese mite, but much smaller,
which destroys the whole of the internal portion of the grain, leaving
nothing but the shell, and a considerable quantity of excrementitious
matter. To prevent this the ergot should be well dried, and then placed in
bottles or tin canisters, and closely preserved from the air. The addition
of a few cloves, or drops of the oil of cloves, or strong acetic acid, or
a little camphor, or camphorated spirit of wine, will preserve this
substance for years in close vessels. M. Martin proposes to steep the dry
ergot in strong mucilage, and then to dry it on a sheet of white iron.
This operation he repeats once or oftener, and finally preserves the
prepared and thoroughly dried ergot in a well-corked glass flask. ('Jour.
de Chimie Med.') The wholesale druggists generally keep it in well-covered
tin canisters or tin boxes.

H. Ducros ('Zeitschr. des Oesterr. Apoth. Ver.,' 1876-8), on the strength
of many years' experience, recommends powdered wood-charcoal for the
preservation of ergot of rye.

The ergot is placed in a wide-mouth stoppered bottle, and covered with a
thick layer of the powdered charcoal. Whenever it is required for use some
of the ergot is transferred to a piece of paper, and freed from the
adhering charcoal by blowing and rubbing. What is not required is returned
to the bottle.

N. B. Gionovie ('Zeitschr. des Oesterr. Apoth. Ver.,' 1876, 126) states he
has used the following process with the best success. A small quantity of
ether is dropped on the ergot contained in a bottle, and the latter closed
with a well-fitting stopper. The addition of ether is repeated every time
the bottle is opened.

Ergot of rye is much used to restrain uterine haemorrhage, and to
accelerate the contraction of the uterus in protracted labour. It is also
much used as an emmenagogue.--_Dose._ To facilitate labour, 20 to 30 gr.,
either in powder or made into an infusion; repeated at intervals of 20 or
30 minutes until 3 or 4 scruples have been taken. In other cases
(leucorrh[oe]a, haemorrhages, &c.) the _dose_ is 5 to 12 gr., three times
daily, for a period not longer than a week or ten days at a time.

M. Tancret states that he has succeeded in obtaining an alkaloid from
ergot of rye, which he names _ergotinine_. The isolation of ergotinine is
said to be attended with great difficulty, owing to its great tendency to
undergo spontaneous changes, a short contact with the air being sufficient
to decompose it; a circumstance which may perhaps help to explain the
rapid change that the powder ergot experiences. Professor Dragendorff,
however, refuses to admit that ergotinine is the active principle of
ergot, or that it is a distinct chemical substance. He ascribes the
therapeutic power of the drug mainly to _sclerotic acid_, which body,
after various unsuccessful attempts, he has obtained from ergot, with
certain other determinate compounds, by the following process:--"Very
finely powdered ergot is exhausted with distilled water, the solution
concentrated _in vacuo_, and the residuary liquid mixed with an equal
volume of 95 per cent. alcohol. This causes the precipitation of a
peculiarly shiny substance (scleromucin), together with a portion of the
salts, and the greater part of the suspended fatty matter. The mixture
having been allowed to stand on ice for twenty-four to forty-eight hours,
it is filtered, and the filtrate mixed with a further quantity of 95 per
cent. alcohol, sufficient to precipitate all the sclerotic acid in
combination with the bases (chiefly as calcium sclerotate). The separation
of the precipitate is promoted as before, by placing the mixture on ice
for some days. This causes the deposited mass, which has a brownish
colour, to adhere firmly to the walls of the vessel, so as to permit the
supernatant liquid to be easily poured off. The precipitate is kneaded
with alcohol of 80 per cent., and immediately thereafter dissolved in a
sufficient quantity of 40 per cent. alcohol, when the remainder of the
scleromucin and another large portion of the foreign salts are left
behind. The filtered liquid is now mixed with absolute alcohol, whereby
sclerotic acid is precipitated in conjunction with certain bases and other
substances. The impure product, when carefully dried over sulphuric acid,
was found on analysis to contain 8.5 per cent. of potassium, about 0.36
per cent. of calcium, 4.3 per cent. of sodium, 2.74 per cent. of
phosphoric acid, or altogether 12.9 per cent. of ash.

"The greater part of these admixtures may be removed, and the sclerotic
acid obtained free, by adding before the final precipitation with absolute
alcohol a considerable quantity of hydrochloric acid (for every 100 c. c.
of solution 5-6 gm. of the acid, sp. gr. 1.100), allowing to stand at
ordinary temperature for a few hours, and then proceeding to precipitate.
In this manner the amount of ash may be brought down to 3 per cent., and
by repeated solution, addition of acid, and precipitation, it may further
be reduced to less than 2 per cent. or 3 per cent. A more complete
purification is difficult and hazardous, because every addition of
hydrochloric acid causes the decomposition of a small quantity of
sclerotic acid, while at the same time a portion of the latter is lost by
remaining in solution.

"The resulting product, although not chemically pure, is nevertheless
physiologically pure, as it always produces constant and identical
results, no matter from what sample of (good) ergot it was obtained.

"Good ergot contains about 4 to 4.5 per cent. of the acid, although
samples are met with which contain scarcely 1.5 to 2 per cent."[279]

[Footnote 279: From 'New Remedies.']

Frogs are stated to have been thrown into a state of palsy by the
hypodermic injection of 0.02 to 0.04 gram of sclerotic acid.

See DECOCTION, EXTRACT, INFUSION, OIL, TINCTURE, &c.

=ER'GOTIN.= _Syn._ ERGOTINA, L. _Prep._ 1. (Bonjean's.) Powdered ergot is
exhausted with cold water, by displacement, and the resulting solution is
heated in a water bath to about 200 deg. Fahr., and filtered; the filtered
liquor is then evaporated to the consistence of a syrup, and when cold,
is treated with rectified spirit, in considerable excess, to precipitate
its gummy matter; after repose, the clear portion is decanted, by the heat
of a water bath, to the consistence of a soft extract. _Prod._ 15%.
According to M. Bonjean, this preparation possesses all the 'haemostatic'
without any of the 'poisonous' qualities of ergot. It has a reddish-brown
colour, a bitter taste, and an odour somewhat resembling that of roasted
meat. Its aqueous solution is red, limpid, and transparent.--_Dose_, 4 to
10 gr., either made into a pill or dissolved in water.

2. (Wigger's.) Powdered ergot is first digested in ether, to remove the
fatty matter, and then in boiling alcohol; the alcoholic tincture is
evaporated, and the resulting extract treated with water; the undissolved
portion, dissolved in hot alcohol and filtered, yields pure ergotine by
gentle evaporation.--_Prod._ 1-1/4%. It has a brownish-red colour; is
resinous, acrid, bitter, insoluble in water and ether, soluble in alcohol,
and poisonous. It evolves a peculiar odour when warmed. Its therapeutical
action has not been determined. See EXTRACT.

=ER'RHINES.= _Syn._ ERRHINA, L. Substances applied to the pituitary
membrane of the nose, for the purpose of producing an increased discharge
of nasal mucus. When they are given to excite sneezing, they are called
STERNUTATORIES or PTARMICS. Asarabacca, euphorbium, several of the
_labiatae_ (herbae _vel_ flores), sal-ammoniac, powdered sugar, subsulphate
of mercury, tobacco, and white hellebore, are the principal substances of
this class.

Errhines act as local irritants, and are occasionally employed in chronic
affections of the eyes, face, ears, and brain; as in amaurosis,
ophthalmia, deafness, weak sight, headache, &c.

=Errhine, Al'um.= _Syn._ ERRHINUM ALUMINIS, L. _Prep._ (Radius.) Alum and
Armenian bole, of each, 1 dr.; kino, 1/2 dr.; red oxide of iron, 2 dr.
(all in powder); mix and triturate. In bleeding at the nose. A little is
snuffed up the nostrils.

=Errhine, Haemostat'ic.= _Syn._ ERRHINUM HAEMOSTATICUS, L. _Prep._ From
powdered catechu, 1 dr.; opium, 5 gr.; sugar, 2 dr. As the last.

=ERUPTIONS (of the Skin).= For brevity and convenience, these cutaneous
affections may be divided into 5 classes:--

=Eruptions, Animal'cular.= These are due to the presence of minute
parasites (ACARI), which burrow and breed in the scarf-skin, and occasion
much local irritation. See ITCH.

=Eruptions, Pap'ular.= _Syn._ DRY PIMPLES. In these the surface is raised
into little elevations or pimples, which sometimes show themselves on the
surface, and at others are only appreciable by the touch. They are usually
accompanied with a greater or less degree of cutaneous irritation and
troublesome itching, in attempting to relieve which they are frequently
converted into disagreeable and painful sores and excoriations, which are
often difficult to heal.

_Treat._ In simple cases, where there is not much disarrangement of the
general health, these eruptions commonly yield to the occasional use of
mild saline aperients, and warm or tepid bathing, or frequent ablution
with warm soap and water. Sea-bathing is also a powerful remedy.
Stimulants of all kinds should be avoided, and ripe fruit and vegetables
should form a prominent part of the diet. Lemonade, made by squeezing a
lemon into a tumbler of water, and sweetening the mixture with a little
sugar, is one of the best beverages on these occasions. To relieve the
itching, brisk friction with a soft flesh-brush may be had recourse to,
followed by the use of a lotion formed by adding the juice of a lemon or a
wine-glassful of distilled vinegar, to 3/4 of a pint or a pint of water,
either with or without the addition of a table-spoonful of glycerin.
Occasional single pimples, depending on local causes, generally require no
particular treatment. See LICHEN, PRURIGO, RED GUM, and TOOTHRASH.

=Eruptions, Pus'tular.= _Syn._ MATTERY PIMPLES. These are distinguished by
the pimples (pustules) containing an opaque yellow fluid or matter (pus,
lymph). "They are generally developed on a ground of inflamed skin; and
the degree of this inflammation of the skin is the basis of their division
into two groups, termed technically 'IMPETIGO' and 'ECTHYMA,' The former
presents the slighter degree of inflammation, and, sometimes, there is
scarcely any redness of the skin; the latter is always accompanied by
considerable inflammation and redness." "The little bubbles attain their
full size in the course of two or three days, and either dry up without
breaking, or more frequently burst and then dry, forming a hard crust,
which offers considerable variety of colour, being sometimes yellowish,
sometimes brownish, and sometimes almost black." The latter form is
popularly known as 'crusted tetter.' In ecthyma the pustules "are
generally of the size of a split pea, and surrounded at their base by a
broad halo of redness. They are usually separate, not clustered like
impetigo, scattered over various parts of the body, and followed either by
a hard black crust or by a sore."

_Treat._ The inflammation and pain may be generally alleviated by the
application of a lotion formed of rectified spirit of wine, 1 part; and
water, 5 or 6 parts; to which a table-spoonful of distilled vinegar is
often added. The crusts or scabs, when they become hard or troublesome,
may be removed by a warm fomentation or an emollient poultice; a little
simple cerate being afterwards applied to allay irritation. When the
constitution is full and inflammatory (as it usually is in impetigo), a
depletive treatment may be adopted, when it is low and debilitated (as it
usually is in ecthyma), tonics and a more liberal diet, with the free use
of lemon juice diluted with water, as a beverage, should be had recourse
to. Sea-bathing is also highly useful. See TETTERS.

=Eruptions, Sca'ly.= _Syn._ DRY TETTER. This is a form of inflammatory
condition of the true skin (DERMA), which commonly makes its appearance as
a small dull red, salmon-red, or liver-coloured spot, slightly raised
above the level of the surrounding skin, constituting a broad, flat,
pimple-like prominence, about the size of a split pea. Upon the surface of
this prominence the scarf-skin becomes slightly roughened, and after a
little while a very distinct but circular scale is produced, which
increases in thickness by the addition of fresh layers, and after assuming
various colours in different varieties of the disease, ultimately
separates and falls off, either leaving a permanently bare surface, or
being followed by crops of other like scales, which also fall off, and are
replaced in rapid succession. This class of eruptions is more obstinate
than any of the other varieties, and often defies medical skill. Each
particular form generally requires special treatment. In all, however,
endeavours should be made to restore the general health of the body in the
manner which existing circumstances may indicate. The red meats, ripe
fruit, and antiscorbutic vegetables should form a large portion of the
diet; and sea-bathing, or shower, sulphuretted, or ioduretted baths,
should be taken daily, if possible. Dry friction with a flesh-brush, and
daily exercise to perspiration, are also highly recommended. See LEPROSY,
PSORIASIS, TETTERS, &c.

=Eruptions, Vesic'ular.= _Syn._ WATERY PIMPLES. These consist of little
vesicles or bladders, filled with a small quantity of a transparent and
colourless liquid. They result from a similar action to that which
produces ordinary blisters. Inflammation is excited in the sensitive skin
by an inward or outward cause, and the inflamed vessels pour out the
watery part of the blood, and so raise the scarf-skin from off the
sensitive layer, in the form of a small dome, which in some situations is
conical, in others a segment of a sphere. They present great variety in
point of number and size; some are so minute as to be scarcely discernible
without close inspection, whilst others increase to the magnitude of a
hen's egg. They are numerous in the inverse ratio of their size; the
smaller ones being very abundant, and the larger ones scanty and few.

_Treat._ This consists chiefly in the due attention to the general
principles of health--cleanliness, exercise, food, and raiment, as already
pointed out, assisted by such special remedies as the particular case or
circumstances may demand. Antiphlogistics or tonics must be had recourse
to, according to the condition of the system, and local irritation allayed
by the usual means. Simple cases frequently yield to a dose or two of some
saline aperient and a change of diet. See ACNE, ERYSIPELAS, PEMPHIGUS,
RUPIA, TETTERS, and SKIN.

=ERVALEN'TA.= The meal of lentil (_Ervum lens_,--Linn.), variously
doctored with other substances. In some cases the article sold under the
name does not contain a particle of lentil meal.

_Prep._ 1. (Paris Ervalenta.) Indian-corn meal (fine), and bean flour, of
each 14 lbs.; salt and sugar, of each 1 lb.; mix, and pass the compound
through a sieve.

2. (Warton's.) Lentil powder, 1 part; durra or Turkey millet flour
(_Sorghum vulgare_), 2 parts. Some persons assert that it contains a large
quantity of the flour of Indian corn. See REVALENTA and LENTILS.

=ERYN''GO.= _Syn._ ERYNGIUM, L. The root of the _Eryngium campestre_, a
plant common in middle and southern Europe. It is sweet, aromatic, and
tonic, and formerly enjoyed much repute in gonorrh[oe]a, suppressed
menstruation, and visceral obstructions generally, especially those of the
gall-bladder, liver, and uterus. Candied eryngo (ERYNGIUM CONDITUM,
ERYNGII RADIX CONDITA), according to Lindley, "has the credit of being a
decided aphrodisiac," and has a considerable sale. _Eryngium aquaticum_
(bitter snake-weed) and _E. maritimum_ (sea eryngo, sea holly) furnish the
eryngo of the Ph. U. S. See CANDYING.

=ERYSIP'ELAS.= _Syn._ ST. ANTHONY'S FIRE, THE ROSE. A peculiar form of
inflammation, which chiefly attacks the skin, and is generally accompanied
or followed by an eruption of a very red colour, sometimes vesicular, and
by tumefaction. It commonly attacks the head and face, and is at its
height from the third to the sixth day, but the duration and progress of
the symptoms are variable. From the eighth to the twelfth day the eruption
usually scabs or scales off. Sometimes suppuration occurs, especially of
the eyelids and scalp, and during the latter stages of the disease there
is, in general, a tendency to debility. In many cases erysipelas is
attended by typhoid symptoms, and is then a dangerous and often fatal
disease.

_Treat._ Aperients and diaphoretics, assisted by a cooling diet. When the
inflammatory symptoms run high, blistering and cupping are frequently had
recourse to. Local irritation may be subdued by milk-and-water, or cooling
or evaporating lotions, or by sprinkling starch, hair-powder, or
arrow-root, on the part. The tendency to debility in the latter stages
should be combated with bark, quinine, or other like tonics. When
shiverings, sickness, and delirium, attend the height of the disorder,
wine, bark, ammonia, and other stimulants, are usually prescribed, and
depletion must be avoided. The same treatment is also adopted in the
gangrenous forms of the disease, to which doses of opium and calomel are
also commonly added. When suppuration and sloughing of the cellular
membrane have taken place, it is usual to make incisions to give exit to
the discharge, and relieve the tension of the limb. These may be about
1-1/2 inch in length, and from 2 to 4 inches apart, and should be made in
the direction of the long dimensions of the limb. Mr Higginbottom, of
Nottingham, applies (freely) lunar caustic to the inflamed skin, and also
to the healthy skin, to the extent of an inch or more beyond it. The
result, in many cases, is a complete change of action in the part, and a
resolution of the disease. Iodine paint is often successfully used in the
same way.

Wherever practicable medical assistance should be called in on the first
appearance of this dangerous disease.

Erysipelas is generally symptomatic of a debilitated or bad constitution.
It is also a common sequel of surgical operations in crowded and
ill-ventilated hospitals, where it often appears to be contagious. In
these cases cleanliness, ventilation, and change of air, are the only
remedies. We need scarcely add, that this disease should never be tampered
with, but the best medical advice sought, whenever it can be procured.

_For animals._ The bowels should be kept gently open, by small doses of
medicine, and laxative glysters. If there be any feverish symptoms, saline
diuretics should be administered; and as a lowering treatment is
objectionable, tonics and stimulants should be had recourse to at an early
stage of the disease. The affected parts should be kept constantly moist
with a lotion composed of one part of Goulard's extract to thirty parts of
distilled or freshly boiled water. Nutritious food, fresh air and general
comfort must not be neglected. Cold applications are hurtful. Horses are
seldom attacked by erysipelas.

=ERYTHORE'TIN.= _Syn._ RED RESIN OF RHUBARB. A yellow or reddish-yellow
substance, forming one of the three resins found by Schloesberger and
D[oe]pping in rhubarb. It is very soluble in alcohol; less so in ether;
with ammonia and potassa it forms soluble compounds of a rich purple
colour. See RHUBARB.

=ERYTH'RIC ACID.= _Prep._ The lichen _Roccella tinctoria_ (Canary or
herb-archil) is boiled with milk of lime, and the filtered solution
precipitated with hydrochloric acid; the dried precipitate is dissolved in
warm alcohol, and filtered; as the solution cools, crystals of erythric
acid are deposited.

_Prep., &c._ Feebly acid; colourless; inodorous; scarcely soluble in
water; soluble in alcohol and ether; chloride of lime turns its solutions
of a blood-red colour.

=ERYTH'RINE=, AMARYTHRINE, ERYTHRILINE, PSEUDO-ERYTHRINE, and
TELERYTHRINE. Substances obtained by Kane and Heeren from _Roccella
tinctoria_, _Parmelia roccella_, _Leconara Tartarea_, &c. They are of
little practical importance.

=ESCHAROT'ICS.= _Syn._ ESCHAROTICA, L. Substances that destroy the texture
of living organic bodies, with the production of an 'eschar' or 'scab.'
Escharotics have been divided into two classes--_mechanical_ and
_chemical_. Among the former are actual cauteries, as a heated iron,
moxas, &c.; among the latter are all those substances commonly known as
caustics. Some writers have subdivided chemical escharotics into ERODING
ESCHAROTICS, as blue vitriol, red precipitate, burnt alum, &c.; and into
CAUSTIC ESCHAROTICS, as lunar caustic, pure potassa, strong sulphuric
acid, nitric acid, &c.; but these distinctions possess little practical
value. "In cauterising with a heated iron, this should be at a white heat,
as, at this temperature, it occasions less pain to the patient, from its
causing an immediate death of the parts to which it is applied." "The
surrounding surface should be protected by some non-conductor of heat, but
not by wet paper or cloth, as the sudden extrication of steam will produce
a blistered surface around the burn, and will much increase the pain." (Dr
R. E. Griffith.) See CAUSTIC, SOLUTION, &c.

=ES'CULENTS.= Substances used for food. The more important esculents are
noticed under their respective heads.

=ESCU'LIC ACID.= A peculiar acid found by M. Bussy in the bark of the
horse-chestnut. It is but little known, and has not been applied to any
use.

=ESERINE.= Powder of Calabar bean, 100 parts; tartaric acid, 1 part;
potassium bicarbonate in powder, q. s.; alcohol (90 deg.) q. s.; rectified and
washed ether q. s. Exhaust the bean mixed with tartaric acid by several
digestions in alcohol at the heat of a water-bath, alcohol equal to about
three times the weight of the powder being used for each maceration.
Distil the combined liquors and filter; heat the residue in a water-bath
exposed to the air until it contains no more alcohol. After cooling
suspend the extract in a small quantity of distilled water, and filter
through paper to separate the insoluble resin.

Agitate the filtrate with rectified and washed ether, until the ether is
no longer sensibly coloured; two or three treatments are usually
sufficient. Treat the aqueous liquor which contains the eserine in the
state of acid tartrate, with a slight excess of potassium bicarbonate,
until the reaction is alkaline. Shake this liquor several times with
ether, which removes the liberated eserine, and deposits it upon
evaporation. The product is purified by fresh crystallisations from ether.

Pure eserine is colourless or slightly rose coloured; it crystallises in
thin laminae having a rhomboid form. Most frequently it occurs in commerce
under the form of yellowish spangles, or amorphous masses more or less
coloured by the action of the air.

It is slightly soluble in water, but dissolves freely in alcohol, ether,
and chloroform. When a one per cent. solution of it is treated with
potash or soda it rapidly acquires a characteristic rose colour. Heated in
a flask with a water-bath in contact with excess of ammonia, it gives upon
evaporation of the liquor in the open air, a magnificent blue colour, very
soluble in the water. This solution treated with acids, produces a very
fine dichroic liquor, violet and transparent by transmission, and carmine
red and turbid by refraction. Eserine has the property of contracting
energetically the pupil of the eye.

A kilogram of Calabar beans yields on the average one gram of eserine
(from 'Formulae for new Medicaments, adopted by the Paris Pharmaceutical
Society.') See CALABAR BEAN.

=Eserine, Neutral Hydrobromate of.= This body is prepared with colourless
hydrobromic acid in the same manner as the sulphate. The solution
evaporated to a syrupy consistence, crystallises in the course of a few
days in fibrous masses, rarely colourless and non-deliquescent.

The neutral hydrobromate of eserine is employed like the sulphate and in
the same doses, although it contains a little less eserine. (From 'Formulae
for New Medicaments,' adopted by the Paris Pharmaceutical Society.) See
CALABAR BEAN.

=Eserine, Neutral Sulphate of.= This salt is obtained by saturating
directly and exactly a known quantity of eserine with dilute sulphuric
acid (1 in 10); or better still, by shaking a solution of the eserine with
a titrated solution of sulphuric acid so as not to exceed the point of
saturation. The filtered solution of sulphate of eserine is evaporated
rapidly to dryness by the aid of a gentle heat.

Sulphate of eserine can be crystallised in long prismatic needles,
combined in radiating groups, but it is very difficult. It is preferable
to preserve it in the amorphous state, and in well-stoppered bottles, as
it is very deliquescent.

Sulphate of eserine is employed like eserine, internally under the form of
granules containing up to one milligram. It is employed also for the eyes
as a solution, containing two to five centigrams of the salt to ten grams
of distilled water.

Solutions containing eserine, pure or combined, alter rapidly in contact
with the air, becoming red; they should only be prepared in small
quantities as required. (From 'Formulae for New Medicaments,' adopted by
the Paris Pharmaceutical Society.) See CALABAR BEAN.

=ESPRIT.= [Fr.] SPIRIT. This term is commonly applied to alcoholic
solutions of the essential oils, and to various odorous and aromatic
essences sold by the perfumers and druggists as articles of the toilet.
See ESSENCE, SPIRIT, &c.

=ES'SENCE.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA, L. The active and characteristic portion of a
substance, or that on which its most remarkable properties depend. The
term has been very loosely applied to various preparations presumed to
contain these essential principles or qualities, disencumbered of grosser
matter. Modern systematic writers generally restrict its application to
the volatile oils obtained from vegetable substances by distillation, or
to a strong solution of them in alcohol. In pharmacy and perfumery, the
word 'essence' is applied to concentrated preparations that differ vastly
from each other. Thus, concentrated effusions, decoctions, liquors,
solutions, and tinctures, are frequently called 'essences' by those who
vend them; but the term 'fluid extracts' would be more appropriate, if
those already mentioned are not deemed sufficiently showy and attractive.
We shall here confine ourselves to a brief notice of the principal
compound essences, or those that undergo some preparation beyond being
merely extracted from vegetables by distillation along with water. The
latter will be considered under the article OIL.

The concentrated preparations of the pharmaceutist, termed 'essences,' are
mostly prepared by digesting the active ingredient or ingredients in
rectified spirit of wine, either with or without the addition of a certain
portion of water; or they are extemporaneously formed by dissolving a
portion of the essential oil of such substances in the spirit. In this way
are made the essences of lavender, musk, ginger, &c. When it is desired
only to obtain the aromatic and volatile portion of the ingredients, the
latter are usually digested in the spirit for a few days, and then
submitted to distillation, when the alcohol comes over loaded with
aromatic essential oil, or other volatile matter. In this way are prepared
most of the fragrant essences of the perfumer and druggist, when simple
solution of the essential oils in alcohol is not resorted to. In many
cases the active principles of the ingredients are partly volatile and
partly fixed, or at least do not readily volatilise at the temperature at
which alcohol distils over. This is the case, for instance, with the
active portion of ergot and Jamaica ginger. In such cases digestion alone
should be adopted. When the principles of organic substances, of which it
is desired to obtain a concentrated solution, are resinous or oily, or
little soluble in weak spirit (which is mostly the case), the strongest
rectified spirit of wine should alone be employed. In the preparation of
essences without distillation, the method by percolation or displacement
is preferable to that of simple maceration and expression, when the nature
of the ingredients and other circumstances render it applicable, as it is
not only more economical, but a more concentrated solution may thereby be
obtained. At the same time, however, the reader should remember, that this
mode of operating requires much greater experience and skill to ensure
success than the former method. This clumsiness of manipulation is the
common cause of the failures which are so frequently met with in the
preparation of these articles.

The ingredients for the preparation of essences must undergo the same
operations of bruising, powdering, or slicing, as directed under
'TINCTURE,' previous to digestion in the spirit, or other menstruum; and
the length of time they should be allowed to infuse, when this method
alone is adopted, should not be less than ten days; but this time may be
advantageously extended to a fortnight, or even longer. During the whole
of this period frequent agitation should be employed, and when the
ingredients are so bulky as to absorb the whole of the fluid, the vessel
which contains them should be securely fastened by a bung or stopper
covered with bladder, and inverted every alternate day. By this means
every portion of the ingredients will be equally exposed to the action of
the menstruum. In all such cases the method of displacement, or
percolation, is preferable. For the essences used as perfumes and for
flavouring, not only must the spirit be perfectly tasteless and scentless,
but it must be also quite devoid of colour.

The following formulae embrace most of the essences met with in the shops.
Those not found among them may be readily prepared by applying the general
directions given above, or by employing the formula given for the
preparation of the essence of some similar substance, merely varying the
characteristic ingredient. Thus, were it desired to form an essence of
ambergris or of myrrh, and no formulae could be found for these
preparations, the tyro would consider in what menstruum the active
principles of these substances were most soluble. This, he would
immediately see by reference to their properties, is rectified spirit of
wine. He would next have to decide on the proper strength of his essence.
In this he must be guided, either by the strength of the like preparations
of other makers, or by his own judgment of what would be useful, novel, or
convenient. Suppose he decided that his essence should represent 1-10th of
its weight of the solid ingredient. He would then take 2 oz. of ambergris
or myrrh, and 20 oz. of rectified spirit, which he would digest together
for 10 days or a fortnight in the manner described above. Had the required
preparation been an essence of senna (for example), he would probably
recollect, or might easily ascertain by reference, that the active
properties of senna are soluble in both water and weak spirit. Then, to
make an essence 4 times as strong as the tincture of the pharmacop[oe]ia,
7 oz. of senna, and 1 pint of proof spirit, should be employed, with due
digestion, as before.[280] The same applies to other preparations. See
CONCENTRATION, DECOCTION, INFUSION, LIQUOR, SPIRIT, TINCTURE, &c.

[Footnote 280: See directions given under TINCTURE.]

=Essence of Ac'onite.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ACONITI, L. _Prep._ From aconite
(herb, dried, and powdered), 8 oz.; rectified spirit, 16 oz.; macerate for
4 days at a temperature of 68 deg. Fahr., press, and strain; the marc or
residuum is again macerated with (a little) spirit, and pressed as before,
so that the weight of the mixed tinctures may amount to double that of the
herb.--_Dose_, 3 to 6 drops. See TINCTURE.

=Essence of All'spice.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF PIMENTO; ESSENTIA PIMENTAE, L.
_Prep._ From essential oil of pimento or allspice, 1 fl. oz.; strongest
rectified spirit of wine, 1 pint; agitate until perfectly united, and the
next day decant the clear portion, if there is any sediment. Used to make
pimento water, and by cooks and confectioners as a 'flavouring.'

=Essence of Al'monds.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF BITTER ALMONDS, E. OF PEACH
KERNELS, E. OF RATAFIA, E. OF NOYEAU, QUINTESSENCE OF N., ALMOND FLAVOUR;
ESSENTIA AMYGDALAE, E. A. AMARAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From essential oil of
almonds, as the last.

2. (Pereira.) Essential oil of almonds, 1 fl. oz.; rectified spirit, 7 fl.
oz.

_Uses, &c._ It is added to wine, cordials, perfumery, pastry, &c., to
impart an agreeable nutty flavour or aroma. It is also employed to prepare
cherry-laurel, peach-kernel, and bitter-almond water. A large quantity is
consumed by the confectioners, and by wine merchants to 'improve' their
sherries, and to give Cape wine a sherry flavour. It should be used in
very small quantities, as it is very powerful, and, in quantity,
poisonous. A few drops are sufficient for several pounds of pastry. The
first formula is that used in trade. The second is sometimes used by the
druggists, and is occasionally vended under the name of 'CONCENTRATED
ESSENCE OF BITTER ALMONDS,' &c. The directions for purifying the almond
oil from hydrocyanic acid before dissolving it in the spirit, given in
more than one recent book of receipts, are absurd, as in this way the oil
loses much of its characteristic odour and flavour, and by keeping
gradually becomes nearly destitute of both. See ESSENTIAL OIL.

=Essence of Am'bergris.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA AMBRAE GRISEAE, E. A. SIMPLEX,
TINCTURA A. CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. Ambergris (cut very small), 5 dr.;
rectified spirit, 1 pint; place them in a strong bottle or tin can, secure
the mouth very firmly, and expose it to the heat of the sun, or in an
equally warm situation, for 1 or 2 months, frequently shaking it during
the time; lastly, decant, and filter through paper.

2. (Guibourt.) Ambergris, 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 3 oz.; digest 10 or 12
days.

3. (Redwood.) Ambergris, 2-1/2 dr.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; macerate for
14 days. Chiefly used as an element in other perfumes. The first is the
formula employed by the London houses.

=Essence of Ambergris and Musk.= _Syn._ CONCENTRATED TINCTURE OF A. AND
M.; E. AMBRAE GRISEAE (ODORATA), E. A. ET MOSCHI, E. REGIA, L.; ESSENCE
ROYALE, Fr. _Prep._ 1. Ambergris (cut small), 3/4 oz.; 1 or 2
fresh-emptied musk-pods (or musk, 12 gr.); rectified spirit, 1 pint;
proceed as in No. 1 (_above_).

2. Ambergris, 2-1/2 oz.; bladder musk, 1/2 oz.; spirit of ambrette (purple
sweet sultan), 1 gal.; as last.

3. Ambergris, 2-1/2 oz.; bladder musk, 1 oz.; spirit of ambrette, 1 gal.;
as before. The fragrance of the above, especially of the last two, is very
powerful, and is much esteemed.

4. Ambergris, 1/2 oz.; musk and lump sugar, of each 1/4 oz.; triturate
together in a wedgwood-ware mortar, adding oil of cloves, 20 drops; true
balsam of Peru, 30 drops, and enough essence of jasmine or tuberose to
convert it into a perfectly smooth paste; then put it into a strong bottle
with rectified spirit, 1 quart; observing, before adding the whole of the
last, to rinse the mortar out well with it, that nothing may be lost;
lastly digest for 6 or 8 weeks, as directed in No. 1 (_above_).

5. Ambergris, 4 dr.; musk, 1-1/2 dr.; sand, 3 oz.; triturate, then add, of
oil of cinnamon, 1 dr.; oil of rhodium, 1/2 dr.; essence of roses and eau
fleurs d'orange, of each 1/4 pint; rectified spirit, 1-1/2 pint; digest as
before (or not less than 14 days), and decant and filter. The last two are
very fine, though inferior to Nos. 2 and 3.

6. To the last (No. 5), add civet, 1 dr.; salt of tartar, 3 dr.; and an
additional pint of rectified spirit. Inferior to the above, but cheaper.

_Obs._ Essence of ambergris is used as a perfume, and is added in small
quantities to sweet-scented spirits and wines, to improve their flavour
and aroma. A very small quantity of any one of them added to lavender
water, eau de Cologne, tooth-powder, hair-powder, wash-balls, or a
hogshead of claret, communicates a delicious fragrance. See AMBERGRIS and
ESSENCE ROYALE (_below_).

=Essence d'Ambrette.= [Fr.] _Syn._ ESSENCE OF MUSK SEED, SPIRIT OF M. S.;
ESPRIT D'AMBRETTE, Fr. _Prep._ 1. Musk seed (ground in a clean
pepper-mill), 1-1/4 lb.; rectified spirit, 3 pints; digest for 3 or 4
weeks in a warm place, and filter.

2. Musk seed, 4 lbs.; rectified spirit, 1 gal.; digest 10 days, add water,
2 quarts, and distil over 1 gal. Very fine.

=Essence of Ammoni'acum.= _Syn._ CONCENTRATED TINCTURE OF AMMONIACUM;
ESSENTIA AMMONIACI, TINCTURA A. CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. Ammoniacum (in
tears), 1 lb., is bruised in a very cold marble mortar with half its
weight of coarse and well-washed siliceous sand or powdered glass, and
rectified spirit, 1/2 pint, gradually added; the trituration is continued
until the whole is reduced to a smooth paste, and is then placed in a
wide-mouthed bottle, and spirit of wine, 1-1/2 pint, further added; the
whole is then digested together for a week with constant agitation, and
after sufficient repose to settle, the supernatant transparent liquid is
decanted into another bottle for use.

2. Gum ammoniacum, 1 lb., is reduced to a cream with boiling water, 3/4
pint; as soon as the mixture has cooled a little, it is placed in a strong
bottle, and rectified spirit of wine, 1-1/4 pint, is cautiously added; the
mixture is then corked down close, and the whole macerated for a few days;
the bottle is next placed in a moderately warm situation, that the
sediment may subside, after which the clearer portion is poured off
through flannel into another bottle.

_Obs._ This preparation is used as a substitute for the gum in substance,
for extemporaneously preparing emulsion of ammoniacum, mixture of a., &c.
It is represented to possess fully the same amount of medicinal virtue as
an equal weight of the solid gum, on which account it has a considerable
sale. The product of the first formula, when well managed, is a beautiful
pale brownish-coloured, transparent tincture; that of the second is milky
and less sightly. The preparation generally sold under the name of
'CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF AMMONIACUM' (ESSENTIA AMMONIACI CONCENTRATA, L.),
and represented as twice as strong as the gum in substance, is generally
prepared by the first formula given above for ESSENCE OF AMMONIACUM. A
stronger article may be prepared by a similar process, by using 1 lb. of
ammoniacum to a pint of the strongest rectified spirit. As, however, a
clear liquid at this strength is somewhat difficult to produce, it is very
seldom attempted by the druggists; they therefore generally content
themselves with sending out the liquid at half the professed strength,
leaving the label to confer the additional concentration. See AMMONIACUM.

=Essence of Anchov'ies.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CLUPEAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Anchovies,
1 lb., are 'boned,' reduced to a pulp in a wedgwood-ware or marble mortar,
and passed through a clean hair or brass-wire sieve: meanwhile the bones
and other portion that will not pass through the sieve are boiled with
water, 1 pint, for 15 minutes, and strained; to the strained liquor, salt,
and flour, of each, 2-1/2 oz., together with the pulped anchovies are
added, and the whole simmered for 3 or 4 minutes, when the vessel is
removed from the fire, and as soon as the mixture has cooled a little,
strong pickling vinegar, 1/2 pint, is mixed in; it is then bottled, and
the corks tied over with bladder, and either 'waxed' or 'capsuled.'
_Product_, 3 lbs. (nearly).

2. Anchovies, 7 lbs.; water, 9 pints; salt and flour, of each, 1 lb.
_Product_, 20 lbs.

3. To the last add of Cayenne pepper, 1/4 oz.; the peel of a lemon
(grated), and mushroom catsup, 4 oz. Very savoury.

4. From British anchovies (pickled sprats) or young pilchards, along with
herring liquor, or the drainings of anchovy barrels.

_Use, &c._ As a sauce and condiment; when well prepared, it has a fine
flavour. That of the shops is usually coloured with Venetian red or
Armenian bole. An infusion of cochineal, or a little annotta, would form a
more appropriate colouring, and would be perfectly harmless. See ANCHOVY
and SAUCE.

=Essence of Angel'ica.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ANGELICAE, L. _Prep._ (Van Mons.)
Angelica root (bruised), 1 part; rectified spirit, 8 parts; water, 16
parts; digest, and distil over 6 parts; Stomachic, carminative, and
alexipharmic.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 spoonfuls.

=Essence of Ani'seed.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ANISI (B. P.), L.; ESPRIT D'ANISE,
Fr. Oil of anise, 1 part; rectified spirit, 4 parts; mix (B. P.).
Stimulant, aromatic, and carminative.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 minims. Used also
to flavour liqueurs, and to make aniseed water. See SPIRIT.

=Essence of An'odyne.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ANODYNA, L. _Prep._ 1. Hard aqueous
extract of opium (in powder), 1 dr.; powdered cinnamon, 1/2 dr.; rectified
spirit, 1 fl. oz.; digest a week.--_Dose_, 5 to 20 drops.

2. Extract of henbane (recent), 5 dr.; rectified spirit, 2 fl. oz.; as
last.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 drops. Narcotic, sedative, and antispasmodic. Both
are excellent preparations.

=Essence, Antihyster'ic.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ANTIHYSTERICA, L. _Prep._ 1.
Cyanuret of potassium, 3 gr.; powdered sugar, 1 dr.; rectified
spirit and eau d'orange, of each 4 fl. dr.; agitate together until
dissolved.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 drops, in pure water; in hysteria,
gastrodynia, &c. See DRAUGHT (Antihysteric).

2. (P. Cod.) Resembles FETID SPIRIT OF AMMONIA (which _see_).

=Essence of Ap'ple.= _Syn._ SOLUTION OF VALERIANATE OF AMYL; ESSENTIA POMI
ODORATA, L. _Prep._ From apple oil (valerianate of oxide of amyl), as
ESSENCE OF ALMONDS. Used to flavour liqueurs and confectionery.

=Essence of Ar'nica.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ARNICAE, E. A. FLORUM, TINCTURA A. E.
CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Baden, 1841.) From arnica flowers, ESSENCE OF
ACONITE. It represents half its weight of herb.

=Essence, Aromat'ic.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA AROMATICA, L. _Prep._ From hay
saffron, dr.; and rectified spirit, 6 fl. dr.; digested together; to the
filtered tincture is added oil of cinnamon and powdered white sugar, of
each 1 dr.; ether (rect.), 2 fl. dr.; oil of nutmeg and essence of ginger,
of each 1/2 dr.; after agitation and a few days' repose, the clear portion
is decanted into a stoppered phial.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 drops, on sugar or in
a glass of wine or weak spirit; in cholera, diarrh[oe]a, spasms, &c.

=Essence of Bark.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CINCHONAE, E. CORTICIS C., L. _Prep._ 1.
Resinous extract of yellow bark, 4 dr.; rectified spirit, 1-1/2 fl. oz.;
tincture of orange peel, 1/2 fl. oz.; acetic acid (Ph. L.), 1 fl. dr.;
digest a week.

2. Disulphate of quinine, 1/2 dr.; resinous extract of bark, 2 dr.;
rectified spirit, 2 fl. oz.; as before.--_Dose_, 12 drops to a
teaspoonful; as a febrifuge and tonic.

=Essence of Beef.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF RED MEATS, &c. _Prep._ 1. From lean
beef (chopped small), 1 lb.; water, 1/2 pint; place them in a bottle,
which they will only half fill, and agitate them violently for half an
hour; then throw the whole on a sieve, and receive the liquid in a jug;
next boil the undissolved portion in water, 1 pint, for 20 minutes;
strain, mix the decoction with the cold infusion, evaporate the liquid to
the consistence of a thin syrup, adding spice, salt, &c., to taste, and
pour the essence, whilst boiling hot, into bottles, jars, or (still
better) tin cans, which must then be at once hermetically corked, sealed,
or soldered up, and stowed away in a cold place. In this state it will
keep a long time. (Brande's.)

2. (Ellis.) Take of lean beef (sliced), a sufficient quantity to fill the
body of a porter bottle; cork it up loosely, and place it in a pot of cold
water, attaching the neck, by means of a string, to the handle of the pot;
boil for 1-1/2 to 2 hours, then decant the liquid and skim it. Spices,
salt, wine, brandy, &c., may be added as before. Highly nutritious and
sustaining.

=Essence of Ber'gamot.= See OIL (Volatile).

=Essence, Bit'ter.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA AMARA, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Den.) Wormwood,
4 parts; gentian root, bitter orange peel, and blessed thistle, of each 1
part; rectified spirit, 45 parts; digest a week. Tonic and
stomachic.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 2 dr.

=Essence of Calum'ba.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CALUMBAE, L. See INFUSION OF
CALUMBA.

=Essence of Cam'phor.= _Syn._ CAMPHOR DROPS, LIQUOR OF CAMPHOR,
CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF C., CONCENTRATED SOLUTION OF C., CONC. CAMPHOR
JULEP; ESSENTIA CAMPHORAE, LIQUOR C., L. C. CONCENTRATUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Camphor (clean), 4-1/2 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 gall.; dissolve. This
forms the 'ESSENCE OF CAMPHOR' and 'LIQUOR CAMPHORAE' of the wholesale
houses. About 1/2 fl. dr., added to 7-1/2 fl. dr. of cold distilled water,
forms (by agitation) a transparent aqueous solution of camphor, fully
equal in strength to the filtered 'MISTURA CAMPHORAE' (camphor julep) of
the Ph. L. The above made with weaker spirit forms the 'spirit of wine and
camphor' of the shops.

2. Camphor, 1 oz.; rectified spirit, 10 oz. (by weight); dissolve. This
forms the 'CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF CAMPHOR' of the wholesale druggists. 10
or 12 drops, added to 1 fl. oz. of pure cold water, make a transparent
camphor julep, as before. There is a large quantity of these solutions of
camphor sold by the London houses, who charge a considerable price for
them. They are very convenient for preparing extemporaneous camphor julep
or camphor mixture in dispensing.

3. (Fordred.) Tincture of camphor, 13 fl. dr.; tincture of myrrh, 1/2 fl.
dr.; rectified spirit, 18-1/2 fl. dr.; mix. 1 fl. dr., added to 4 fl. oz.
of water, forms camphor julep. It has been proposed to bleach the tincture
of myrrh with animal charcoal, but this interferes with its proper action.

4. (Hom[oe]opathic.) See CHOLERA REMEDIES, Nos. 6 and 7.

5. (Houlton.) Spirit of camphor (Ph. L.), 1 fl. oz.; proof spirit, 7 fl.
oz.; 1 fl. dr. to 3 fl. oz. of water; forms 'CAMPHOR JULEP,'

6. (Redwood.) Camphor, 1 dr.; rectified spirit, 2-1/2 oz.; dissolve, and
add of water, 1/2 oz.

7. (Swediaur.) Powdered camphor, 1 dr.; water saturated with carbonic acid
gas, 12 fl. oz.; dissolve. 1 part of this solution, added to 4 parts of
water, forms 'CAMPHOR MIXTURE,' See CAMPHOR.

=Essence of Cap'sicum.= See ESSENCE OF CAYENNE.

=Essence of Car'away.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CARUI, L. _Prep._ From oil of
caraway, as ESSENCE OF ALMONDS. Its applications and uses are similar. An
inferior kind is prepared by macerating the seeds in proof spirit.

=Essence of Car'damoms.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CARDAMOMI, E. C. CONCENTRATA, L.
_Prep._ From lesser cardamom seeds (ground in a pepper mill), 5-1/2 lbs.;
rectified spirit of wine, 1 gall.; digest for a fortnight, press, and
filter.

_Obs._ This preparation is very convenient for flavouring cordials,
pastry, &c., and is very powerful. In the laboratory it is frequently
substituted for powdered cardamoms in making compound extract of
colocynth, and has the advantage of adding no inert matter to the
preparation, whilst it imparts the characteristic odour of the seeds in a
remarkable degree. When used in this way it is not added to the extract
until it is nearly cold and about to be taken from the pan. The testae or
shells of the seed should be separated from the kernels, as the former are
quite inert, and if used occasion a loss of spirit for no purpose.

=Essence of Cascaril'la.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CASCARILLAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
Cascarilla (bruised), 12 oz.; proof spirit, 1 pint; proceed either by
digestion or percolation. The product is 8 times the strength of the
infusion of cascarilla. (Ph. L.)

2. See INFUSION (Concentrated).

=Essence of Cas'sia.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CASSIAE, L. _Prep._ From oil of
cassia, as essence of allspice or almonds.

=Essence of Cayenne'.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF CAYENNE PEPPER, E. OF CAPSICUM,
CONCENTRATED E. OF C.; ESSENTIA CAPSICI, TINCTURA CAPSICI CONCENTRATA, L.
_Prep._ 1. Capsicum (recent dried pods, bruised), 3 lbs.; rectified
spirit, 1 gall.; digest 14 days, press, and filter. Some persons prepare
it by the method of displacement.

2. Capsicum, 1/4 lb.; proof spirit, 1 pint; digest as before. Weaker than
No. 1.

3. (Kitchener's.) Cayenne pepper, 1 oz.; brandy, 1 pint; digest, &c., as
before.

_Obs._ The product of the first formula is a transparent, dark-coloured
liquid, having an intensely burning taste. One drop is sufficient to
deprive a person of the power of speech for several seconds; and a few
drops will impart the rich pungency of cayenne to a large quantity of
soup, sauce, or any other article. It forms the 'ESSENCE OF CAYENNE' and
the 'CONC. ESS. OF CAYENNE PEPPER' of the London houses. It is principally
used as a flavouring, and to make SOLUBLE CAYENNE PEPPER; also in
dispensing. It is fully eight times as strong as the 'TINCTURA CAPSICI'
(Ph. L.). The product of the third formula is used exclusively for
culinary purposes. The pods or fruit of _Capsicum annuum_ (capsicum
chilly), _C. baccatum_ (bird pepper), and _C. fructescens_ (Guinea pods,
red pepper), are indiscriminately used for this preparation, but the first
are those preferred for medicinal purposes; the others have similar
properties, but are more pungent and acrimonious; hence the preference
given to them in the preparation of cayenne pepper. See PEPPER.

=Essence of Ce'drat.= See OIL (Volatile).

=Essence of Cel'ery.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF CELERY SEED; ESSENTIA APII, ESS.
A. SEMINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. From celery seed (bruised or ground), 4-1/2 oz.;
proof spirit, 1 pint; digest a fortnight, and strain.

2. (Concentrated.) Celery seed, 7 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest as
before. Very fine. Both are used for flavouring.

=Essence, Cephalic.= See ESSENCE FOR HEADACHE.

=Essence of Cham'omile.= _Syn._ CHAMOMILE DROPS; ESSENTIA ANTHEMIDIS, E.
CHAMAEMELI, E. C. ALBA, L. _Prep._ 1. From essential oil of chamomile, as
essence of allspice. Stomachic and stimulant.--_Dose_, 5 to 30 drops; 1/2
fl. oz., shaken with about 1 pint of pure water, forms an excellent
extemporaneous chamomile water.

2. Gentian root (sliced or bruised), 1 lb.; dried orange peel, 1/4 lb.;
proof spirit, 1 gal.; essential oil of chamomile, 3-1/2 fl. oz.; macerate
a week. Slightly coloured. Some persons use 1/2 lb. of quassia wood,
instead of the gentian and orange peel. Both the above are stomachic and
tonic, and are favourite remedies in loss of appetite, dyspepsia,
&c.--_Dose._ As the last, on sugar, or in a wine-glassful of wine or beer.

=Essence of Chiret'ta.= See INFUSION (Concentrated).

=Essence of Cin'namon.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CINNAMOMI, SPIRITUS C.
CONCENTRATUS, L. _Prep._ 1. From oil of cinnamon, as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE
or ALMONDS.

2. Cinnamon, 5 oz.; rectified spirit, 3/4 pint; water, 1/4 pint; digest a
week, and strain. Inferior to the last. Essence of cassia is commonly sold
for it.

=Essence of Civ'et.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ZIBETHI, L. _Prep._ 1. Civet (cut
small), 1 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; as ESSENCE OF MUSK.

2. Instead of rectified spirit use spirit of ambrette. Both are used in
perfumery; chiefly in combination with other substances.

=Essence of Cloves.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CARYOPHILLI, L. _Prep._ 1. (White.)
From oil of cloves, as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE. Used as a 'flavouring.'

2. (Coloured.) Cloves (bruised), 3-1/2 oz. proof spirit, 3/4 pint; water,
1/4 pint; digest a week, and strain. Inferior to the last. It is 8 times
as strong as INFUSION OF CLOVES (Ph. L.). Chiefly used in dispensing.

=Essence of Cof'fee.= See COFFEE.

=Essence of Co'gnac.= (k[=o]ne'-y[)a]k). _Syn._ BRANDY ESSENCE. _Prep._
From brandy oil, 2 fl. oz.; rectified spirit, 18 fl. oz. For flavouring
malt spirit to imitate brandy. See OIL.

=Essence of Cologne.= _Syn._ CONCENTRATED EAU DE COLOGNE; ESSENTIA
COLONIENSIS, AQUA C. CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. By taking 8 times the
quantity of the ingredients ordered for COLOGNE WATER, and using the
strongest rectified spirit.

2. Oils of lemon and cedrat, of each, 2 dr.; oil of rosemary, 1 dr.; oil
of bergamotte, 1 oz.; spirit of neroli, 2 fl. oz.; purest rectified
spirit, 5 fl. oz. Used as a condensed perfume.

=Essence of Colts'foot.= _Prep._ 1. (Ryan.) Balsam of tolu, 1 oz.;
rectified spirit and compound tincture of benzoin, of each 3 oz.;
dissolve, and in a few days decant the clear portion.

2. (Paris.) Equal parts of balsam of tolu and compound tincture of
benzoin, with double the quantity of rectified spirit.

3. Tincture of tolu, 5 fl. oz.; compound tincture of benzoin, 3 fl. oz.;
powdered sugar (quite dry), 1 oz.; hay saffron, 1 dr.; digest a week, with
frequent agitation.

_Obs._ Pectoral and stimulant. A quack remedy for consumption and most
other diseases of the lungs, but unless assisted by occasional aperients,
and in the absence of fever, it is more likely to kill than cure in these
complaints. The last is the best formula.

=Essence of Cu'bebs.= _Syn._ CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF CUBEBS; ESSENTIA
CUBEBAE, E. C. CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. Cubebs (bruised, or preferably
ground in a pepper mill), 1/2 lb.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest 14
days, press, and filter.

2. (Wholesale.) Cubebs, 4-1/4 lbs.; rectified spirit, 1 gall. This essence
has a very large sale, and if carefully prepared from a good sample of the
drug, is a most excellent preparation. Every fl. oz. represents 2-1/2 dr.
of cubebs.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 dr.

=Essence of Cubebs (Oleo-resinous).= _Prep._ (Dublanc.) Oleo-resinous
extract of cubebs, 1 oz.; rectified spirit, 3 oz.; dissolve. A very active
and concentrated form of administering cubebs, which must not be
confounded with the preceding preparation, which is the one always meant
when 'Essence of Cubebs' is ordered.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 1 dr.

=Essence of Dill.= _Syn._ DILL DROPS; ESSENTIA ANETHI, L. _Prep._ 1. From
oil of dill, as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE.

2. Oil of dill, extract of dill, and salt of tartar, of each 1/2 oz.;
rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest, and strain. Both the above are aromatic
and anti-flatulent. The first is commonly used as an adjunct to other
medicines, especially to purgatives for children. The second is a popular
tonic and stomachic in the flatulent colic, dyspepsia, &c., of women and
children.--_Dose._ A few drops, on sugar.

=Essence of Er'got.= See LIQUOR or ERGOT OF RYE.

=Essence of Ergot (Ethereal).= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ERGOTAE ETHEREA, E. SECALIS
CORNUTI E., L. _Prep._ 1. (Mr Lever.) Ergot (powdered), 2 oz.; rectified
sulphuric ether, 2 fl. oz.; digest a week, express the tincture, filter,
and abandon the liquid to spontaneous evaporation; lastly, dissolve the
residuum in ether, 1 fl. oz. This is an expensive and troublesome formula.
The following modification of it is both simpler and less expensive.

2. Ergot (ground), 8 oz.; ether, 16 fl. oz.; prepare a tincture as before,
and by a gentle heat distil off the ether in a retort connected with a
well-cooled refrigerator, until 15 fl. oz. shall have passed over;
continue the evaporation at a reduced heat until the remainder of the
ether has passed off; lastly, dissolve the residuum, as soon as cold, in
ether, 4 fl. oz.

_Obs._ Each fl. oz. represents 2 oz. of ergot.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 drops as
a parturifacient, taken on sugar; 3 to 5 drops as a haemostatic and
emmenagogue, in haemorrhages, floodings, &c. It possesses all the acrid,
narcotic principle of the ergot, but less of the haemostatic principle than
the ordinary essence, whilst it is much more costly.

=Essence of Fen'nel.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF SWEET FENNEL; ESSENTIA
F[OE]NICULI, L. _Prep._ From oil of fennel (_F[oe]niculum dulce_), as
ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE.

=Essence of Gen'tian.= See INFUSION OF GENTIAN (Concentrated).

=Essence of Gin'ger.= _Syn._ CONCENTRATED TINCTURE OF GINGER, ESSENTIA
ZINGIBERIS, TINCTURA Z. CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. Unbleached Jamaica
ginger (bruised), 5 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest a fortnight,
press, and filter.

2. (Oxley's 'CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF JAMAICA GINGER,' The same as the
preceding, with the addition of a very small quantity of essence of
cayenne. The above possess only about 4 times the strength of tincture of
ginger (Ph. L.); and though vended in the shops as essence of ginger,
scarcely deserves the name.

3. As No. 1 (next article, _below_), but using double the quantity of
spirit. Very fine.

4. (Kitchener's.) Ginger (grated), 3 oz.; yellow peel of lemon (fresh), 2
oz.; brandy, 1-1/2 pint; digest 10 days. For culinary purposes, &c. See
_below_.

=Essence of Ginger (Concentrated).= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ZINGIBERIS
CONCENTRATA. _Prep._ 1. Jamaica ginger (best unbleached, in coarse powder)
and siliceous sand, equal parts, are sprinkled with rectified spirit of
wine, q. s. to perfectly moisten them, and after 24 hours the mass is
placed in a 'percolator,' and after returning the first runnings 2 or 3
times, the receiver is changed, and more rectified spirit poured on
gradually, and at intervals, as required, until as much essence is
obtained as there has been ginger employed.

_Obs._ The quality of the product of the above formula is excellent, but
the process is somewhat difficult to manage. The mass remaining in the
percolator is treated with fresh spirit until exhausted, and the tincture
so obtained is employed, instead of spirit, for making more essence with
fresh ginger. The last portion of spirit in the waste mass may be obtained
by adding a little water. Coarsely powdered charcoal is frequently used
instead of sand, in which case the product has less colour; at the same
time, however, a little of the flavour is lost.

2. (Wholesale.)--_a._ Best unbleached Jamaica ginger (as last), 12 lbs.;
rectified spirit, 2-1/2 galls., are digested together for 14 days, and the
expressed and strained tincture reduced by distillation, in a steam or
water bath, to exactly 1 gall.; it is next cooled, and transferred as
quickly as possible into stoppered bottles, and the next day filtered.

_Obs._ The product of the last formula is a most beautiful article, of
immense strength, and the richest flavour. The assertion made by a recent
writer on pharmacy, that 'the product is very strong, but has lost some of
the flavour of the ginger,' is evidently made in ignorance of the
preparation. "We were the first to introduce and publish this formula, and
have employed it for years on the most extensive scale, and can
conscientiously assert that, for inexpensiveness, and the quality of the
essence produced by it, it is unequalled by any other. The process, though
apparently complicated is, in reality, easily performed. The spirit
distilled over contains none of the fragrant or aromatic principles of the
ginger; on the contrary, the little flavour it has received (apparently
from a species of ethereal oil) is rather disagreeable than otherwise, and
is better got rid of than retained in the essence. The spirit is used with
advantage for preparing the common tincture of ginger, and several other
articles. The cause of failure when this process is adopted is careless or
awkward manipulation. When possible, hydraulic pressure should be employed
to express the tincture, 2 oz. of this essence are regarded as equivalent
to 3 oz. of the finest ginger, being fully twenty times as strong as the
'TINCTURE OF GINGER' (Ph. L.). A single drop, swallowed, will almost
produce suffocation." Cooley.

_b._ From ginger (as last), 24 lbs.; rectified spirit, 6 gall.; make a
tincture, as before, and reduce it by distillation to 1 gall.; then cool
as quickly as possible out of contact with the air and add, of the
strongest rectified spirit of wine, 1 gall.; lastly, filter, if required.
Quality resembles No. 2, _a_ (nearly). "We are in the habit of applying
the method developed in the last two formulae to the preparation of the
essences of several other substances, the active principles of which are
not volatile at a low temperature." Cooley.

=Essence of Grape.= _Prep._ From grape oil, as ESSENCE OF ALMONDS. It is
used to flavour brandy and wines. See OIL (Volatile).

=Essence of Guaiac'um.= _Syn._ FLUID EXTRACT OF GUAIACUM; ESSENTIA
GUAIACI, EXTRACTUM GUAIACI FLUIDUM, L. _Prep._ Recent guaiacum shavings,
from which the dust has been sifted, 3 cwt., are exhausted by coction in
water, as in the preparation of an extract, using as little of that fluid
as is absolutely necessary; the decoction is evaporated to exactly 1-3/4
gall.; it is next stirred until cold, to prevent the deposit of resinous
matter, when it is put into a bottle, and spirit of wine, 5 pints, is
added; the whole is then repeatedly agitated for a week, after which it is
allowed to settle for 7 or 8 days, and the clear portion is decanted into
another bottle.

_Obs._ This preparation is frequently substituted for guaiacum shavings in
the preparation of compound decoction of sarsaparilla. 1 pint of this
essence is considered equivalent to 19 lbs. of guaiacum in substance. See
DECOCTION OF SARSAPARILLA (Comp.).

=Essence for the Handkerchief.= See ESSENTIA ODORATA, &c.

=Essence for the Headache.= _Syn._ CEPHALIC ESSENCE, EMBROCATION OF
AMMONIA, DR HAWKINS' EMBROCATION, WARD'S E., WARD'S ESSENCE FOR THE
HEADACHE; EMBROCATIO AMMONIAE, LINIMENTUM A., ESSENTIA CEPHALICA, L.
_Prep._ 1. Oil of lavender (Mitcham), 1 dr.; camphor, 1 oz.; liquor of
ammonia, 4 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; dissolve. Very fragrant and
powerful.

2. (Beasley.) Spirit of camphor, 2 lbs.; strong water of ammonia, 4 oz.;
essence of lemon, 1/2 oz.

3. (Redwood.) Camphor and liquor of ammonia, of each 2 oz.; oil of
lavender, 4 dr.; rectified spirit, 14 oz. Very fragrant. Stimulant and
rubefacient. Used as a counter-irritant lotion in local pains, as
headache, earache, colic, &c. Compound camphor liniment is usually sold
for it. See LINIMENT.

=Essence of Henbane.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA HYOSCAMI, L. See ESSENCE (Anodyne),
No. 2.

=Essence of Hop.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA LUPULI, E. HUMULI, TINCTURA LUPULI
CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. New hops (rubbed small), 26-1/2 oz.; proof
spirit, 1 quart; digest 24 hours, then distil over (quickly) 1 pint, and
set the distillate (_spiritus lupuli_) aside in a corked bottle; to the
residuum add water, 1 pint; boil 15 minutes, cool, express the liquor,
strain, and evaporate it as quickly as possible to dryness by the heat of
a water bath, powder the residuum, and add it to the distilled spirit;
digest a week, and filter.

2. Lupulinic grains (yellow powder or lupulin of the strobiles), 5 oz.;
rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest 10 days; express, and filter. Both the
above are powerfully bitter, and loaded with the aroma of the hop. They
are fully 8 times as strong as the 'TINCTURA LUPULI' of the Ph. L. A few
drops added to a glassful of ale or beer render it agreeably bitter and
stomachic.

3. (BREWER'S E. OF HOPS.) Several noxious preparations under the name of
extract of hops are sold by the brewer's druggist. They are mostly
semi-fluid extracts of quassia, gentian, and like powerful bitters. Of
three of these articles which we have examined, one (for PALE ALE)
consisted of the mixed extracts of quassia and chamomile; another was a
preparation of picric acid; whilst a third ('strongly recommended for
PORTER') consisted of about equal parts of the extracts of bitter aloes,
cocculus indicus, and wormwood. A few years ago one of these vile
compounds was publicly advertised, and 'warranted' as being equal to 100
times its weight in hops (1 oz. to 5-1/2 lbs.).

=Essence of Jargonelle' Pear.= _Syn._ PEAR ESSENCE, ESPRIT DE JARGONELLE,
&c. _Prep._ From pear oil (acetate of oxide of amyl), as ESSENCE OF
ALMONDS. This is now largely employed to flavour confectionery and
liqueurs. See AMYL and OIL (Volatile).

=Essence of Jas'mine.= See SPIRIT and OIL (Volatile).

=Essence of Jes'samine.= See SPIRIT and OIL.

=Essence of Jon'quil.= See SPIRIT and OIL.

=Essence of Lav'ender.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA LAVANDULAE (ODORATA), L. _Prep._ 1.
Oil of lavender (Mitcham), 2 oz.; rectified spirit (strongest), 1 pint.

2. As the strongest _Eau de lavende_. See SPIRIT.

=Essence of Lavender (Red).= See SPIRIT and TINCTURE.

=Essence of Lem'on.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA LIMONIS, L. _Prep._ 1. See OIL
(Volatile).

2. (W. Procter.) Fresh oil of lemons, 1 fl. oz.; deodorised alcohol
(strongest flavourless rectified), 8 fl. oz.; exterior yellow rind of
lemons (fresh), 1/2 oz.; digest 48 hours, and filter. Used for flavouring
mixtures, pastry, &c.

3. From oil of lemons, as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE. Used as the last.

=Essence of Lemon Peel.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF LEMON RIND, QUINTESCENCE OF L.
P.; ESSENTIA CORTICIS LIMONIS, L. _Prep._ 1. Yellow peel of fresh lemons,
1/2 lb.; spirit of wine, 1 pint; digest for a week, press, and filter.
Very fragrant.

2. Yellow peel of fresh lemons, 1 lb.; boiling water, 1/2 gall.; infuse 1
hour, express the liquor, boil down to 1/2 pint, cool, and add oil of
lemon, 1/4 oz., dissolved in spirit of wine, 1-1/2 pint; mix, and filter.
Used as the preceding.

=Essence of Lov'age.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA LEVISTICI, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Wurt.)
Lovage root (_levisticum officinale_), 2 oz.; lovage seeds, 1 oz.;
rectified spirit, 10 oz.; digest a week, and filter. Aromatic, stomachic,
and diaphoretic.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 1 dr.; in dyspepsia, dropsies, &c.

=Essence, Madden's.= Concentrated infusion of roses.

=Essence of Malt.= See COLOURING.

=Essence of Mint.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF SPEARMINT; ESSENTIA MENTHAE, E. M.
SPICATAE, E. M. VIRIDIS, L. _Prep._ As ESSENCE OF PEPPERMINT.

=Essence of Moss-Rose= (from the 'Chemist and Druggist'). Otto of rose,
1-1/2 dr.; essence of ambergris, 2-1/2 oz.; essence of musk, 1 oz.;
alcohol, 15 oz.; concentrated rose water, 10 oz. Mix, and shake frequently
for a week.

=Essence of Musk.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA MOSCHI, TINCTURA M. CONCENTRATA, L.
_Prep._ 1. Grain musk, 2 oz., and boiling water, 1 pint, are digested
together in a close vessel until cold, when rectified spirit of wine, 7
pints, is added; the vessel (preferably a tin bottle) being corked close,
and tied over with bladder, the whole is digested, with frequent
agitation, for 2 months, in the sunshine (in summer), or in an equally
warm situation in winter. At the end of the time the essence is decanted
and filtered.

2. Grain musk, 1/4 oz.; rectified spirit of wine, 2 pints; essence of
ambergris, 1 fl. oz.; digest as before.

3. Musk (from the bladder, rubbed very small), 5 oz.; civet, 1 oz.;
essence of ambergris, 1 pint; spirit of ambrette, 1 gall.; as before.

_Obs._ All the preceding formulae yield superior essences, but the product
of the last is of the very finest quality, and such as is seldom sold,
except by the most celebrated houses, when it fetches a very high price.
It is powerfully and deliciously odorous, and has received the approval of
royalty itself, both in these kingdoms and on the Continent. The second
formula also produces a very fine article, but less choice than just
referred to. The digestion should be long continued, and on no account
less than 3 weeks, as otherwise much fragrant matter is left undissolved.
The addition of 1 fl. dr. of either liquor of ammonia or liquor of
potassia (the first is best) to each pint of the essence, vastly increases
its fragrance. The essence of musk of the wholesale London druggists is
generally made by merely digesting the freshly emptied musk pods in
rectified spirit. Sometimes a little (a very little) grain musk is added.
See ESSENCE ROYALE and ESSENCE OF AMBERGRIS.

4. (Guibourt.) Musk, 1 part; proof spirit, 12 parts; digest a fortnight,
or longer. Used in dispensing, &c.

=Essence of Musk Seed.= See ESSENCE D'AMBRETTE.

=Essence of Mus'tard.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA SINAPIS, L. _Prep._ (Whitehead's.)
Black mustard seed (bruised), and camphor, of each 2 oz.; oil of rosemary,
3 dr.; balsam of tolu, 1 dr.; annatto, 1/2 dr.; digest a week, and
filter.

=Essence of Myr'tle.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF MYRTLE BLOSSOMS; ESSENCE DE MYRTE,
ESPRIT DE M., Fr. _Prep._ Myrtle tops (in blossom), 2-1/2 lbs.; proof
spirit, 9 pints; digest 3 days, then distil 1 gall. A pleasant perfume.
See OIL (Volatile).

=Essence of Nero'li.= _Syn._ ESSENCE DE FLEURS D'ORANGES, ESPRIT DE F.
D'O., Fr. _Prep._ 1. Neroli, 3 dr.; rectified spirit of wine, 1 pint; mix.
A delicious perfume.

2. Oil of orange, 2 dr.; orris root (bruised), 1/2 oz.; ambergris, 10 gr.;
neroli, 35 drops; spirits of wine, 1 pint; digest 14 days, and filter.
Very fragrant, but less 'chaste' than the last.

=Essence of Nut'meg.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA MYRISTICAE, E. M. MOSCHATAE, E. NUCIS
M., L. _Prep._ From essential oil of nutmeg, as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE. Used
as a flavouring or zest by cooks, liqueuristes, and confectioners.

=Essence, Odontal'gic.= See ESSENCE, TOOTHACHE.

=Essence d'[OE]illets.= [Fr.] _Prep._ From cinnamon, 3 oz.; cloves, 1-1/4
oz. (both well bruised); rectified spirit, 1 quart; digest for a week. Oil
of cloves and spirit of cloves also bear this name in some places.

=Essence of O'pium.= See ESSENCE ANODYNE, No. 1. BLACK DROP and ROUSSEAU'S
LAUDANUM have also been sometimes so called.

=Essence of O'range.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA AURANTII, L. _Prep._ As ESSENCE OF
LEMON.

=Essence of Orange Peel.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA CORTICIS AURANTII, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Golden.) Fresh yellow rind of orange, 4 oz.; rectified spirit and water,
of each 1/2 pint; digest for a week, press, filter, and add of sherry
wine, 1 quart. A pleasant liqueur.

2. (Saccharated.) See OLEO-SACCHARUM.

=Essence d'Orient.= [Fr.] A pearly-looking substance, found at the base of
the scales of the blay or bleak, a small fish of the genus _cyprinus_.

_Prep._ The scales are scraped from the fish into a tub containing water,
and after agitation and repose the fluid is poured off, and its place
supplied with fresh water, and this in its turn, after agitation and
repose, is also poured off. This part of the operation is repeated till
the 'essence' and scales are perfectly freed from impurities, when the
whole is thrown on a sieve, which retains the latter, but allows the
former to flow through. After repose for a short time, the essence is
obtained as a deposit at the bottom of the vessel.

_Obs._ Essence d'Orient has a bluish-white and pearly aspect, and is
employed to cover the interior of glass bubbles and beads, in imitation of
pearls and mother-of-pearl. Its tendency to putrefaction, while in the
moist state, may be obviated by the addition of a little liquor of
ammonia.

=Essence of Patch'ouli.= _Syn._ ESSENCE DE PATCHOULIE, ESPRIT DE POUCHA
PAT [Fr.]. _Prep._ 1. Indian patchouli (leaves or foliaceous tops), 2-1/2
lb.; rectified spirit, 9 pints; digest for a week; add of water, 1 gall.;
oil of lavender (Mitcham), 3 dr.; common salt, 2 lbs.; agitate well
together, distil over (rapidly) 1 gallon, and add of essence of musk,
3-1/2 fl. dr. A very fashionable perfume. Essence of patchouli, thus
prepared, has been largely used, both at court and by the nobility
generally.

2. Patchouli, 3 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest a week, press, and
filter. A still commoner kind is made with proof spirit.

=Essence of Pear.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF JARGONELLE.

=Essence of Pen'nyroyal.= See ESSENTIA PULEGII, E. MENTHAE P., L. _Prep._
From pennyroyal (_Mentha pulegium_), as ESSENCE OF PEPPERMINT. Stimulant,
carminative, and emmenagogue. Used in dispensing, especially to make
extemporaneous pennyroyal water.

=Essence of Pep'permint.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA MENTHAE PIPERITAE (B. P.) L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Oil of peppermint, 1 part; rectified spirit, 4 parts.
Mix.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 minims.

2. To the last add of herb peppermint, parsley leaves, or spinach leaves
(preferably one of the first two), 1/2 oz., and digest for a week, or
until sufficiently coloured. Sap green (10 or 12 gr., rubbed up with a
teaspoonful of hot water) is also used for the same purpose. A delicate
light green.

3. (Ph. U. S.) Oil of peppermint, 2 fl. oz.; rectified spirit, 16 fl. oz.

_Obs._ Essence of peppermint is not conceived to be good by the ignorant
unless it has a pale-greenish tint, which they take as a proof of its
being genuine. The most harmless way of tinging it is that indicated
above. A little green mint or parsley will, indeed, be found to improve
the flavour. These additions are quite harmless. The practice of using
cupreous salts, adopted by some lazy and unprincipled makers, is
unpardonable, and admits of no excuse, even a lame one, as not the least
advantage, either of convenience, cost, or appearance, results from such a
practice, while the colouring matter, though small in quantity, is
nevertheless sufficient to impart a noxious quality to the liquid. This
fraud may be detected by the addition of liquor of ammonia in excess,
which will strike a bluish or greenish-blue colour when copper is present.

Essence of peppermint (like that of most of the other aromatic oils) is
cordial, stimulant, and stomachic. A few drops (10 to 30) on sugar, or
mixed with a little water or wine, is an excellent remedy in flatulence,
colic, nausea, sickness, &c. It is also extensively used as a flavouring
ingredient by cooks, confectioners, and druggists. A few drops, well
agitated with half a pint of cold water, form an excellent extemporaneous
peppermint water.

The formulae 1 and 2, generally the latter, are those employed by the
respectable portion of the London trade. The various published receipts
for this and similar essences, ordering the essential oil in a larger
proportion than that directed above, are never adopted in practice, and
their products (often impossible combinations) exist only in the
imaginations of the writers.

=Essence of Pimen'to.= See ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE.

=Essence of Pine-apple.= From pine-apple oil (butyric ether, butyrate of
ethyl), as ESSENCE OF ALMONDS. It forms a delicious flavouring for
liqueurs, confectionery, rum, &c. See ETHER and OIL (Volatile).

=Essence of Quas'sia.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA QUASSIAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From quassia
(sliced), 1-1/2 oz.; proof spirit, 1 pint; digest 10 days, and filter; 1/2
fl. dr. added to 7-1/2 fl. dr. of water, forms the infusion of quassia, of
the Ph. L.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. in water or wine, an hour before a meal, as a
stomachic tonic, in dyspepsia, loss of appetite, &c., particularly when
complicated with gout; 1 to 2 dr., three or four times daily, as a
febrifuge, and antiseptic, in intermittents, putrid fevers, &c.

2. (Brewer's).--_a._ From powdered quassia (sprinkled with a little rum)
and "foots" (coarse moist sugar or sugar bottoms), equal parts, reduced to
the consistence of a semi-fluid extract by the addition of a few spoonfuls
of water. For ale.

_b._ From powdered quassia, 1 part; burnt sugar colouring, 2 parts; well
stirred together. For porter and stout. Both are used by fraudulent
brewers as substitutes for hops.

=Essence of Quin'ine.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA QUINAE, L. _Prep._ From disulphate
of quinine, 1-1/2 oz.; rectified spirit, 1/2 pint; digest with warmth,
gradually dropping in a little dilute sulphuric acid (avoiding excess),
and employing constant agitation until the whole is dissolved. 1 fl. dr.,
added to 7 dr. of proof spirit, forms the 'TINCTURE OF QUININE' (Ph. L.).
Every fl. dr. contains 8 gr. of disulphate of quinine, or about 10 gr. of
the neutral sulphate. If more sulphuric acid is added than is sufficient
to dissolve the salt (_i. e._ convert it into a neutral sulphate), the
solution is apt to deposit part of it on keeping, owing to the gradual
formation of ether, by the action of the excess of acid on the alcohol.

=Essence of Rat'afia.= The same as Essence of Almonds. So called from
being used to flavour ratafias, noyeau, and other liqueurs.

=Essence of Rhu'barb.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA RHEI, L. _Prep._ From rhubarb (in
powder) and siliceous sand, of each 5 oz.; proof spirit, 1 pint; by the
method of displacement. Every fl. oz. represents the active virtues of 2
dr. of rhubarb.

=Essence of Rondele'tia.= _Prep._ 1. Essence (oil) of bergamotte, essence
(oil) of lemon, and oil of cloves, of each 1 dr.; otto of roses, 10 drops;
rectified spirit, 1 pint.

2. To the last add, of oil of lavender, 1 dr.; neroli, 15 drops. A very
fashionable and agreeable perfume.

=Essence of Rose'mary.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ROSEMARINI, L. _Prep._ From oil of
rosemary, as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE. Used as a perfume; also to make
extemporaneous rosemary water.

=Essence of Ro'ses.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ROSAE (ODORATA), L. _Prep._ 1. Attar
of roses (genuine), 2 dr.; alcohol, 1 pint; agitate frequently until they
unite.

2. Attar of roses, 1 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 gall.; mix in a close
vessel, and assist the solution by placing it in a bath of hot water. (See
ESSENCE OF MUSK.) As soon as the spirit gets warm, take it from the water
and shake it till quite cold; the next day filter.--_Obs._ Unless the
spirit of wine is of more than the common strength, it will not retain the
whole of the otto in solution in very cold weather.

3. To each pint of either of the preceding, add, of oil of bergamotte, 30
drops; neroli and essence of musk, of each 20 drops.

4. Petals of roses, 3 lbs., digest in spirit of wine, 5 quarts, for 24
hours; distil to dryness in a water bath; digest the distilled spirit on 2
lbs. of fresh rose petals, as before, and repeat the whole process of
maceration and distillation, a third, fourth, fifth, and sixth time, or
oftener, the last time only drawing over 1 gall., which is the essence.
Each of the above is very superior. The last has a peculiar delicacy of
flavour, when the spirit used to make it is pure.

=Essence of Roses (Red).= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ROSAE (RUBRA), TINCTURA E.
CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ From rose leaves, 1 lb.; proof spirit, 1 gall.;
digest for 14 days, press, strain, add concentrated acetic acid, 2-1/2 fl.
dr.; mix well, and the next day filter. Used to make extemporaneous SYRUP
and HONEY OF ROSES, &c. Smells, colours, and tastes strongly of the
flower. CONCENTRATED INFUSION OF ROSES is sold under the same name.

=Essence Royale.= [Fr.] _Prep._ 1. (Soubeiran.) Ambergris, 40 gr.; musk,
20 gr.; civet and carbonate of potassa, of each 10 gr.; oil of cinnamon, 6
drops; oil of rhodium and otto of roses, of each 4 drops; rectified spirit
of wine, 4 fl. oz. (say 1/4 pint); macerate for 10 days or longer.
Antispasmodic and aphrodisiac. A few drops on sugar, or in syrup of
capillaire.

2. See ESSENCE OF AMBERGRIS.

=Essence of Sarsaparil'la.= _Syn._ CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF SARSAPARILLA;
ESSENTIA SARSAE; E. SARSAPARILLAE; L. _Prep._ 1. Sarsaparilla root (best red
Jamaica), 2-3/4 lbs., is carefully decorticated, the bark reduced to
coarse powder, and digested for a week or 10 days in sherry, 3/4 pint, and
rectified spirit, 1/4 pint, with frequent agitation; after which the
essence is expressed, and in a week the clear portion is decanted from the
sediment. A very elegant preparation. 1/2 fl. dr. added to 7 fl. dr. of
water forms 1 fl. oz. of a solution of equal strength to decoction of
sarsaparilla of the Ph. L. Every fl. oz. represents the active principles
of 2 oz. (= 2 oz. 85 gr. avoir.) of sarsaparilla root. In other words, it
is twice as strong as the root, and 16 times as strong as the decoction.

2. Alcoholic extract of sarsaparilla, 7 oz.; sherry, 3/4 pint; rectified
spirit, 1/4 pint; dissolve and filter. Strength as the last.

3. (Beral.) Alcohol extract, 4 oz.; sherry wine, 1 pint; dissolve and
filter. About 3 fl. dr., added to water, 1 pint, form an extemporaneous
decoction.

4. (Guibourt.) Alcoholic extract, 4 oz.; white wine, 1 lb. Strength the
same as Nos. 1 and 2 (nearly).

5. (Hening.) Sarsaparilla (bruised), 10 oz.; distilled water, 6 pints;
macerate at a temperature of 120 deg. Fahr. for six hours and strain; repeat
with the same quantity of fresh water; mix the liquors, and evaporate in
china vessels at 160 deg. Fahr. If reduced to 10 fl. oz. (or to 9 fl. oz.,
with 1 fl. oz. of rectified spirit added), 1 fl. dr., mixed with 7 fl. dr.
of water, will be equal to the decoction of the usual strength. If reduced
to 5 fl. oz. 1 fl. dr. will be equal to 2 fl. oz. of the decoction.

6. The bark separated from sarsaparilla root, 2-3/4 lbs., is exhausted
with water as last; the liquid is evaporated as quickly as possible, in a
water bath, to 16 fl. oz., and when cold, mixed with rectified spirit, 4
fl. oz. Strength same as No. 1.

7. The infusion in No. 6 is evaporated to 10-1/2 fl. oz., and when cold
mixed with sherry, 1/2 pint; in a week the clear portion is decanted from
the sediment. Strength same as No. 1.

_Obs._ The formulae Nos. 1, 2, 6, and 7 have each in turn been extensively
employed by us in the laboratory with the most satisfactory results. See
LIQUOR OF SARSAPARILLA.

=Essence of Sarsaparilla (Compound).= _Syn._ ESSENTIA SARSAPARILLAE
COMPOSITA, E. SARSAE C., L. _Prep._ 1. One pint of No. 1, 2, 6, or 7
(_above_), is triturated with the extract prepared from mezereon bark,
3-1/4 oz., and extract of liquorice, 4 oz.; when mixed it is returned to
the bottle, and essence of guaiacum, 1-1/2 fl. dr., and oil of sassafras,
20 drops, are added, the whole is then well agitated for at least 15
minutes, and after a week's repose the clear portion is decanted as
before. 1/2 fl. dr., with 7-1/2 fl. dr. of water, forms extemporaneous
compound decoction of sarsaparilla.

2. (Cadet.) Sarsaparilla (bruised), 8 oz.; hot water, q. s.; exhaust the
root by successive macerations; unite the liquors, and evaporate to 10 fl.
oz.; strain, and add, when cold, of alcohol (.842) and tinctures of
guaiacum and mezereon, of each 4 fl. dr.; white wine, 1 fl. oz.; oil of
sassafras, 12 drops; extract of liquorice, 2 dr.; agitate, and after
repose decant as before. This is nearly 8 times as strong as 'DEC. SARSAE
CO.'--Ph. L. The first is the best formula. See LIQUOR OF SARSAPARILLA
(Compound).

=Essence of Sa''vory Spices.= _Prep._ 1. Black pepper, 4 oz.; powdered
turmeric, 3 dr.; coriander seeds, 1-1/2 dr. (all ground and genuine); oil
of pimento, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; oils of nutmeg, cloves, cassia and caraway, of
each 1/2 dr.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest, with agitation, for a
fortnight. Very fine.

2. Black pepper, 3 oz.; allspice, 1-1/4 oz.; nutmegs and burnt sugar, of
each 1/2 oz.; cloves, cassia, coriander, and caraway seeds, of each 1 dr.
(all bruised or ground); rectified spirit, 1 pint; digest with agitation,
as before, for 14 days, press, and filter. Used as a flavouring. When made
with proof spirit or brandy, and only 1/2 the above weight of spice, it is
called 'TINCTURE OF SAVORY SPICES,'

=Essence of Sen'na.= See LIQUOR and INFUSION (Concentrated).

=Essence of Smoke.= See ESSENCE, WESTPHALIAN.

=Essence of Soap.= _Syn._ SPIRIT OF SOAP, SHAVING FLUID; ESPRIT DE SAVON,
ESSENCE DE SAVON, ESSENCE ROYALE POUR FAIRE LA BARBE, Fr.; ESSENTIA
SAPONIS, TINCTURA SAPONIS CONCENTRATA, L. _Prep._ 1. Castile soap (in
shavings), 4 oz.; proof spirit, 1 pint; dissolve, and add a little
perfume.

2. Venetian soap, 3/4 lb.; salt of tartar, 1 oz.; benzoin, 1/2 oz.; spirit
of wine, 1 gall.

3. Best soft soap, 1/4 lb.; boiling water, 1 pint; dissolve, cool, and
add, oils of cinnamon (cassia), verbena, and neroli, of each 6 drops;
dissolved in rectified spirit, 1 pint; mix well, and if not perfectly
transparent, add a little more strong spirit, or filter through blotting
paper.

_Obs._ This alcoholic solution of soap is chiefly used for shaving, and is
very convenient in travelling, as a good lather may be instantly produced
without the trouble of employing a soap-box. Instead of the above
perfumes, 15 drops of essence of musk or ambergris, or 30 drops of any of
the perfumed spirits, or 3 drops of attar of roses, or 6 drops of any of
the aromatic essential oils, may be added, when a corresponding name is
given to the preparation, as esprit de savon, de la rose, &c.

4. (P. Cod.) White soap, 3 oz.; carbonate of potassa, 1 dr.; proof spirit,
12 oz.; dissolve. Used medicinally. They are all used as frictions, &c.

5. (CAMPHORATED,--Guibourt.) White soap, 3 parts; camphor, 1 part; spirit
of rosemary, 16 parts; dissolve. A variety of opodeldoc. Used as an
embrocation in rheumatic pains, sore throat, &c.

=Essence of Soup Herbs.= _Syn._ SPIRIT OF SOUP HERBS, CONC. TINCTURE OF S.
H., &c. _Prep._ (Kitchener's.) Lemon thyme, winter savory, sweet marjoram,
and sweet bazil, of each 1 oz.; lemon peel (grated), and eschalots, of
each 1/2 oz.; bruised celery seed, 1/4 oz.; proof spirit or brandy, 1
pint; digest for 10 days or a fortnight. A superior flavouring essence for
soups, gravies, &c. See ESSENCE OF SAVOURY SPICES.

=Essence of Spear'mint.= See ESSENCE OF MINT.

=Essence of Sprats.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF BRITISH ANCHOVIES. From pickled
sprats (British anchovies), as ESSENCE OF ANCHOVIES, for which it is
commonly sold.

=Essence of Spruce.= _Syn._ FLUID EXTRACT OF SPRUCE; ESSENTIA ABIETIS,
EXTRACTUM A. FLUIDUM, L. _Prep._ A decoction of the young tops of the
black spruce-fir _Abies nigra_, evaporated to the consistence of a thick
syrup. Used to make spruce beer, &c.

=Essence, Toothache.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA ODONTALGIA, L. _Prep._ 1. Acetate of
morphia, 1/2 dr.; tincture of pellitory of Spain (made with rectified
spirit), 2 fl. oz.; acetic acid (glacial), 4 fl. dr.; dissolve, and add of
oil of cloves, 6 fl. dr.

2. (Redwood.) Pellitory, 1/2 lb.; extract of belladonna, 2 dr.; rectified
spirit, 1 pint; digest 14 days, strain, and add, of hyponitrous ether, 1
oz.; oil of wine, 1/2 oz.; oil of cloves, 2 dr. See DROPS (Odontalgic).

=Essence of Tu''berose.= _Prep._ The flowers are stratified with sheep's
or cotton wool, impregnated with the purest oil of ben or of olives, in an
earthen vessel, closely covered, and kept for 12 hours in a water bath;
the flowers are then removed, and fresh ones substituted, and this is
repeated until the oil (HUILE AU TUBEROSE) is sufficiently scented. The
wool or cotton is then mixed with the purest spirit of wine, and distilled
in a water bath; or it is first digested in a warm situation, and in a
well-closed vessel, for several days, during the whole of which time
frequent agitation is had recourse to. A similar plan is followed for the
preparation of essences of jasmine, violets, and other like flowers. See
SPIRIT.

=Essence of Turtle.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF GREEN TURTLE. _Prep._ From essence
of anchovies and shallot wine, of each 3 oz.; basil wine, 1/2 pint;
mushroom ketchup, 1/4 pint; the juice of 2 lemons; the yellow peel of 1
lemon; curry powder, 1/4 oz.; digest for a week. Used to impart the
flavour of turtle to soups and gravies.

=Essence of Tyre.= See HAIR DYE.

=Essence of Vanil'la.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA VANILLAE, TINCTURE V. CONCENTRATA,
L. _Prep._ 1. Vanilla (cut small), 2 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint, digest
a fortnight.

2. (Wholesale.) Vanilla, 2 lbs.; rectified spirit, 1 gall.; proceed as for
ESSENCE OF MUSK. Very superior.

3. Vanilla (best), 3/4 lb.; spirit of ambrette, 1 quart; cloves, 30 gr.;
grain musk, 7 gr.; as last. Much esteemed. It is chiefly used as a perfume
and for flavouring.

=Essence of Verbe'na.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF LEMON-GRASS, E. OF CITRONELLE;
ESSENTIA VERBENAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From oil of lemon-grass or verbena
(_Andropogon citratum_), as ESSENCE OF ALLSPICE.

2. To the last add, of essences of ambergris and bergamotte (oil), of each
1 fl. dr.; neroli, 1/2 fl. dr.

3. To No. 1. add, of oils of lavender and bergamotte, of each 1/2 dr.;
essence of vanilla, 2 fl. dr. A powerful and refreshing perfume.

=Essence of Vio'let.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA VIOLAE, L.; ESSENCES DES VIOLETTES,
Fr. See ESSENCE OF TUBEROSE and SPIRIT.

=Essence of Vittie Vayr.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF VETIVER; ESSENCE DE VITTIE
VAYR DOUBLE, Fr. _Prep._ 1. Vittie vayr or cuscus (the root of _Andropogon
muricatus_, cut small and bruised), 3 lbs.; proof spirit, 9 pints; digest
a week, add of water, 5 pints, and the next day distil over 1 gall. of
essence.

2. To the last, before distillation, add, of otto of roses, 1/2 dr.; eau
de melisse (spirit of balm), 1/2 pint; and proceed as before. Used as a
perfume. In 1831 it was much employed in Paris as a prophylactic of
cholera.

=Essence, Volatile (Acetic).= _Syn._ PUNGENT ACETIC ESSENCE; ESSENTIA
VOLATILIS ACETICA, L. Aromatic vinegar.

=Essence, Volatile (Ammoniacal).= _Syn._ PUNGENT AMMONIACAL ESSENCE,
AROMATIC AMMONIACAL E.; ESSENTIA VOLATILIS, E. V. AMMONIACALIS, E. V.
AROMATICA, &c., L. _Prep._ 1. Oil of cinnamon, 6 drops; otto of roses, 12
drops; oil of cloves, 1 fl. dr.; essence of bergamotte, 2 fl. dr.; oil of
lavender (Mitcham), 4 fl. dr.; essence of musk, 5 fl. dr.; liquor of
ammonia (strongest), 1 pint; mix in a cold place, and shake the bottle
until the whole is combined.

2. Essence of violets and oil of cinnamon, of each 12 drops; neroli,
essence of jasmine, and otto of roses, of each 1/2 dr.; oil of lavender, 1
dr.; essence royale and essence (oil) of bergamotte, of each 2-1/2 dr.;
liquor of ammonia (strongest), 1 pint; as the last.

3. Oils of lemon and bergamotte, of each 5 fl. dr.; oil of lavender, 1-1/2
fl. dr.; otto of roses, 1 fl. dr.; oils of cassia, neroli, cloves, and
cedrat, of each 1/2 fl. dr.; oil of sandal wood, 15 drops; liquor of
ammonia (strongest), 1 pint.

4. Essence of bergamotte, 6 fl. dr.; oil of lavender, 4 fl. dr.; oil of
cloves, 3 fl. dr.; oil of cassia, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; oil of verbena
(lemon-grass), 1 fl. dr.; otto of roses, 30 drops; liquor of ammonia, 18
fl. oz.

5. (Redwood.) Oil of bergamotte, 3 oz.; essence of lemons, 2 oz.; oil of
lavender, 6 dr.; essence of jasmine, 4 dr.; oil of sassafras, 3 dr.; oil
of neroli, 2 dr.; otto of roses, 1-1/2 dr.; oil of origanum and essence of
ambergris, of each 1 dr.; musk, 20 gr.; macerate for a week, and decant
the clear portion. It is added to the strongest liquor of ammonia in
proportion of 1-1/2 oz. to the pint.

_Obs._ The above are used to fill smelling-bottles. They are all very
fragrant and refreshing.

=Essence, Ward's.= See ESSENCE HEADACHE.

=Essence of Water-fen'nel.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA PHELLANDRI AQUATICI, E.
F[OE]NICULIS A., L. _Prep._ (Cottereau.) Water-fennel seeds (fine-leaved
water-hemlock, bruised), 1 oz.; proof spirit, 4 fl. oz.; digest. Narcotic
and pectoral.--_Dose_, 5 to 25 drops, combined with bark; in phthisis, &c.

=Essence, Westphalian.= ESSENCE OF SMOKE, E. OF WOOD-SMOKE, CAMBRIAN
ESSENCE, SMOKING FLUID; ESSENTIA FULIGINIS, &c., L. _Prep._ 1. Crude or
empyreumatic pyroligneous acid, 1 pint; sugar colouring, 2 oz.; dissolve,
and in a week decant the clear portion.

2. Tar, 3 dr.; sugar colouring, 2 oz.; hot crude pyroligneous acid, 1
pint; agitate constantly for 1 hour, and after repose decant the clear
portion.

3. Acetic acid (Ph. L.), 1 pint; creasote, 5 dr.; mix. White.

4. Barbadoes tar, 1/4 oz.; burnt sugar and common salt, of each 1 oz.;
strong pickling vinegar, 3/4 pint; port or elder wine, 1/4 pint; digest as
before. Inferior to the preceding. Used to impart a smoky flavour to meat,
fish, &c., by brushing it over them, or adding a little to the brine in
which they are pickled.

=Essence of Worm'wood.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA AMARA, E. ABSINTHII, L. _Prep._ 1.
Extract of wormwood, 4 oz.; oil of wormwood, 1 oz.; rectified spirit, 1
pint; digest a week and filter. Tonic, stomachic, and vermifuge.--_Dose_,
10 drops to a teaspoonful.

2. (Van Mons.) Tincture of wormwood, 1 pint; salt of wormwood, 5 dr.;
extract of wormwood, 1 dr.; digest as before.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1-1/2 fl.
dr.

=Essences, Fla''vouring.= _Syn._ CULINARY ESSENCES, SPICE E., ESSENCES FOR
THE TABLE, &c. Those used by cooks, confectioners, liqueurists, &c., are
all made by either dissolving 1 fl. oz. of the essential oil of the
particular substance in 1 pint of rectified spirit, or by digesting 4 to 6
oz. of the bruised spice, or 5 to 10 oz. of the dried herb, in a like
quantity (1 pint) of spirit. The first method is preferable, from being
the least troublesome, and yielding the finest product. They are commonly
labelled 'CONCENTRATED ESSENCE OF ----.' An inferior article, vended under
the names of 'ESSENCES OF CULINARY HERBS,' 'CULINARY TINCTURES,'
'TINCTURES FOR KITCHEN USE,' &c., are prepared from half the above
quantity of oil or spice, infused in a pint of proof spirit or British
brandy. The principal compounds of this class are the essences of
allspice, caraway, cardamoms, cassia, cayenne, celery seed, cinnamon,
cloves, coriander seed, fennel, garlic, ginger, lemon peel, mace,
marjoram, nutmegs, orange peel, peppermint, spearmint, sweet basil, and
the like. The whole of these are employed to flavour soups, gravies,
sweetmeats, pastry, wines, mulled wines, liqueurs, &c.

=Essences, Flower.= Those for which separate formulae are not given in this
work may most of them be made from the essential oil of the flowers and
rectified spirit, as the last; or by digesting the flowers (crushed or
bruised), 3 to 5 lbs., in proof spirit, 2 galls., for a few days, and then
drawing over, by distillation, 1 gall. For the essences of those flowers
which are not strongly odorous, the spirit thus obtained is distilled from
a like quantity of flowers, a second, and a third time, or even oftener.
The essences of other organic substances, whose fragrant principles are
volatile, may be prepared in the same manner. A small quantity of some
other odorous essence is frequently added to the product, to enrich or
modify the fragrance. See FLOWERS and ESSENCES BY INFUSION.

=Essences, Fra'grant.= See FLOWER ESSENCES (_above_), ESSENTIA ODORATA,
PERFUMERY, &c.

=Essences, Fruit.= See ESSENCES OF APPLE, PINE-APPLE, JARGONELLE, &c.

=Essences by Infu'sion.= This term, among perfumers, is commonly applied
to those essences, eaux, and esprits, which are prepared by digesting the
ingredients in the spirit used as the vehicle for the aroma, in opposition
to those obtained by 'distillation,' or by 'contact,' or 'pressure.' Thus,
the ESSENCES OF AMBERGRIS, MUSK, and VANILLA, are of this class.

=Essences, Vi'nous.= _Syn._ ESSENTIA VINOSA, L. These are prepared in a
similar way to the wines (VINA) of the pharmacop[oe]ia, by using 8 times
the usual quantity of ingredients, and the very strongest sherry wine. 1
fl. dr., added to 7 fl. dr. of wine or water (properly the first only),
forms an extemporaneous imitation of the officinal VINA MEDICATA. Some of
the above are largely used in dispensing, and by travellers. See LIQUOR
and WINE.

=ESSENTIA BI'NA.= See COLOURING.

=Essentia, Odora'ta.= _Prep._ 1. Oil of lavender, 1 dr.; oils of cloves,
cassia, and bergamot, of each 1/2 dr.; neroli, 20 drops; essence royale, 2
fl. dr.; rectified spirit, 1/2 pint; mix.

2. (Redwood.) English oil of lavender, 48 drops; oil of cloves, 32 drops;
oil of orange peel, 16 drops; oil of bergamotte and sweet spirit of nitre,
of each 8 drops; oil of yellow sandal-wood, neroli, and otto of roses, of
each 2 drops; oil of cinnamon, 1 drop; rectified spirit, and essence of
ambergris and musk, of each 1 oz.; honey water, 8 oz.; mix. Used as a
perfume for the handkerchief, &c. The last form seems unnecessarily
complicated and minute.

=Essentia Odorif'era.= _Prep._ 1. Grain musk and balsam of Peru, of each
10 gr.; civet, 4 gr.; oil of cloves, 5 drops; oil of rhodium, 3 drops;
salt of tartar (dried by a dull-red heat and cooled), 1/2 dr.; rectified
spirit (strongest), 2-1/2 fl. oz.; macerate for 14 days, and pour off the
clear.

2. Oil of rhodium and balsam of Peru, of each 1/2 dr.; oil of cloves, 1
dr.; spirit of ammonia, 2 fl. dr.; essence of civet and vanilla, of each 2
fl. oz.; essence of musk, 5 fl. oz.; neroli, oils of lavender, verbena,
and cassia, of each 6 drops. As last. Both are very pleasant, durable, and
powerful perfumes for personal use.

=ESSENTIAL OIL.= See OIL (Volatile).

=ESSENTIAL SALT OF BARK.= See BARK and =Extract=.

=ESSENTIAL SALT OF LEMONS.= _Syn._ SALT OF LEMONS; SAL LIMONUM, L. The
preparation sold under this name is made by mixing cream of tartar
(bitartrate of potassa) with twice its weight of salt of sorrel
(quadroxalate of potassa), both in fine powder. It is used to remove fruit
stains, &c., from linen, by rubbing a little of it on the part moistened
with warm water. It is poisonous, if swallowed in quantity.

=ETCH'ING.= A species of engraving, in which the design is formed on the
plate by the action of an acid, or some other fluid, instead of being cut
out by the graver.

_Proc._ In the ORDINARY PROCESS OF ETCHING the plate is covered with
'etching ground' (an acid-resisting varnish), and the design is scratched
on the metal through the ground, by means of a pointed tool of steel
called the 'etching needle' or 'point.' A border of wax is then placed
round the plate, and the 'biting' fluid poured on, and allowed to remain
till the 'lights' or finest portions of the design are sufficiently
'bitten in,' The etching fluid is then poured off, the plate washed, and
the light parts 'stopped out' with Brunswick black or other varnish; the
solvent is again poured on, and allowed to remain until the finest portion
of the exposed lines are sufficiently deep, when the acid is again poured
off, and the whole process is repeated till the very darkest lines or
shadows are sufficiently 'bitten in,' The plate is then cleaned, and is
ready to be printed from. Occasionally the etched design receives a few
finishing touches with the 'graver.'

There are several varieties of etching, of which the following are the
principal:--ETCHING WITH A SOFT GROUND, when a coating of lard or tallow
is employed, and the design is drawn on a piece of paper, laid evenly on
the ground, by which means the fatty matter adheres to the paper, on the
parts pressed on by the point or pencil, and the copper beneath becomes
exposed, and is then acted on by the acid. The effect resembles that of
chalk or pencil drawings.--STIPPLING, or executing the design in dots
instead of lines.--AQUATINTA or AQUATINT, a mode of etching on copper for
producing an effect resembling a drawing in Indian ink. It is performed by
sifting powdered asphaltum or lac resin on the plate, previously slightly
greased, and, after shaking off the loose powder, gently heating it over a
chafing dish; on cooling, the lights are covered with turpentine varnish
coloured with lampblack, by means of a hair pencil, and a rim of wax being
placed round the plate, a mixture of 'aquafortis' and water is poured on
it, and allowed to remain for 5 or 6 minutes, when it is poured off, the
plate dried, and recourse had to the pencil as before. The process of
'stopping' and 'etching' is repeated again and again, until the darkest
shades are produced. Sometimes, instead of using asphaltum, an alcoholic
solution of shell-lac or gum mastic is poured over the plate, placed in a
slanting direction; this varnish forms a film, which, on drying, leaves
innumerable cracks or minute fissures through which the acid acts on the
plate. The fineness or coarseness of the grain depends entirely upon the
condition of the powdered asphaltum, or on the quantity of matter
dissolved in the spirit employed to form the ground.

The fluids employed for 'biting in' the designs vary considerably, almost
every artist having his own receipt. Aquafortis, more or less diluted, is,
however, generally employed for COPPER, and this, with the addition of
pyroligneous acid, for etching on STEEL; but any fluid that rapidly
dissolves the metal may be used for the purpose. The 'etching ground' may
be formed of any substance capable of resisting the action of the etching
fluid, and which is, at the same time, sufficiently soft to allow of the
free use of the needle or point, and sufficiently solid to prevent an
injury to the design during the 'scratching in,'

In ETCHING ON GLASS, the ground is laid on, and the design 'scratched in'
in the usual way, when liquid hydrofluoric acid is applied, or the glass
is exposed to the action of hydrofluoric acid gas. The former renders the
surface of the etching transparent, the latter opaque. A simple
modification of the process is to wet the design with sulphuric acid, and
then to sprinkle on some finely pulverised fluor spar (fluoride of
calcium), by which means hydrofluoric acid is set free and attacks the
glass. This method may be very easily applied to the graduation of glass
vessels, thermometer tubes, &c.

ETCHING ON GLASS BY ELECTRICITY. Plante ('Ann. Chem. Phys.' [5], xiii,
143-144). The author had previously drawn attention to the fact that when
an electric current is passed through saline solutions in glass vessels,
platinum wire serving as electrodes, the glass is immediately attacked,
and he therefore proposes the following method for etching on glass:

The surface of the glass to be engraved is coated with a concentrated
solution of potassium nitrate, and beneath the layer of liquid a platinum
wire, connected with one of the poles of a battery, is stretched across
the plate. With the other pole is connected another platinum wire, the
whole of which, except the point, is insulated; with this the designs are
drawn on the glass, which is engraved wherever the wire comes in contact
with it, flashes of light being emitted at the same time.

The depth of engraving depends on the rate at which the platinum wire
moves; the slower the rate the deeper the line.

A RAPID METHOD OF ETCHING ON IRON OR STEEL, capable of very general
application, is as follows:--"The metal is warmed until it is capable of
melting a piece of beeswax, or 'etching ground,' which is then carefully
rubbed over it, so as to form a thin and even coating; when cold, the
design is 'scratched in' in the common way; a little powdered iodine is
then sprinkled on the exposed parts, and at the same time a few drops of
water are added, and the two worked into a liquid paste with a camel-hair
pencil. The paste is then moved about over the intended etching, for a
period varying from one to five minutes, according to the depth of the
lines required to be produced. Afterwards the whole is removed, and
reapplied, &c., as with the usual etching fluids. The same etching-paste,
by being kept for a few days, again acquires the property of dissolving
iron, and may be used again and again; but independently of this, the
iodide of iron formed during the process, if rapidly evaporated to dryness
in a clean iron vessel by a moderate heat, and placed in stoppered
bottles, will sell for more than the original cost of the iodine. To
travellers and amateurs who amuse themselves with the delightful art of
etching, iodine, from its portability and convenience, will, doubtless,
prove invaluable. We have adopted it with considerable success, and have
found it especially useful in marking surgical instruments, razors, and
other edge tools. We published this method many years ago. Several parties
have since availed themselves of our suggestions and formulae, but without
the slightest acknowledgment of the source from which they obtained them."
(A. J. Cooley.)

=Etching, Electro-.= This mode of etching, which is in many respects
superior to the ordinary mode, is based upon the destructive action of
certain 'anions' during 'electrolysis.'[281] If two plates of copper be
connected with the opposite ends of a voltaic battery, and placed in a
vessel containing very dilute sulphuric acid, the plate connected with the
copper of the battery will be attacked by the anion oxygen which is
released during the decomposition of the acid. This destructive action can
be localised at pleasure by covering certain parts of the plate with a
protecting stratum of varnish, ordinary 'etching ground' for instance. In
the practice of electro-etching, the drawing is 'scratched in' in the
usual way through an ordinary ground; a stout wire is then soldered to the
plate, and this, as well as the back of the plate, is coated with
sealing-wax varnish. Thus prepared, the plate is placed in a suitable
'decomposition cell' opposite a plate of somewhat similar size, and the
two are connected respectively with the copper and zinc of a 'Daniell's
cell,' or the silver and zinc of a 'Smee's cell.'[282] After about ten
minutes the plate is removed, washed, and dried; and when the 'fine work'
has been stopped out with Brunswick black, it is returned for another
space of ten minutes. By alternately exposing the plate to the action of
the decomposing fluid, and 'stopping out' parts of the work, the required
gradation in tints is obtained. The exact duration of the various
exposures, as well as their number, must, of course, be regulated by
circumstances. See ETCHING FLUIDS (_below_).

[Footnote 281: See ELECTROLYSIS and ELECTROTYPE, pages 428 and 429.]

[Footnote 282: See VOLTAIC ELECTRICITY.]

=Etching Fluids.= 1. (For COPPER.)--_a._ From 'aquafortis,' 2-1/2 fl. oz.;
water, 5 fl. oz.; mix.

_b._ To the last add of verdigris, 1 oz.; water, 2-1/2 fl. oz.; dissolve.
For light touches.

_c._ (EAU FORTE,--Callot and Piranesi.) Alum, sal-ammoniac, sea salt, and
verdigris, of each 4 oz.; vinegar (pyroligneous acid), 8 fl. oz.; water,
16 fl. oz.; mix, dissolve, boil for 1 or 2 minutes in a glazed or
stoneware vessel, cool, and decant the clear portion. Used as the last.

_d._ Water acidulated with sulphuric acid. Used in the process of
electro-etching.

2. (For STEEL.)--_a._ From iodine, 1 oz.; iron filings or wire, 1/2 dr.;
water, 4 fl. oz. It must be kept in a stoppered bottle, until required for
use.

_b._ From iodine, 3 dr.; iodide of potassium, 1 dr.; proof spirit, 1 fl.
oz.; water, 2 fl. oz. As the last.

_c._ (Mr Turrel.) Pyroligneous acid, 4 fl. oz.; alcohol (rectified
spirit), 1 fl. oz.; mix, and add of nitric acid or double aquafortis (sp.
gr. 1.28), 1 fl. oz.

_d._ From hydrochloric acid, 5 parts; water, 95 parts; mix, and add the
liquid to a solution of chlorate of potassa, 1 part, in water, 50 parts.

_e._ A solution of common salt. Used in the process of electro-etching.

=Etching Ground.= _Syn._ ETCHING VARNISH. _Prep._ 1. Beeswax, 5 parts;
linseed oil, 1 part; melted together.

2. (Callot's HARD VARNISH, FLORENTINE V., FLORENCE V.) From linseed oil
and mastic, equal parts, melted together.

3. (Callot's SOFT VARNISH.) From linseed oil, 4 oz.; gum benzoin and white
wax, of each 1/2 oz.; boil to two thirds.

4. (Lawrence.) White wax, 2 oz.; black pitch and Burgundy pitch, of each
1/2 oz.; melt, add by degrees, of powdered asphaltum, 2 oz.; and boil
together, until a piece, when thoroughly cold, will break by being bent
double 2 or 3 times between the fingers; next pour it into warm water,
make it into small balls, and place each of them in a piece of taffety for
use.

_Obs._ The preceding compositions are applied to the surface of the
plates, previously made sufficiently warm to melt them easily, their even
diffusion being promoted by dabbing them with a wad of cotton. Those that
are white are then generally blackened on the surface by skilfully passing
them over the smoky flame of one or more candles, by which the marks of
the etching point on the bright metal are rendered the more visible.

=E'THER.= _Syn._ OXIDE OF ETHYL. Described under ETHYL, OXIDE OF. Several
substances are known under the name of ethers besides the true ethers or
salts of ethyl, and are given below.

=Ether of Canthar'ides.= _Syn._ AETHER CANTHARIDALIS, L. _Prep._
([OE]ttinger.) From powdered cantharides, 1 part; ether, 2 parts; digested
together for 3 or 4 days, and the tincture expressed. Used as a vesicant,
&c.

=Ether, Chlo''ric.= This name was applied by Dr T. Thomson to the CHLORIDE
OF OLEFIANT GAS, or 'DUTCH LIQUID,' and afterwards, by Guthrie and
Silliman, to CHLOROFORM, which they took for an alcoholic solution of
chloride of olefiant gas. It now forms one of the synonyms of chloroform.
The medicinal 'CHLORIC ETHER' of the shops is a solution of chloroform, 1
part, in rectified spirit 8 parts; of which the _dose_ is 20 or 30 drops
in water, as an antispasmodic and anodyne. See CHLOROFORM.

=Ether, Chlorinet'ted.= Formed by the action of dry chlorine on pure
ether. When the action is long continued, a heavy, oily product
(BICHLORINETTED ETHER), smelling like fennel, is formed. By the still
further action of chlorine, aided by sunlight, a white, crystalline
substance (PENTACHLORINETTED ETHER), a compound resembling sesquichloride
of carbon, is obtained.

=Ether, Cu''preous.= _Syn._ TINCTURA CUPRI CHLORIDI AETHEREA, L. _Prep._
(Van Mons.) Sulphate of copper, 6 parts, and chloride of barium, 5 parts,
are triturated together, and the mixture digested in ether, 3 or 4 parts,
until all the chloride of copper is dissolved.--_Dose_, 2 to 5 drops; in
epilepsy, &c.

=Ether, Methy'lic.= _Syn._ OXIDE OF METHYL, WOOD-ETHER, METHYL-ETHER;
AETHER METHYLICUS, L. _Prep._ From wood spirit, 1 part; concentrated
sulphuric acid, 4 parts; mix in a retort, apply heat, pass the evolved gas
(methylic ether) through a little strong solution of potassa, and then
collect it over mercury. See METHYL.

=Ether, Spirits of Nitrous.= See SPIRITS.

=Ether, Washed.= _Syn._ AETHER LOTUS, L. Ordinary ether, agitated first
with 2 or 3 times its volume of distilled water, and a few grains of
carbonate of potassa, or a few drops of milk of lime; and after
decantation, again agitated with a like quantity of water only. Used for
inhalations. For other purposes the washed ether is afterwards digested on
chloride of calcium, to deprive it of retained water.

=E'THERIN.= _Syn._ CAMPHOR OF OIL OF WINE. A volatile, white, crystalline
substance, deposited by light oil of wine when left in a cold situation
for some time. It is isomeric with etherole, and received its name from
the assumption of its being the base of the ethereal compounds. According
to this hypothesis, ether is a hydrate of etherin. Etherin forms brilliant
prisms and plates; is tasteless; soluble in alcohol and ether; fuses at
230 deg. Fahr., and boils at 500 deg. Fahr.; and is a little lighter than water.
The crystals are purified by pressure between the folds of bibulous paper,
solution in ether, and evaporation.

=E'THEROLE.= The yellowish, oily liquid, forming the residual portion of
light oil of wine, after it has deposited its etherin. It is lighter than
water; is freely soluble in both alcohol and ether; and has a rather high
boiling-point. See ETHERIN and OIL OF WINE.

=ETHION'IC AC'ID.= _Prep._ An alcoholic solution of the crystals of
sulphate of carbyle is diluted with water, the whole neutralised with
carbonate of baryta, the filtered liquid evaporated by a very gentle heat
to a small bulk, and a large quantity of alcohol added; the precipitate
(ethionate of baryta) is treated (cautiously) with dilute sulphuric acid
(avoiding excess), by which the baryta is withdrawn, and ethionic acid
left in solution.

_Prop., &c._ Ethionic acid closely resembles sulphovinic acid. It is
decomposed by heat. Its salts (ethionates), however, differ completely
from the sulphovinates. They are all soluble in water, and are said to be
anhydrous. The ethionates of ammonia, potassa, and soda crystallise
readily; those of lead, baryta, lime, and the other earths are
uncrystallisable. See ISETHIONIC ACID, and _below_.

=ETHION'IC ANHY'DRIDE.= _Prep._ Pure and dry olefiant gas is passed over
anhydrous sulphuric acid ('sulphuric anhydride') contained in a U-shaped
tube.

_Prop., &c._ When thus produced, it is in white, milky crystals, which
speedily deliquesce in the air, giving rise to ethionic acid. It is
similar in appearance, and probably identical with, 'sulphate of carbyle,'
which results from the absorption of the vapour of anhydrous sulphuric
acid by absolute alcohol.

=E'THIOPS.= _Syn._ AETHIOPS, L. A name given by the older chemists to
several black powders on account of their colour, and still occasionally
employed in medical works.

=Ethiops, Graphi'tic.= _Syn._ ETHIOPS OF PLUMBAGO; AETHIOPS GRAPHITICUS, L.
From plumbago, 2 parts; quicksilver, 1 part; triturated together until the
globules disappear.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr.; in herpes, and some other
obstinate skin diseases.

=Ethiops, Martial.= Black oxide of iron, prepared by keeping iron filings
under water, and occasionally shaking them. It is washed with water, dried
as quickly as possible, and preserved from the air, to prevent further
oxidation. Formerly much esteemed as a tonic.

=Ethiops, Min'eral.= _Syn._ ETHIOPS MINERAL; AETHIOPS MINERALIS, HYDRARGYRI
SULPHURETUM CUM SULPHURE, L. Black sulphuret of mercury, with excess of
sulphur.

(Tyson's.) Oxide of mercury (prepared by decomposing calomel with an
equivalent proportion of liquor of potassa to which a little liquor of
ammonia has been added) and flowers of sulphur, equal parts, triturated
together. This is recommended as an efficient substitute for the old and
uncertain preparation commonly sold under the name of _Ethiops mineral_.
It is, however, of more than double the usual strength, and should
therefore be taken in proportionate doses. See MERCURY (Sulphide).

=Ethiops, Veg'etable.= _Syn._ AETHIOPS VEGETABILIS, PULVUS QUERCUS MARINAE,
L. Bladder wrack (_Fucus vesiculosus_), burned in a close vessel till it
becomes black and friable. Used in bronchocele, scrofula, &c. Like burnt
sponge, it owes its virtues to the presence of a very minute quantity of
iodine.--_Dose_, 20 gr. to 1 dr., or more, made into an electuary with
honey or sugar.

=E'THYL.= C_{2}H_{5}. _Syn._ ETHYLE. The hydrocarbon assumed to be the
radical of the ether-compounds (ethyl-series). A body containing carbon
and hydrogen in the proportions indicated by the formula of ethyl,
2(C_{2}H_{5}), has been obtained by exposing dry iodide of ethyl in sealed
tubes for several hours to the action of finely divided zinc, at a
temperature of from 320 deg. to 338 deg. Fahr. In this reaction the iodine of the
iodide of ethyl combines with the zinc, and the hydrocarbon supposed to be
ethyl is set free. On opening the sealed tubes and allowing the gas (which
is a mixture of the 'ethyl' and certain secondary products) to pass into a
freezing mixture, the temperature of which is kept below -9 deg. Fahr., the
'ethyl' condenses to a colourless, mobile liquid. Hitherto no compound
ether has been produced from the 'ethyl' thus prepared.

According to the beautiful theory of Liebig, ethyl is a 'salt-basyle,'
forming 'haloid salts' with chlorine, iodine, and bromine; its oxide is
ether, and the hydrate of this oxide alcohol. The compound ethers may be
compared with ordinary salts in which the metal is replaced by the radical
ethyl.

=Ethyl, Oxide of.= (C_{2}H_{5})_{2}O. _Syn._ ETHER, SULPHURIC ETHER, AETHER
(B. P.), AETHER SULPHURICUS (PH. E. D. & U. S.), AE. RECTIFICATUS, AE.
VITRIOLICUS, AE. SPIRITUS VITRIOLI DULOIS, L. A colourless, highly
volatile, fragrant, inflammable liquid, obtained by distilling a mixture
of sulphuric acid and alcohol. It was not known before the 13th century.

_Prep._ There are two methods employed for the preparation of ether. The
one is by mixing the whole of the ingredients at once, and immediately
subjecting them to distillation at a proper temperature; the other is by
adding the alcohol in a slender streamlet to the acid, previously heated
to the etherifying point. The former, though less economical, is the one
more generally employed.

1. Rectified spirit, 3 lbs.; sulphuric acid, 2 lbs.; carbonate of potassa
(previously ignited), 1 oz.; pour 2 lbs. of the spirit into a glass
retort, add the acid, and place the vessel on a sand bath, so that the
liquor may boil as quickly as possible, and the ether, as it forms, pass
over into a well-cooled receiver; continue the distillation until a
heavier fluid begins to pass over, then lower the heat, add the remainder
of the spirit, and distil as before; mix the distilled liquors together,
pour off the supernatant portion, add the carbonate of potassa, and
agitate occasionally for one hour; finally, distil the ether from a large
retort, and keep it in a well-stoppered bottle. Sp. gr. .750.

2. The strongest oil of vitriol, 3 parts, are mixed with alcohol, q. s.
(about 2 parts at .830) to reduce its sp. gr. to 1.780; an object which
may be easily obtained by distilling off some of the ether if required.
The still or retort is then connected with a vessel full of alcohol, of at
least 90%, by means of a small syphon tube, furnished with a stop-cock;
the longer limb of which should be of glass, and so arranged that it just
dips into the mixture of acid and alcohol. Heat is next applied, and the
contents of the still raised to the boiling-point as rapidly as possible,
and as soon as full ebullition commences the stop-cock of the syphon is
cautiously turned, so as to allow the alcohol to flow down in such a
manner as to keep the boiling liquid exactly at the same level; or, in
other words, to supply a quantity of alcohol exactly equal to that of the
liquid which distils over. By careful manipulation the whole of the
alcohol which enters the retort passes over as ether and water, and this
decomposition proceeds for some time, and would continue for an unlimited
period did not the sulphuric acid ultimately become too weak to form
ether, from the gradual absorption of the superfluous water contained in
the alcohol. Were it convenient or practicable to use absolute alcohol, a
given weight of sulphuric acid of the proper strength, would maintain the
power of producing ether for an indefinite period. In practice, the
quantity of alcohol that may thus be etherified is twice or thrice as much
as by the common process, while neither sulphurous acid, sulphovinic acid,
nor sweet oil of wine is generated, and the residual liquid of the
distillation continues limpid, and has only a pale-brown colour. This is
termed the 'continuous,' or 'Boullay's' method. (This process is similar
to that given in the B. P.)

3. Alcohol of 90%, five parts are mixed with oil of vitriol, 9 parts, in a
vessel of copper or iron immersed in cold water; the mixture is next
introduced into a still or retort, and raised to a state of ebullition as
rapidly as possible, as before. A fresh quantity of alcohol, equal in bulk
to the liquid distilled over, is then added to the liquid in the still,
and distillation again had recourse to. As much concentrated alcoholic
solution of potassa as will give it a perceptible alkaline reaction is
next added to distilled liquor, which is then rectified by the heat of a
water bath, as long as the ether which distils over has the sp. gr. .720
to .725 at 80 deg. Fahr. Instead of the potassa, a little milk of lime may be
used, along with its own bulk of water. By allowing the product to stand
for some days over chloride of calcium or quicklime, and again rectifying
it along with one of these substances, perfectly pure ether may be
obtained.

_Obs._ The mixture of alcohol with sulphuric acid requires some caution.
It is best done by introducing the alcohol into a suitable vessel, and
imparting to it a rapid whirling motion, by which a considerable conical
cavity is formed in the centre, and into which the acid may be gradually
poured with perfect safety. The mixed fluids should be brought to a state
of rapid ebullition, as quickly as possible, as without this precaution
much of the alcohol distils over before the liquor acquires the proper
temperature for etherification. On the small scale, a tubulated retort,
connected with a Liebig's condensing tube, and two globular receivers
surrounded with a freezing mixture, or ice-cold water, may be employed as
the distillatory apparatus. The second receiver should be connected with
the first one by means of a bent glass tube, reaching nearly to the bottom
of the former; and the whole of the joints should be securely luted, as
soon as the expanded air has been allowed to escape. We have employed the
following convenient little apparatus for the preparation of small
quantities of ether, and it will be found very suitable for the
distillation of most other highly volatile liquids, and particularly for
boiling mixtures of alcohol and organic acids. By connecting the neck of a
flask or digester containing volatile fluids with the lower instead of the
upper end of the refrigerator, ebullition may be carried on without loss,
as the vapour will be condensed, and run back into the vessel from which
it has distilled.

[Illustration:

  _a._ Condenser tube.
  _b, c_ Glass tube.
  _d._ Funnel by which cold water runs in from the water bottle _h_.
  _e._ Pipe by which water escapes through _f_ into the bottle _g_.
  _i._ Retort.
  _k._ Adapter, connecting the retort with the condenser.
  _l._ Adapter, connecting the condenser with the bottles _t, t_.
  _A._ Wooden tressel, with movable arms _n, o_, for supporting and
      adjusting the heights of the condenser.
  _B._ Wooden stool for supporting the water bottle.
  _q._ Furnace.
  _r._ Support for the furnace.
  _p._ Gutter for carrying off water that overflows the funnel _d_,
      and preventing its escape along the pipe _c_.
  _s._ Leg of syphon connected with bottle containing alcohol.
  _t, t._ Glass globes, placed in the basins _v, v_, and surrounded
      with pounded ice or ice-cold water.
  _w._ Safety tube, containing a little mercury at _x_.]

For the rectification of ether, a water bath is employed along with the
above simple refrigerator, and the receivers surrounded by ice or a
freezing mixture.

_Chem. comp., &c._ Ether is generally regarded as the oxide of ethyl, and
alcohol as the hydrate of this base. This view is borne out by analysis,
which proves that ether differs from alcohol by the elements of water.
Recent experiments have also shown that the relation existing between the
two compounds is--if alcohol be expressed by the formula C_{2}H_{6}O, the
true formula of ether will be (C_{2}H_{5})_{2}O. We cannot describe these
experiments here, but we may remark that ether cannot be made to combine
with water directly, nor can alcohol be converted into ether by the
abstraction of water, pure and simple, without the aid of other
substances.

The compound ethers may be compared to ordinary salts in which the metal
is replaced by a radical termed ethyl, having the formula C_{2}H_{5}. This
view is, of course, in accordance with the theory which regards ether as
the oxide of ethyl.

According to theory, 1 equivalent, or 46 parts of absolute alcohol, should
produce 1 eq., or 37 parts, of pure ether; but in practice, the greatest
product obtained by operating according to Boullay's method, which
produces more ether than any other, does not exceed 33-1/2 parts for the
preceding quantity of alcohol, or 71.5%. A mixture of 9 parts of oil of
vitriol, and 5 parts of alcohol of 90%, ceases to produce ether after 31
parts of such alcohol have been added.

The most economical method of etherification is that known as the
continuous ether process, or the process of Boullay. When this is adopted,
the retort or flask should be fitted with a sound cork, perforated by an
aperture to receive a thermometer, and the application of the heat, and
the flow of alcohol, should be so managed, that a temperature of 300 deg.
Fahr. and a state of rapid and violent ebullition (points of essential
importance) are maintained.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ Pure ether is a colourless, transparent, and very
limpid fluid, having a penetrating and agreeable smell, and a burning,
sweetish taste; its evaporation produces the sensation of extreme cold;
when prevented, a sensation of heat is experienced. Its specific gravity
varies between .712 and .724. If it contains water it begins to
crystallise in brilliant white plates when cooled to -24 deg. Fahr., and
become a white crystalline mass at -46 deg. or -47 deg. Fahr.; but if absolutely
pure, ether cannot be solidified by any degree of cold that can be
produced, it remaining fluid when placed in contact with solid carbonic
acid, at a temperature of about -148 deg. Fahr. Boils at 96 deg. or 97 deg. Fahr.; is
very combustible; is soluble in about 10 parts of distilled water, and
mixes with alcohol in all proportions. It abstracts corrosive sublimate,
terchloride of gold, sesquichloride of iron, and many of the alkaloids,
from their watery solutions, and is hence invaluable in analysis and
pharmacy. It readily dissolves the volatile and fixed oils, and most fatty
matters, as well as sulphur and phosphorus in small quantities. By
exposure to light and air it absorbs oxygen, and water and acetic acid are
gradually formed. It is decomposed by exposure to a high temperature. Its
evaporation occasions intense cold. The greatest degree of cold yet
produced (-166 deg. Fahr.) has resulted from the admixture of ether with solid
carbonic acid. Ether is powerfully stimulant, narcotic, and antispasmodic,
and externally refrigerant, if allowed to evaporate, or stimulant and
counter-irritant if its evaporation is prevented, and is used in various
diseases. Applied to the forehead by means of the fingers or a strip of
linen, it generally relieves simple cases of nervous headache. In
_pharmacy_ it is largely employed in the preparations of tinctures
alkaloids, spirits, &c.; and in _chemistry_ is invaluable in organic
analyses. Its principal commercial application is as a solvent for
pyroxyline, in the manufacture of collodion. It is also employed as a
solvent of resins, india rubber, &c., in the preparation of varnishes, and
for several other useful purposes.--_Dose_, 20 drops to 2 fl. dr.; in
water or wine. Excessive doses of ether produce intoxication resembling
that from alcohol, and require similar antidotes. Sulphuric ether is said
to be taken largely in the north of Ireland as a stimulant, particularly
in Antrim. Shortly before the discovery of chloroform, it was found that
when the vapour of ether was inhaled it gradually produced insensibility
to pain. It was therefore employed as an anaesthetic in surgical
operations. Having been found less efficient than chloroform, and more
troublesome to administer, its use for this purpose has been abandoned.

_Tests._ Ether may be recognised by its volatility, odour, taste, sparing
solubility in water, admixture with alcohol in all proportions, great
inflammability (burning with a yellowish-white flame), and its power of
dissolving fats and resins. Its further identification can only be
effected by ultimate analysis.

_Pur._ The ether of the shops generally contains alcohol, water, or acetic
acid, and sometimes all of them. Its usual specific gravity fluctuates
between .733 and .765. Exposed to the air, it volatises entirely. It turns
litmus paper red; sometimes very slightly, and occasionally even not at
all. 1/2 fl. oz. mixes completely with 1/2 pint of water. Pure ether
should, however, be neutral to test-paper, although seldom so. When shaken
in a minim measure with half its volume of concentrated solution of
chloride of calcium, its volume should not lessen. 10 fluid ounces of
water should only dissolve 1 fluid ounce of ether, and remain transparent.

[Illustration]

_Preserv._ Ether rapidly evaporates at common temperatures when kept in
corked bottles, and even in bottles secured with ground-glass stoppers and
tightly tied over with bladder and leather; it also becomes sour by age.
To prevent this waste, the stoppers should fit accurately, and the bottles
should be placed in as cool a situation as possible. Bottles furnished
with ground-glass caps, as well as stoppers, are frequently employed. (See
_engr._) Dewar's 'ether phial' is formed on a similar principle. We have
seen bottles of ether accurately stoppered, tied over with bladder, and
thickly coated with wax, which have yet become quite empty by a voyage to
the tropics, though they still appeared to be as closely secured as when
they were first filled.

_Caution._ The vapour of ether is very inflammable, and when mixed with
atmospheric air, it forms a violently explosive mixture. The density of
this vapour is 2.586, that of air being 1; hence it rapidly sinks, and
frequently accumulates in the lower parts of buildings, especially cellars
which are badly ventilated, in the same way as water does. The only remedy
is thorough ventilation. Many serious accidents have arisen from this
cause, for no sooner is a light carried into an apartment where such
vapour is present than an explosion takes place.

=Ethyl, Acetate of.= C_{2}H_{5}C_{2}H_{3}O_{2} _Syn._ ACETATE OF OXIDE OF
ETHYL, ACETIC ETHER, PYROLIGNEOUS ETHER; AETHER ACETICUS, L. A compound
discovered by the Count de Lauraguais in 1759.

_Prep._ 1. Acetate of potassa, 3 parts (or an equiv. quant. of acetate of
soda), alcohol (85%), 3 parts, oil of vitriol (strongest), 2 parts, are
mixed together and distilled, by the heat of a sand bath, from a glass or
earthenware retort into a well-cooled receiver; the distillate is agitated
with a little water to remove undecomposed alcohol, and then digested
first with a little chalk to remove acidity, and afterwards with fused
chloride of calcium, to absorb water; it is, lastly, rectified by a gentle
heat.

2. Rectified spirit (sp. gr. .84), 50 parts, acetic acid (sp. gr. 1.075),
33 parts, are mixed together, and oil of vitriol (strongest), 10 parts,
added; the distillation is continued until 65 parts have passed over, and
the distillate, after digestion for some hours on a little dry carbonate
of potassium, is rectified as before, the first 50 parts only being kept
for use.

_Prop., &c._ Acetic ether is colourless, and bears a considerable
resemblance to ordinary ether, but it has a much more agreeable and
refreshing odour. It boils at 165 deg. Fahr.; has a sp. gr. of .89 at 60 deg.
Fahr., dissolves in about 7 parts of water; and mixes in all proportions
with alcohol and ether. It is decomposed by alkalies and the strong acids.

Acetic ether is diaphoretic, stimulant, antispasmodic, and
narcotic.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 fl. dr.; in similar cases to those in which
sulphuric ether is employed, and especially in nervous and putrid fevers,
spasmodic vomitings, and diseases of the bowels and stomach, arising from
debility, and not of an inflammatory character. Its principal consumption
is in the manufacture of British brandy.

=Ethyl, Benzoate of.= C_{2}H_{5}C_{7}H_{5}O_{2}. _Syn._ BENZOIC ETHER,
BENZOATE OF ETHER, B. OF OXIDE OF ETHYL; AETHER BENZOICUS, L. _Prep._
Alcohol (sp. gr. .830), 4 parts; benzoic acid (cryst.), 2 parts;
concentrated hydrochloric acid, 1 part, are distilled together; as soon as
the product turns milky when mixed with water, the receiver is changed,
and the liquid that distills over collected; to this liquid water is
added, and the supernatant ether is decanted, and boiled with water, and a
little oxide of lead (to separate benzoic acid); it is, lastly, freed from
water by allowing it to stand over chloride of calcium.

_Prop., &c._ A colourless oily liquid, slightly heavier than water, and
possessing an aromatic odour and taste. It boils at 410 deg. Fahr., and is
miscible with alcohol and ether.

=Ethyl, Bromide of.= C_{2}H_{5}Br. _Syn._ AETHER HYDROBROMICUS, L. A
volatile, ethereal liquid, discovered by Serullas.

_Prep._ Bromine, 8 parts; alcohol, 32 parts; dissolve, place the mixture
in a retort, add of phosphorus, 1 part, and distil by a gentle heat as
soon as the liquid becomes cold. The ether is separated from the
distillate by the addition of water.

_Prop., &c._ A very volatile liquid, with a penetrating taste and smell;
boiling at 105 deg. Fahr., and heavier than water.

=Ethyl, Bu'tyrate of.= C_{2}H_{5}C_{4}H_{7}O_{2}. _Syn._ BUTYRIC ETHER,
PINE-APPLE OIL; AETHER BUTYRICUS, L. _Prep._ By passing hydrochloric acid
gas into an alcoholic solution of butyric acid, and purifying the product
from free acid.

Commercially, from crude butyric acid saponified with caustic potassa or
baryta, and the resulting soap distilled along with alcohol and oil of
vitriol.

_Uses._ Crude butyric ether forms the 'pine-apple oil' of commerce, and
when largely diluted with rectified spirit, the 'pine-apple essence' so
much employed as a flavouring substance by confectioners, liqueuristes,
&c. It imparts a delicious flavour to sweetmeats, rum, arrack, punch, &c.
The Germans add it to common rum, to form the flavouring for their
'pine-apple ale.'

=Ethyl, Carbonate of.= (C_{2}H_{5})_{2}CO_{3}. _Syn._ CARBONIC ETHER,
CARBONATE OF OXIDE OF ETHYL; AETHER CARBONICUS, L. _Prep._ Fragments of
potassium are added to oxalic ether, gently warmed, as long as bubbles of
gas are formed; the excess of metal is removed from the semi-solid mass,
some water added, and the whole distilled. The carbonic ether floats on
the surface of the liquid in the receiver, and is collected, dried by
contact with chloride of calcium, and rectified along with some potassium
or sodium, till it ceases to yield acetate of potassa when acted on by
caustic potassa.

_Prop., &c._ Colourless, limpid, and aromatic; tastes pungent and burning;
boils at 259 deg. to 260 deg. Fahr. It greatly resembles oxalic ether. It is
decomposed by alkalies.

=Ethyl, Chlo'ride of.= C_{2}H_{5}Cl. _Syn._ LIGHT HYDROCHLORIC E.,
CHLORIDE OF ETHYL; AETHER HYDROCHLORICUS, L. A highly volatile compound,
formed of ethyl and chlorine.

_Prep._ Rectified spirit of wine is saturated with dry hydrochloric acid
gas in the cold, and the product is distilled in a retort connected with a
Wolfe's apparatus, the first bottle of which should be two thirds filled
with tepid water (70 deg. to 75 deg. Fahr.), and the remainder surrounded with a
mixture of ice and salt. To render it perfectly anhydrous, it must be
digested on a few fragments of fused chloride of calcium.

A mixture of oil of vitriol, 3 parts, and alcohol, 2 parts, is poured upon
common salt (dried), 4 parts; and the whole distilled as before.

_Prop., &c._ This ether has a sweetish taste; is soluble in about 15 parts
of water, and miscible in all proportions with alcohol; boils at 54 deg.
Fahr.; burns with a flame edged with green; is neutral to test paper; and
does not affect a solution of nitrate of silver. Sp. gr. .921, at 32 deg.
Fahr.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 drops, as an antispasmodic and a powerful
diffusible stimulant. Owing to its extreme volatility it can only be taken
dissolved in spirit.

=Ethyl, Cy'anide of.= C_{2}H_{5}CN. _Syn._ AETHER HYDROCYANICUS. L. _Prep._
Cyanide of potassium and sulphovinate of baryta, equal parts, are mixed
and distilled in a glass retort by a moderate heat. The product separates
into two strata; the lighter one is impure hydrocyanic ether; this is
decanted and agitated with 4 or 5 times its bulk of water at 120 deg. to 140 deg.
Fahr., and the operation is repeated with about 2 parts of water; the
ether is again decanted, and placed in contact with chloride of calcium
for 24 hours, and then rectified.

_Prop., &c._ It boils at 190 deg. Fahr. Sp. gr. .788. In its therapeutical
effects it resembles hydrocyanic acid, but is less active. Its odour is,
however, more penetrating and offensive.--_Dose_, 2 to 6 drops, in
mucilage or emulsion; in obstinate or convulsive coughs, gastrodynia,
hysterical affections, &c.

=Ethyl, Cy'anate of.= C_{2}H_{5}CNO _Syn._ CYANIC ETHER, CYANATE OF OXIDE
OF ETHYL. _Prep._ By distilling a dry mixture of cyanate of potassa and
sulphovinate of potassa in nearly equivalent proportions. A mixture of
cyanic and cyanuric ethers passes over into the receiver. By distilling
this mixture the two are readily separated; that which passes over by the
heat of a water bath being the first, and the residuum in the retort the
second.

_Prop., &c._ An ethereal, very mobile liquid, boiling at 140 deg. Fahr.

=Ethyl, Cyan'urate of.= (C_{2}H_{5})_{3}C_{3}N_{3}O_{3}. _Syn._ CYANURATE
OF OXIDE OF ETHYL. _Prep._ See CYANIC ETHER.

_Prop., &c._ Tasteless, inodorous, colourless, transparent, needles and
prisms; fusing at 185 deg. Fahr.

=Ethyl, I'odide of.= C_{2}H_{5}I. _Syn._ AETHER HYDRIODICUS, L. _Prep._
Phosphorous, 4 parts, alcohol (sp. gr. .84), 70 parts, and iodine, 100
parts, are gradually and cautiously mixed together, and distilled.

_Prop., &c._ A colourless liquid, possessing a strong ethereal odour, and
boiling at 158 deg. Fahr.; sp. gr. 1.92. It is reddened and decomposed by
exposure to air and light.

=Ether, Methy'lic.= _Syn._ OXIDE OF METHYL, WOOD-ETHER, METHYL-ETHYL. See
METHYL.

=Ether, Muriatic (Heavy).= _Syn._ AETHER MURIATICUS PONDEROSUS, L. _Prep._
Alcohol, of 80 to 85%, is saturated, in the cold, with chlorine gas, water
is next added, and the oily fluid that separates collected and washed with
water, as long as any of it is dissolved.

_Prop., &c._ Heavy muriatic ether is a volatile, oily, colourless liquid,
boiling at about 245 deg. Fahr., and heavier than water. Its precise
constitution is undetermined. This ether enters into the composition of
the SPIRITUS MURIATICO-ETHEREUS, a remedy occasionally used on the
Continent.

=Ethyl, Nitrate of.= C_{2}H_{5}NO_{3}. _Syn._ NITRIC ETHER, NITRATE OF
OXIDE OF ETHYL; AETHER NITRICUS, L.

_Prep._ Nitric acid (sp. gr. about 1.375), 50 parts; nitrate of urea, a
little (say 2 or 3 parts); dissolve, add alcohol, 50 parts, and distil
with the usual precautions, until 7-8ths of the whole (of the liquid
portion) have passed over; agitate the distillate with a little water to
separate the ether, and preserve the heavier portion.

_Prop., &c._ Nitric ether possesses an agreeable sweetish taste and odour;
it is insoluble in water; the alcoholic (but not the aqueous) solution of
potassa decomposes it rapidly; sp. gr. 1.112. Its vapour is very apt to
explode when strongly heated, and therefore a small quantity only should
be prepared at a time.

=Ethyl, Nitrite.= C_{2}H_{5}NO_{2}. _Syn._ NITRIC ETHER, HYPONITROUS
ETHER, NITRITE OF ETHER, NITRITE OF OXIDE OF ETHYL, HYPONITRITE OF E.;
AETHER NITROSUS, AE. HYPONITROSUS, L. This is a compound, of which 'sweet
spirit of nitre' is an impure alcoholic solution.

_Prep._ 1. Starch (potato farina), 1 part; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.30), 10
parts; mix in a capacious retort, connected with a wide tube, 2 or 3 feet
long, bent at right angles, and terminating near the bottom of a
two-necked bottle, containing a mixture of alcohol (of 85%), 2 parts, and
water, 1 part, and surrounded with a freezing mixture, pounded ice, or
very cold water; the other neck of the bottle being connected by a long
glass tube with a good refrigerator or condenser. All elevation of
temperature must be avoided. The heat of a water bath only must be
cautiously applied to the retort. The gas liberated passes into the
alcohol, causing the ether to distil in a gentle stream. The tube
connecting the retort and bottle must be cooled by means of rag or moist
paper, kept wetted with ice-cold water; as, if the temperature of the tube
and the alcohol rises only a little, the latter becomes spontaneously hot,
and boils violently, by which the product is vitiated. This process is
very productive and economical, and yields pure nitrous ether.

2. A mixture of oil of vitriol, 8 parts, and alcohol, 9 parts, is poured
upon crystallised nitrate of ammonia, 11 parts, contained in any suitable
distillatory vessel connected with a well-cooled receiver. Nitrous ether
gradually distils over on the application of a gentle heat. An admirable
process, but more expensive than the preceding. Even a common fire may be
employed without danger, as the liberation of the ether proceeds
gradually, and not almost instantaneously, as in operating in the usual
way. Sulphate of ammonia is left in the retort. The product is scarcely
inferior to that of the last formula.

3. Rectified spirit, 46 fl. oz.; pure nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.500), 7 fl.
oz.; put 15 fl. oz. of the spirit, with a little clean sand, into a quart
matrass, fitted with a cork, and a safety tube reaching to within an inch
of the spirit, and a second tube leading to a refrigeratory. Fill the
safety tube with pure nitric acid, then add through it, gradually and
cautiously, 3-1/2 fl. oz. of the acid. When the violent action that ensues
is nearly over, gradually add the remaining portion of the acid, 1/2 fl.
oz. at a time, and at intervals. Agitate the ether that distils over,
first with a little milk of lime, till it ceases to redden litmus paper,
and then with half its volume of concentrated solution of chloride of
calcium. The pure hyponitrous ether thus obtained should have a density of
.899.

4. (Mr John Williams.) Nitrite of ethyl is best made by passing nitrous
acid gas into alcohol.

The nitrous acid gas is prepared by acting upon such bodies as starch,
copper, mercury, or arsenious acid with nitric acid. The alcohol is
generally recommended in the text-books to be diluted with half its bulk
of water; this, however, I consider a decided mistake. The alcohol should
be as concentrated as possible, even absolute alcohol is preferable. The
main points to be attended to are that the current of nitrous acid gas
should be slow and steady, so as to give time for the reaction to proceed
properly, and that the vessel containing the alcohol should be kept as
cool as possible; in this way much of the production of bye-products will
be avoided, and the gas can be passed through the alcohol, as long as it
continues to be absorbed.

The resulting liquid is anything but pure; it contains much nitrite of
ethyl, some aldehyde, acid--it is even stated to contain malic acid. In
fact it is well known that the reaction between the nitrous acid, and such
products as alcohol, however pure, is not sharp, but is always accompanied
by secondary products.

From the crude alcoholic solution obtained by the method I have described,
the pure nitrite of ethyl can be obtained without difficulty. Nitrite of
ethyl is an extremely volatile liquid; it boils at about 61 deg. F., whereas
aldehyde boils at 90 deg. F., and alcohol at 180 deg. F. Taking advantage of this
fact, we are enabled to separate it from the crude liquid by distillation.
Some precautions are, however, necessary, to ensure the purity of the
product. The flask containing the crude product is placed in a water bath,
and connected by bent tubes with several other flasks and bottles. The
first tube should be passed into a small empty flask, this will condense
most of the alcohol which may pass over during the operation. Then a
second bent tube passes into a second flask containing a little water;
this condenses any alcohol which may not have been stopped in the first
flask, together with free acid, and nearly all the aldehyde.

From this wash bottle a third tube proceeds into a somewhat shallow flask,
containing a strong solution of caustic potash; the gas, however, is not
allowed to pass through this alkaline liquid, but simply over the surface.
In this way the last portion of the aldehyde is absorbed, and the potash
solution gradually assumes an amber colour. From this vessel, the gas (for
such at the ordinary temperature of the laboratory, the nitrite of ethyl
is--in very cold weather it would be necessary to gently warm the
different flasks) is passed through a tube charged with anhydrous chloride
of calcium to absorb moisture, and the pure and dry nitrite of ethyl thus
produced, finally passes into alcohol, which readily absorbs it.

It is only necessary to note the weight of the alcohol used for absorbing
the gas, and its weight at the end of the operation, to know the strength
or per-centage of nitrite of ethyl which must be in solution. Thus, if 9
oz. of alcohol becomes 10 oz., it is evident we have a solution of 10 per
cent.; if it becomes 12 oz., then the strength must be 25 per cent., and
so on. Ordinary spirits will answer for condensing the nitrite of ethyl,
but it is better to use absolute alcohol, as it is very desirable to avoid
the presence of water in any form. The solutions made with weaker spirit
soon turn acid; those made with absolute alcohol, on the other hand, keep
a long time. It is very true the very strong solutions of 50 and 25 per
cent. show traces of acidity when tested with moistened litmus paper, but
the 10 per cent. solution is quite neutral.[283]

[Footnote 283: The object of Mr Williams' paper, which is published in the
'Pharmaceutical Journal' for Dec. 8th, 1877, is to give instructions for
the preparation of a pure nitrite of ethyl, which when mixed with alcohol
in definite proportions, shall supersede the variable compound sold under
the name of "Sweet Spirits of Nitre."]

One point I have not mentioned; it is that the distillation must be
conducted at the very lowest possible temperature; in fact, the water in
the water-bath should only be kept gently warm, and the process should be
continued only so long as the conducting tubes feel cool to the touch;
when they become warm the distillation should be discontinued. By passing
the gas into a tube in a freezing mixture, instead of into alcohol, the
pure nitrite of ethyl is readily obtained in a liquid form; it is,
however, necessary to seal the tube, otherwise the very volatile liquid
would soon be lost.

_Prop., &c._ Pure nitrous ether has a pale-yellow colour, an agreeable
odour of apples, and boils at 62 deg. Fahr.; sp. gr. .947 at 60 deg. Fahr.
Commercial nitrous ether contains aldehyde, boils at 70 deg. Fahr., has a more
or less suffocating odour combined with that of the pure ether, has a sp.
gr. of .886 at 40 deg. Fahr., and turns brown when mixed with alcoholic
solution of potassa, while the latter remains unaltered. It also acidifies
by age, whilst pure nitrous ether remains neutral. They are both very
inflammable, and burn with a white flame. Ordinary nitrous ether dissolves
in about 48 parts of water, and mixes in all proportions with alcohol and
sulphuric ether.

Nitrous ether is refrigerant, diaphoretic, and diuretic, but is seldom
employed alone, though, when largely diluted with alcohol (sweet spirits
of nitric, spirit of nitric ether), it is a common remedy in several
diseases. It is also used to flavour malt spirit, in imitation of brandy
(British brandy), although for this purpose it is vastly inferior to
acetic ether. See SPIRITS (Medicinal).

=Ethyl, [OE]nanthate of.= _Syn._ [OE]NANTHIC ETHER, PELARGONIC ETHER,
[OE]NANTHATE OF OXIDE OF ETHYL. _Prep._ 1. The oil obtained towards the
end of the distillation of fermented liquors, especially wines, consists,
in a great measure, of the crude ether. It is purified by agitation with a
weak solution of carbonate of potassa, freed from water by a few fragments
of chloride of calcium, and then re-distilled.

_Prop., &c._ [OE]nanthic ether is colourless; lighter than water; boils at
about 500 deg. Fahr.; and has a powerful, intoxicating vinous odour,
resembling that of an empty wine cask or bottle that has been exposed to
the air for some time. It is very sparingly soluble in water, but freely
soluble in alcohol. Its sp. gr. is .862. As obtained by distillation, it
is united with a little [OE]NANTHIC ACID. 2200 imperial gallons of wine
(about 35 hogsheads) only yielded 2-1/5 lbs. of the mixed oil.

=Ethyl, Oxalate of.= (C_{2}H_{5})_{2}C_{2}O_{4}. _Syn._ OXALIC ETHER,
OXALATE OF OXIDE OF ETHYL; AETHER OXALICUS, L. _Prep._ Alcohol and dry
oxalic acid, equal parts, are digested together in a glass flask furnished
with a very long glass tube of small bore, so that the spirit, volatilised
by the heat, may be condensed, and flow back into the flask. After 6 or 8
hours the process is generally complete, and the liquid contains merely a
trace of free acid, from which it may be separated.

_Prop., &c._ A colourless, oily liquid, slightly heavier than water,
boiling at 363 deg. Fahr., only slightly soluble in water, and having an
aromatic smell. Alkalies decompose it. Sp. gr. 1.09.

=Ethyl, Sulphate of.= (C_{2}H_{5})_{2}SO_{4}.

_Prep._ The vapour of pure anhydrous sulphuric acid is passed (with the
usual precautions) into perfectly anhydrous ether; the resulting syrupy
liquid is agitated with a mixture of 4 volumes of water, and 1 volume of
ether, and after repose the upper stratum, which is an ethereal solution
of the sulphate of ethyl, is decanted, and the oxide of ethyl volatilised
by a very gentle heat. The colourless liquid forming the residuum is the
true sulphuric ether or sulphate of ethyl just referred to. It is a very
unstable compound, and cannot be distilled without suffering
decomposition.

=Ethyl, Valerianate of.= C_{2}H_{5}C_{5}H_{9}O_{2}. _Syn._ VALERIANIC
ETHER, VALERATE OF OXIDE OF ETHYL; AETHER VALERIANICUS, L. _Prep._ By
passing dry hydrochloric acid gas into an alcoholic solution of valeric
acid. It is a fragrant, volatile liquid, lighter than water, having a high
boiling-point, and a rich fruity odour, said to closely resemble that of
butyric ether or pine-apple oil. It is used to flavour liqueurs, &c.

=ETHYL'AMINE.= NH_{2}(C_{2}H_{5}). _Syn._ ETHYL-AMMONIA. One of the bases
of the ethyl-series, obtained by substituting one atom of hydrogen in
ammonia NH_{3} by ethyl C_{2}H_{5}.

=EUCALYP'TIN.= A peculiar substance existing in Botany Bay kino. A
substance exuded by several species of the _Eucalyptus_. It has been
employed medicinally in diarrh[oe]a.

=EUCALYPTOL.= See EUCALYPTUS.

=EUCALYPTUS.= The _Eucalypti_, of which there are many species, belong to
the natural order _Myrtaceae_, and are natives of Australia, where they are
known under the names of "gum-trees," or as "stringy-bark trees." The most
interesting and important characteristic of these plants is the power they
undoubtedly possess of correcting, if not of removing, the pestilential
exhalations which are regarded as the origin of the fevers that occur in
marshy localities. This discovery is due to M. Ramel, and was made by him
in 1856.

M. Gimbert, amongst other cases, cites one of a farm, twenty miles from
Algiers, the atmosphere surrounding which was of a very pestilential
character. In the spring of 1867 13,000 eucalyptus trees were planted on
the farm, and M. Gimbert states that since then not a single case of fever
has taken place, the freedom from disease occurring the same year the
plants were placed in the ground, and the good effects commencing whilst
the trees were only two or three metres in height.

The following is extracted from 'Les Mondes' (1876):--"Between Nice and
Monaco there is a locality so unhealthy that the Paris, Lyons, and
Mediterranean Railway Company have been obliged to change every two or
three months the watchman at a crossing there.

"Plantations of the eucalyptus have been formed there, and at present the
same watchman has resided there for several months with his family without
experiencing the least inconvenience."

Again:--"In the Campagna, about three miles from Rome, there stand some
deserted church buildings and a monastery, the latter having been
abandoned because of the mortality amongst the monks caused by the noxious
exhalations. Some six years since a company of French trappists, having
obtained permission from the Italian Government, planted the grounds in
and around the monastery with eucalyptus trees, and the result is stated
to have been so total an immunity of the building from fever, although
situated in the worst part of the Campagna, that the monastery is now
tenanted, the health of the occupants being, it is said, unimpaired."

The writer in the 'Pharmaceutical Journal,' who contributes this
statement, adds:--"Whether this grand result has been obtained through the
efficacy of the extract of the eucalyptus taken each morning with their
cup of black coffee, or whether it is to be attributed to the effects of
the plantations, I leave to scientific men to determine."[284]

[Footnote 284: Bentley.]

It seems very probable that the effects above described are due to the
eucalyptus having such extensive and far-spreading roots, which suck up
and appropriate the moisture of the surrounding soil, the presence of
which, aided by heat, giving rise to vegetable decomposition, is believed
to be the cause of malarial poisoning.

The avidity of the plant for water is very great; it has been computed
that one tree will absorb ten times its weight of moisture from the
soil.[285] It is most likely owing, at any rate in very large measure, to
this cause, rather than to the supposed antiseptic and disinfecting odours
exhaled by its leaves, that the salubrious effects of the eucalyptus are
due. The blue gum tree, or _Eucalyptus globulus_ (so distinguished because
of the rounded form of the lid which covers its unexpanded flower bud),
has been successfully introduced into Asia, Africa, and Southern Europe.
If, as asserted, it can only exist in a climate where the temperature is
never lower than the freezing point, its domestication (save in
hot-houses) is impossible in our own country.

[Footnote 285: 'Pharm. Journal,' February 5th, 1876.]

[Illustration: EUCALYPTUS GLOBULUS (from the 'Archiv der Pharm.,' 1873, p.
129.)]

The _Eucalyptus globulus_ is a very rapidly-growing tree, and attains to
great proportions. "In some cases it has been known to attain the colossal
dimensions of 350 feet in height and a 100 in circumference."[286]

[Footnote 286: Bentley.]

This magnitude is entirely out of proportion to the size of the seed,
which is very minute; so minute that it has been computed one pound weight
of the seed could produce 162,000 trees. Various preparations of the
leaves and bark of the eucalypti have been introduced into medicine,
which will be found under the respective pharmaceutical preparations. They
were asserted to be specially serviceable in intermittent fevers and
bronchitis. The idea that their efficacy in the former class of disease
was due to the presence in the barks of the eucalypti of an alkaloid
similar to, if not the same as, quinine, has been shown to be an erroneous
one, from the experiments of the Government chemist of Ootacamund (Mr
Broughton), who, after a most careful chemical analysis, failed to
discover either quinine, quinidine, cinchonine, cinchonidine, or the least
trace of any one of the cinchona alkaloids.

When the leaves of the _Eucalyptus globulus_ are held to the light they
reveal the presence of little semi-transparent dots, which are found to be
receptacles for a volatile oil, that may be obtained in large quantity by
submitting the plant to aqueous distillation.

This volatile oil has been examined by Cloez, who found it to consist
chiefly of a substance allied in chemical characters to camphor, which
substance he named _eucalyptol_.[287] Any therapeutic power possessed by
the eucalyptus may be referred to this substance, since, as just stated,
it cannot be due to a bark alkaloid.

[Footnote 287: Messrs Faust and Homeyer state that Cloez's "Eucalyptol" is
a mixture of terpen and cymol.]

Before finishing our notice of the reputed curative effects of the
eucalyptus we may mention that Dr Gimbert employs the leaves instead of
lint for dressing wounds and fetid ulcers, and says he has found them,
when thus used, excellent deodorisers; that another method of employing
the leaves of the eucalyptus consists in having them made into cigarettes,
which are reported to be useful in asthma and bronchial complaints.
Lastly, let us state that another species of eucalyptus exudes a very
astringent substance, which, from its appearance and properties, being so
analogous to kino, has been denominated _Botany Bay kino_. (See
EUCALYPTIN.)

The essential oil of eucalyptus, which, according to the species of the
plant from which it is obtained, varies in colour from light yellow to
light blue, is now largely employed as a diluent for the more delicate
volatile oils used in perfumery.

Many species of the eucalyptus yield excellent timber, possessed of great
hardness and durability, and little affected by moisture. This timber has
the power of resisting the attacks of insects. The wood of the eucalyptus
is also very rich in potash. The maple and the elm, which are regarded as
yielding a large per-centage of this substance, afford only about half as
much as can be obtained from the eucalyptus, this latter tree yielding 21
per cent. of potash.

The barks of different species have also been advantageously utilised for
paper making, as well as for tanning.

In this country eucalyptus seeds are reared in a greenhouse. They may be
sown in a mixture of loam, peat, and ordinary soil, with a sprinkling of
sand on the surface.

The following directions for the cultivation of the eucalyptus in England
were communicated to the 'Medical Times and Gazette' of 1873 by Mr Bennett
Stanford, of Pyt House, Tisbury:--"I have successfully reared from seed
two dozen of these trees, and they are now growing well out of doors. I
obtained the seed five years ago from South Australia, and forced it in a
hothouse; in one year it was four feet high, and now, in its fifth year,
it is growing rapidly in a sheltered position in the park, having attained
a height of thirty feet. The first three years the tree must be taken
under cover in the winter, and the fourth and fifth years should be
protected for several feet up with wisps of hay or straw. When the trees
are kept indoors in winter it should be in an orangery or very high
greenhouse, with plenty of light and a little water."

=EUCHLO''RINE.= A bright-yellow gas, prepared by gently heating chlorate
of potassa with hydrochloric acid. It is probably a mixture of chlorous
acid and free chlorine. Prof. Stone, of Manchester, has found Euchlorine
of a great service as an aerial disinfectant.

=EUGLENAE.= These are ciliated infusorial animalcules inhabiting ponds and
water-tanks. Sometimes they abound in water in quantities so enormous as
to impart to that fluid a blood-red appearance. The principal species are
the _Euglena viridis_ and the _Euglena pyrum_. Their presence is supposed
to indicate the existence in the water in which they are found, of
decaying animal and vegetable matter upon which they are believed to feed.

=EUPHOR'BIUM.= _Syn._ GUM EUPHORBIUM; EUPHORBIUM (Ph. E.), L. The concrete
resinous juice of the _Euphorbia canariensis_, and other species of the
same genus. It is a powerful acrid, purgative, rubefacient, sternutatory,
and vesicant, and the violence of its action has led to its disuse.

=EU'PIONE.= An ethereal liquid forming the chief portion of the light oil
of wood-tar, and which also exists in the tar obtained during the
destructive distillation of animal substances, and in the fluid product of
the distillation of rape oil. It is separated from these substances by
agitating them with oil of vitriol, or a mixture of oil of vitriol and
nitre, and subsequent cautious distillation. Pure eupione is tasteless,
exceedingly thin, limpid, and aromatic; boils at 116 deg. Fahr.; and is the
lightest fluid known; sp. gr. .655. It is very inflammable, burns with a
very bright flame, and gives a transient greasy stain to paper. It is
isomeric with hydride of amyl. Other volatile hydrocarbons of like origin
are often confounded with eupione by chemical writers.

=EUPYR'ION.= Any contrivance for obtaining instantaneous light; as a
lucifer match, &c.

=EVAC'UANTS.= _Syn._ EVACUANTIA, L. Medicines which augment the secretions
or excretions. CATHARTICS, DIAPHORETICS, DIURETICS, EMETICS, ERRHINES,
EXPECTORANTS, and SIALOGOGUES, belong to this class.

=EVAPORA'TION.= The conversion of a fluid into vapour by means of heat,
diminished atmospheric pressure, or exposure to a dry atmosphere.
Evaporation is had recourse to--1. For the vapour as a source of heat or
power, as in the case of steam-boilers, &c.;--2. To separate volatile
fluids from impurities or other bodies, which are either fixed or less
volatile;--3. To recover solid bodies from their solutions, as in the
preparation of extracts, chemical salts, &c.;--4. To concentrate or
strengthen a solution by the expulsion of some of the fluid matter that
forms the menstruum;--5. To purify liquids by the dissipation of the
volatile matters which may contaminate them.

It is found that, under ordinary circumstances, evaporation is confined to
the surface of the heated liquid, and is therefore slower or quicker, in
proportion to the extension of that surface. Hence has arisen the adoption
of wide, shallow vessels for containing fluids during their exposure to
heat for this purpose. Evaporation proceeds most rapidly when a current of
air (especially hot and dry air) is made to pass over the surface of the
fluid; as, in this ease, the vapour is prevented from resting upon the
surface, and impeding the process by its pressure. For a similar reason,
liquids evaporate more rapidly in vessels partially covered than in open
ones. In the former case the cool incumbent air condenses and throws back
a portion of the vapour, which thereupon, besides its cooling action,
offers mechanical resistance to the diffusion of the vaporous particles as
they arrive at the surface of the liquid. In the latter case these
obstacles are avoided, and the impetus of the vapour pouring forth from a
contracted orifice (or pipe), not only readily overcomes the pressure of
the atmosphere, but offers less surface for its cooling action, until it
has passed much beyond the points at which it can exert any influence on
the fluid from which it has escaped. In this way the chemical action of
the atmosphere on the liquid operated on is also considerably lessened. On
the small scale, shallow capsules of glass, wedgwood-ware, porcelain, or
metal, are commonly employed as evaporating vessels, and these are exposed
to heat by placing them over a lamp, or naked fire, or in a water bath, or
sand bath, according to the temperature at which it is proper to conduct
the process. On the large scale, high-pressure steam is usually employed
as the source of heat. The term 'spontaneous evaporation' is applied to
the dissipation of a fluid by mere exposure in open vessels, at the common
temperature of the atmosphere, and without the application of artificial
heat. The celerity of this species of evaporation wholly depends on the
degree of humidity of the surrounding air, and differs from the former, in
which the rate of evaporation is proportionate to the degree of heat at
which the process is conducted, and the amount of pressure upon the
surface of the liquid. Evaporation '_in vacuo_' (as it is called) is
conducted under the receiver of an air-pump, or in an attenuated
atmosphere, produced by filling a vessel with steam, by which means the
air is expelled, when all communication with the external atmosphere is
cut off, and the vapour condensed by the application of cold. Fluids are
also evaporated in air-tight receivers over sulphuric acid, by which they
are continually exposed to the action of a very dry atmosphere. When such
a receiver is connected with an air-pump in action, evaporation proceeds
with increased rapidity, and intense cold is produced. It appears, from
the experiments of Dr Ure, that "if the bottom of a pan, and the portion
of the sides immersed in a hot fluid medium (solution of chloride of
calcium, for example), be corrugated, so as to contain a double expanse of
metallic surface, that pan will evaporate exactly double the quantity of
water, in a given time, which a like pan, with smooth bottom and sides,
will do, immersed equally deep in the same bath. If the corrugation
contain three times the quantity of metallic surface, the evaporation will
be threefold in the above circumstances. But if the pan, with the same
corrugated bottom and sides, be set over a fire, or in an oblong flue, so
that the current of flame may sweep along the corrugations, it will
evaporate no more water from its interior than a smooth pan of like shape
and dimensions placed alongside it in the same flue, or over the same
fire."

In the laboratory, steam heat is now almost exclusively employed. Copper,
or tinned, glazed, or silvered coppered pans, boilers, and stills, are
surrounded by a 'jacket' of cast iron, and high-pressure steam admitted
between the two. By due management of the supply-cock, a range of
temperature may be thus obtained extending from about 90 deg. to 325 deg. Fahr.

It is found that, under ordinary circumstances, 10 square feet of heated
surface will evaporate fully 1 lb. of water per minute; and that a thin
copper tube exposing 10 feet surface will condense about 3 lbs. of steam
per minute, with a difference of temperature of about 90 deg. Fahr. This is
equal to 30 deg. Fahr. per lb.; and, consequently, the heat of the steam
employed to produce the evaporation should be 212 deg. + 30 deg. = 242 deg. Fahr.

An attention to the facts and principles thus briefly explained above will
be found of great value in the laboratory.

=EXCIP'IENT.= See PRESCRIPTION.

=EXCI'TANTS.= See STIMULANTS.

=EXCORIA'TIONS.= _Syn._ _Sprays_, CHAFINGS.

In _surgery_ and _pathology_, superficial injuries or affections of the
skin, consisting of the removal of the scarf-skin or cuticle, accompanied
with more or less irritation and slight inflammations. When arising from
rough friction or attrition, they are more commonly called abrasions.
Young children are very apt to be chafed under the arms, behind the ears,
between the thighs, and in the wrinkles and folds of the skin generally,
unless great attention is paid to cleanliness, and wiping the skin
perfectly dry after washing them. Whenever there is a tendency to
excoriations of this kind, either in adults or children, a little finely
powdered starch, or violet powder, applied by means of a puff, or a small
bag of muslin, once or twice a day, will generally remove them, and
prevent their occurrence in future. Mild unguents, as cold cream, or
spermaceti cerate or ointment, may also be used with advantage. The
preference should, however, be given to the remedies first named, from
their not soiling the linen. See ABRASION.

=EXCRETA.= The excrementitious matter evacuated from the bowels varies of
course in composition and quantity according to the food from which it is
derived.

Berzelius found a sample analysed by himself to yield about seventy-five
per cent. of water, the remainder being made up of alimentary waste, and
biliary matter. A large amount of phosphates of calcium and magnesium was
found in the ash remaining after the incineration of the solid matter. A
specimen of faecal matter examined by Playfair yielded 15 per cent. of
nitrogen and 45 per cent. of carbon. Marcet states that he has obtained
from excrement a crystallisable body possessing an alkaline reaction; to
which he gives the name _excretin_; also a fatty substance, which
he terms _excretolic acid_. To excretin he assigns the formula
C_{7}_{8}H_{1}_{5}_{6}SO_{2}; the composition of the acid has not been
determined.

Hinterberger has succeeded in getting excretine (excretin), free from
sulphur, and gives as its simplest formula C_{2}_{0}H_{3}_{6}O; which
shows a close resemblance to cholesterin, C_{2}_{6}H_{4}_{4}O.

But cholesterin is less easily dissolved in vinegar than excretin, and the
solution deposits crystals which, when viewed by the microscope, are found
to be beautiful silky six-sided prisms, while the excretin solution yields
round masses.

Treated with bromine, excretin gave a crystalline body having the formula
C_{2}_{0}H_{3}_{4}Br_{2}O; but the author did not succeed in preparing a
chlorinated compound of excretin.

In the excreta of carnivorous animals no excretin has been discovered,
although a substance resembling it has been found. Cholesterin has been
obtained from the faeces of the crocodile, but no urates; whilst the
excreta of the boa contain urates, but are destitute of cholesterin.

The faeces of animals that live on vegetables contain neither excretin,
butyric acid, nor cholesterin.

The excreta of birds and serpents, which mixed with the secretion from the
kidneys, are discharged from the animals by the cavities, are very similar
to urine, and consist chiefly of alkaline urates and earthy phosphates.

The excrements of insects consist mainly of the remnants of the tissues,
animal or vegetable which they have swallowed as food, mixed with
constituents of the urine, provided the insect has no special urinary
organs.

Brieger examined the faeces of healthy persons, and of convalescents, and
found in addition to acetic, butyric, and isobutyric acids, small
quantities of phenol and indol, and a new crystallisable body, which he
terms _skatol_ (_skatos_, faeces). It crystallises in irregular-dentate
shining plates, resembling indol, which by frequent recrystallisation from
hot water, can be obtained snow white. Skatol forms the chief constituent
of the volatile aromatic components of human faeces. Faeces of dogs (whether
fed on meat or bread diet) contained no skatol, but indol, and in addition
a yellow oil, with a revolting and peculiarly irritating smell.

Brieger has not yet been able to analyse this yellow oil, although it
forms the chief volatile constituent of dogs' faeces. He has repeatedly
obtained it from distillation from human pathological fluids. In the
pancreas after putrefaction, and in the faeces of typhus patients, no
skatol was found. The author considers skatol identical with the substance
which Secretan obtained by the decomposition of egg albumen under water
for six months.

Skatol injected under the skin of rabbits, passes out in the urine as a
substance yielding colouring matter. Skatol is believed by the author to
be the substance in human urine which, according to Jaffe, yields a red or
violet colour on the addition of hydrochloric acid and chloride of lime.

Phenol, the author finds, is a constant component of human faeces. The
above results show that specific products of decomposition are normal
components of intestinal digestion.[288]

[Footnote 288: 'Deut. Chem. Ges. Berg.,' x, 1027-1031.]

Liebig calculated that the daily average amount of faecal matter passed by
a man is 5-1/2 oz; Lawes says that it averages in healthy male adults, 4.2
oz; Parkes estimates it (in Europe) at 4 oz. on the average; Letheby at
2.784, and Frankland at 3 oz. In India, a native on the average excretes
as much as 12 oz., this increase over the above quantities being due to
the large proportion of rice and farinaceous food of which the Hindoos'
diet consists.

The daily average amount of urine excreted by a human being has been given
by Lawes at 46 oz.; Parkes places it at 50 oz. by measure for each male
adult; Letheby at 31.851, and Frankland at nearly 40 oz. by measure.
According to Parkes' figures a population of a thousand persons, would
thus void daily 156 lbs. of solids, and 260 gallons of urine; or 25 tons
of faeces, and 91,250 gallons of urine per annum; whilst according to
Letheby, from the same number of people, the daily discharge would be 2266
lbs. avoirdupois of urine and 177.5 lbs. of faeces.

Messrs Lawes and Gilbert estimate the manurial value of the urine and
faeces together at 6s. 8d. per annum for every individual, which
corresponds to a yearly produce of about 10 lbs. of ammonia; but Messrs
Hoffman, Witt, and Thudichum assess it at 8s. 6d. for a mixed population
of both sexes and of all ages, which they say represents about 13 lbs. of
ammonia.

Faecal matter decomposes much more rapidly when mixed with urine than it
would otherwise do, ammonia and fetid gases being given off in
considerable quantities. Should much water be also present, and the
temperature moderately high, light carburetted hydrogen, carbonic
anhydride, nitrogen, and sulphuretted hydrogen are likewise evolved.

Unless human excreta be effectually as well as speedily removed from the
dwellings, streets, &c., of a community, that community will assuredly pay
the penalty of their neglect in the shape of health seriously endangered
and deteriorated. If this be so with healthy evacuations, the peril
becomes considerably intensified when the excreta are discharged by
patients labouring under contagious or many other diseases. See URINE,
SEWAGE.

=EX'ERCISE= is essential to the healthy performance of the functions of
both body and mind. Without it, the stomach acts feebly, the bowels become
inactive, and the circulation of the blood languid and imperfect; the
chest contracts, the respiration becomes impeded, the brain is
insufficiently supplied with pure arterial blood, the mind grows
lethargic, the complexion assumes a sickly and effeminate hue, and the
features generally lack the energy and expression which they possess in
perfect health. With exercise, the bodily functions are performed with
vigour and regularity, the constitution is thereby strengthened, and the
attacks of disease repelled. By exercise the mind too is excited to
healthy action, its gloomy reveries are dispelled, and the fair face of
creation is presented to the mind's eye in its proper hues. It robs undue
mental exertion of half its injurious effects upon the body, whilst it
stimulates and directs it in its proper course. It improves the temper,
and humanises the character. The disposition is refined, the passions
restrained, violent emotions checked, the habits improved, and the
personal charms promoted under the stimulus of judicious exercise.

To females, bodily exercise is even more necessary than to males. The
disposition and education of females are such as tend to produce habits of
sloth and indolence to a greater degree than in the other sex. Hence to
them exercise is doubly important--it is inseparable from health. The more
retiring dispositions of females lead them almost unconsciously into
habits of inactivity, which, above all, they should endeavour to shake off
and avoid. By so doing--by replacing habits of indolence and inactivity by
liveliness and moderate exercise, the development of the body will be
promoted, additional grace and elegance imparted to its natural movements,
and the enjoyments arising from both mental and bodily health increased,
whilst disease and deformity will be prevented by the removal of their
cause.

The necessity of exercise exists equally in every grade of society and age
of life. Those who are engaged in sedentary employments or in-door
occupations, should particularly seek refreshing out-door exercise during
the periods of relaxation from their diurnal duties. To the studious and
delicate of both sexes, this is absolutely necessary to preserve the
health and vigour of the body.

In infancy, exercise of a suitable kind should be almost the constant
occupation of the little beings that claim our protection and care. It
should, however, be always borne in mind, that the muscular exercise of
very young children must be of the gentlest class. Prejudice and ignorance
frequently induce nurses and parents to teach their children to walk, as
they falsely call it, and thus their feeble limbs are urged to make
premature efforts to totter along, before the bones and muscles have
acquired sufficient strength to support the body in an erect position.
From this course the legs and joints frequently become bent and
misshapened, and severe injuries are often inflicted on the head and body
by blows and falls. It should never be forgotten, that crawling and
rolling are their first modes of progression, and require the least
exertion. Next comes the sitting posture; from this the child gradually
advances to the erect one; then to walk by slight assistance; and, lastly,
to walk safely alone. All this should come naturally, and never be
promoted, further than by laying the infant on the carpet or floor, for
the full exercise of its little strength. As soon as a healthy child is
able to walk instead of crawl, its own disposition induces it to do so.
The faculty of imitation, the spirit of enterprise, and the pride of doing
what others do, present even in infancy, is rather apt to lead the infant
to over-exertion than the contrary. The practice of constantly 'dolling'
children in the arms is most prejudicial to the early development of their
feeble powers.

It is injudicious to take an infant out during the hottest part of the day
in summer; such a proceeding tends to enervate and depress, rather than to
strengthen him. Whenever he goes out his head should be protected from the
direct rays of the sun by means of a large brimmed hat made of cotton or
straw and an umbrella. The neglect of these precautions frequently gives
rise to the disordered stomach, sickness, and diarrh[oe]a, so prevalent
during very hot weather. During other periods of the day, the weather
being favorable and the locality healthy, an infant cannot be too much out
of doors, especially during teething.

Infants of three or four months' old may, under certain precautions, be
sent out into the open air during the winter. They must be well wrapped
up; they should be carried in the nurse's arms, and not consigned to a
perambulator; they should never go out in foggy nor wet weather; if the
wind be neither in the east nor the north-east there will be no objection
to their being sent out on a clear frosty day. Spring is a trying period
for infants and children, because of the prevalence of east winds; hence
the necessity of seeing that they are well and warmly clad when sent out
during this season. There is much less danger of a child taking cold
during the autumn than the spring, as in autumn the winds frequently blow
from the south, or warm quarter.

In childhood the exercise should be regulated according to constitution
and age; avoiding inactivity, on the one hand, and excessive exercise on
the other. The out-door plays and pastimes of BOYS will generally be found
sufficient, and in some cases will even require to be curbed, to prevent
fatigue and the overtasking of the young frame. With girls it is
frequently difficult to find sufficient exercise without trespassing on
the prejudices of the ignorant, or the routine of their daily education.
With them walking, and some healthy amusement, as skipping, hooping, or
the like, should be indulged in for some hours daily. When this is
impossible or inconvenient, they may be habituated to the practice of the
more simply and cleanly portion of the domestic duties. In the performance
of the latter, the health will be promoted, whilst the care and attention
which is always due by a female to herself and others, at all periods of
her life, will become an easy acquisition, and assist the cultivation of
the best feelings of her nature.

In youth exercise matures and promotes the development of the frame; and
in manhood it is equally necessary, as already noticed, to keep it in
healthy action. In age it will be found to assist the vital functions, and
put off decay. In fact, to all--young, old, rich, and poor, physical
exercise is essential to the permanent enjoyment of health.

In a medical point of view, "exercise, employed moderately, has a tonic
and stimulating influence on the system, and is calculated to prove
beneficial in a great variety of complaints. Used immoderately, it
exhausts both the mental and bodily powers, and produces great debility."
(Pereira.) Well-directed exercise favours the preservation of the general
health, by calling into direct action the majority of the organs of the
body; and it also acts powerfully on the skin, by stimulating its
functions, increasing its temperature, awakening its tone, and subjecting
it to a current of atmosphere favorable to its respiratory offices. But to
be beneficial in the highest degree, exercise must be accompanied by
feelings of present interest and enjoyment. The mind must direct and go
with it; to ensure its full benefits, the "soul must be present."

"During convalescence, properly regulated exertion is highly serviceable;
but it should never be carried so far as to produce exhaustion, and should
be pursued for some time in doors, before it be attempted in the open air;
the latter, at first, should always take place in a carriage, that can be
opened or closed at will; the patient may then attempt short walks in the
open air; but, in all cases, it is of importance that he is not unduly
fatigued, as, otherwise, injury instead of benefit will be the result. One
of the most serious errors, committed with regard to exertion, is that of
permitting a convalescent to sit up too frequently, or for too long a
time, under the mistaken notion of giving him strength. A patient should
never be allowed to sit up longer than is agreeable to his feelings, and
never so long as to produce a sense of fatigue." (Dr R. E. Griffith.)

The physiological effects of exercise have been studied by numerous
scientific observers. The carefully conducted experiments of Dr Edward
Smith have satisfactorily demonstrated that during bodily exertion the
circulation of the blood through the lungs is much increased in velocity,
that these latter inspire air and eliminate carbonic anhydride in
quantities proportionate to the exercise taken, and that these quantities
show an enormous increase over the amounts of these gases inhaled and
exhaled during a state of rest.

Adopting the recumbent position as unity, Dr Edward Smith has given the
following table, illustrating the quantities of air inhaled during various
forms of exercise:

  Lying position                 1.
  Sitting                        1.18
  Standing                       1.33
  Singing                        1.26
  Walking 1 mile per hour        1.90
  Walking 2 miles per hour       2.76
  Walking 3 miles per hour       3.22
  Walking and carrying 34 lbs.   3.50
  Walking and carrying 62 lbs.   3.84
  Walking and carrying 118 lbs.  4.75
  Walking at 4 miles per hour    5.
  Walking at 6 miles per hour    7.
  Riding and trotting            4.05
  Swimming                       4.33
  Treadmill                      5.50

Since a man takes into his lungs 480 cubic inches of air per minute, in
walking four miles an hour he draws in 2400 cubic inches, and if six miles
3260 cubic inches a minute.[289]

[Footnote 289: Parkes.]

Dr Smith estimated the amount of carbonic anhydride evolved under
differing conditions, and found that--

                                Carbonic acid exhaled
                                per minute in grains.
  During sleep                             4.99
  Lying down, and almost
    asleep (average of three
    observations)                          5.91
  Walking at the rate of 2
    miles an hour                         18.10
  Walking at the rate of 3
    miles an hour                         25.83
  Working at the treadmill,
    ascending at the rate of
    26.65 feet per minute (average
    of three observations)                44.97

The relative amounts of carbonic anhydride eliminated from the lungs
during periods of rest and exercise have also been investigated by
Pettenkofer and Voit. The following table, which gives the results of
their experiments, also records the quantities of oxygen absorbed, and of
water and urea excreted at the same time:--


                   |          | Elimination in Grammes of--  |
                   |Absorption|------------------------------|
                   |of Oxygen |        |        |            |
                   |   in     |Carbonic| Water. | Urea.      |
                   |Grammes.  | Acid.  |        |            |
                   |-----------------------------------------|
  Rest-day.        |   708.9  |  911.5 |  828.0 | 37.2       |
  Work-day.        |   954.5  | 1284.2 | 2042.1 | 37.0       |
                   |          |        |        |            |
  Excess on        | }        |        |        |            |
    work-day       | }        |        |        |            |
    (with exception| } 246.6  |  372.7 | 1214.1 |  0.2       |
    of urea)       | }        |        |        |            |


If the quantities in the above table be converted into ounces it will be
found that nearly 8-3/4 oz. more oxygen were absorbed and 13 oz. more of
carbonic anhydride eliminated by the lungs during a work-day than during a
rest-day.[290] It must be stated that during the work-day an interval of
rest was taken, and that the labour was by no means excessive.

[Footnote 290: Parkes.]

Hirn and Speck appear to have conclusively proved that the formation of
the carbonic anhydride occurs in the muscles, and that it is rapidly
carried off from them. In short, this latter result seems essential for
the development of muscular energy. At any rate it is found that if the
respiratory movements be in any way interfered with during exercise, and
the elimination of carbonic anhydride in any degree checked, the muscular
power rapidly diminishes.

An examination of Pettenkofer and Voit's table shows that exercise gives
rise to the escape of a large amount of water from the body, and to a
slightly diminished quantity of urea.

Since the accumulation of the superfluous carbon supplied by the food
gives rise to morbid and diseased states of the body,[291] we shall now be
enabled to understand why deficient exercise should be a source of
physical ill-being, and why, on the contrary, the proper use of the
muscles should be so essential a condition for the maintenance of health,
since it is in them that the great formation of the eliminated carbon is
effected. We shall also not fail to see why, since during exercise the
excretion of water is so largely increased, the blood necessarily becomes
less diluted and richer in quantity.

[Footnote 291: "Deficient exercise is one of the causes which produce
those nutritional alterations in the lung which we class as
tuberculosis."--PARKES.]

Whilst insufficiency of exercise gives rise to a weak action of the heart,
and very frequently to fatty degeneration of that organ, exercise that is
not excessive, although it increases the beats of the heart from ten to
thirty beyond this acceleration, and imparting greater force to the
pulsations, does not interfere with their regularity. Furthermore,
muscular exercise, by considerably augmenting the flow of the blood
through the whole body, the heart included, exercises a most beneficial
function, "since it causes in all organs a more rapid outflow of plasma
and absorption--in other words, a quicker renewal. In this way also it
removes the products of their action, which accumulate in organs, and
restores the power of action to various parts of the body."[292]

[Footnote 292: Parkes.]

Palpitation, enlargement, and valvular disease of the heart result from
excessive or injudicious exercise. Wherever, therefore, fatigue or
embarrassment of the heart shows itself rest must be had recourse to.
Persons having weak hearts suffer greatly in ascending mountain or other
heights.

The effect of exercise upon the kidneys is to diminish the quantity of
water, as well as the chloride of sodium and other chlorides in the urine.
As we have seen, the urea is very slightly lower; but after much exertion
the uric acid is increased. There is also a slight increase in the amounts
of sulphates and carbonic anhydride. Parkes could find no alteration in
the phosphates. The diminution of water and the chlorides is due to the
excretion of these by the skin, the function of which is greatly augmented
by exercise. No urea escapes by the skin, but many acids (probably fatty
ones) are liberated by that organ. Speck has shown that during exercise
the amount of fluid is nearly double what it is when the body is
quiescent.

This escape of fluid by perspiration doubtless affords an explanation of a
diminution in the quantity of the excreta from the bowels. The faeces
exhibit no decrease in nitrogen.

Exercise increases the growth of the muscles, making them at the same time
harder, and also causing them to obey more readily the behests of the
will. Prolonged or excessive exertion, without sufficient rest, has been
found to interfere with their nutrition, and to cause them to become soft.

There is a tolerably general impression that much exercise tends to
cripple the development of the mental faculties, and this idea is said to
have received support from the circumstance that the athletes at our
universities seldom signalise themselves in contests of learning. But this
fact, it has been suggested, may be explained by the athletic exercise
being indulged in to such an extent as to leave no time for cultivating
the mind. If an illustration were required to prove that great bodily
energy is quite consonant with mental vigour it might be found in the life
of the late Professor Wilson, of Edinburgh. On this point Dr Parkes says:
"Considering that perfect nutrition is not possible except with bodily
activity, we should infer that sufficient exercise would be necessary for
the perfect performance of mental work."

As regards the changes that take place in the muscles during exercise Dr
Parkes writes: "The chief changes that take place in the muscles during
action appear to be these: there is a considerable increase of temperature
(Helmholtz), which, up to a certain point, is proportioned to the amount
of work; it is also proportioned to the kind, being less when the muscle
is allowed to shorten than if prevented from shortening (Heidenhain); the
neutral or alkaline reaction of the tranquil muscle becomes acid from
para-lactic acid and acid potassium phosphate; the venous blood passing
from the muscles becomes much darker in colour, is much less rich in
oxygen, and contains much more carbonic acid (Sczelkow); the extractive
matters soluble in water lessen, those soluble in alcohol increase
(Helmholtz, in frogs); the amount of water increases (in tetanus, J.
Ranke), and the blood is consequently poorer in water; the amount of
albumen in tetanus is less, according to Ranke, but Kuehne has pointed out
that the numbers do not justify the inference."

Liebig stated that the creatin is increased (but this was an inference
from old observations on the extractum carnis of hunted animals, and
requires confirmation). Sarokin has stated the same fact in respect to the
frog. The electro-motor currents show a decided diminution during
contraction.

That great molecular changes go on in the contracting muscles is certain,
but their exact nature is not clear; according to Ludimar Hermann there is
a jelly-like separation and coagulation of the myosin, and then a
resumption of its prior form, so that there is a continual splitting of
the muscular structure into a myosin coagulum, carbonic acid, and a free
acid, and this constitutes the main molecular movement. But no direct
evidence has been given of this.

The increased heat, the great amount of carbonic acid, and the
disappearance of oxygen, combined with the respiratory phenomena already
noted, all seem to show that an active oxidation goes on; and it is very
probable that this is the source of the muscular action. The oxidation may
be conceived to take place in two ways--either during rest oxygen is
absorbed and stored up in the muscles, and gradually acts there, producing
a substance which, when the muscle contracts, splits up into lactic acid,
carbonic acid, &c.; or, on the other hand, during the contraction an
increased absorption of oxygen goes on in the blood, and acts on the
muscles, or on the substances in the blood circulating through the
muscles. The first view is strengthened by some of Pettenkofer and Voit's
experiments, which show that during rest a certain amount of storage of
oxygen goes on, which no doubt in part occurs in the muscles themselves.

Indeed, it has been inferred that it is this stored-up oxygen, and not
that breathed in at the time, which is used in muscular action. The
increased oxidation gives us a reason why the nitrogenous food must be
increased during periods of great exertion.

An increase in the supply of oxygen is a necessity for increased muscular
action; but Pettenkofer and Voit's observations have shown that the
absorption of oxygen is dependent on the amount and action of the
nitrogenous structures of the body, so that, as a matter of course, if
more oxygen is required for increased muscular work, more nitrogenous food
is necessary. But, apart from this, although experiments on the amount of
nitrogenous elimination show no very great change on the whole, there is
no doubt that, with constant regular exercise, a muscle enlarges, becomes
thicker, heavier, contains more solid matter, and, in fact, has gained in
nitrogen. This process may be slow, but it is certain; and the nitrogen
must either be supplied by increased food, or be taken from other parts.

So that, although we do not know the exact changes going on in the
muscles, it is regarded as certain that regular exercise produces in them
an addition of nitrogenous tissue.

Whether this addition occurs, as usually believed, in the period of rest
succeeding action, when in some unexplained way the destruction which it
is presumed has taken place is not only repaired, but is exceeded (a
process difficult to understand), or whether the addition of nitrogen is
actually made during the action of the muscle, must be left undecided for
the present.

The substances which are thus oxidised in the muscle or in the blood
circulating through it, and from which the energy manifested as heat or
muscular movement is believed to be derived, may probably be of different
kinds. Under ordinary circumstances the experiments of Fick and
Wislicenus and others, and the arguments of Traube, seem sufficient to
show that the non-nitrogenous substances, and perhaps especially the fats,
furnish the chief substances acted upon. But it is probable that the
nitrogenous substances also furnish a contingent of force. The exact mode
in which the energy thus liberated by oxidation is made to assume the form
of mechanical motion is quite obscure.

There seems little doubt that the exhaustion of muscles is chiefly owing
to two causes--first and principally to the accumulation in them of the
products of their own action (especially para-lactic acid); and secondly,
from the exhaustion of the supply of oxygen. Hence rest is necessary, in
order that the blood may neutralise and carry away the products of action,
so that the muscle may recover its neutrality and its normal electrical
currents, and may again acquire oxygen in sufficient quantity for the next
contraction.

In the case of all muscles these intervals of action and of exhaustion
take place, in part even of the period which is called exercise; but the
rest is not sufficient entirely to restore it. In the case of the heart
the rest between the contractions (about two thirds of the time) is
sufficient to allow the muscle to perfectly recover itself.

The foregoing remarks on the effects of muscular exercise will have
prepared us for the inference which statistics abundantly support, viz.
that, other conditions being favorable, the healthiest occupation is that
which consists in the practice (of course within reasonable limits) of
manual labour in the open air.

The Rev. Professor Haughton, in his work entitled 'A New Theory of Manual
Labour,' has drawn up a table (which we append) of the amount of force
expended during various kinds of work. It represents the number of tons
lifted one foot per diem:--


                            Labouring Force of Man.
  ----------------------------------+-------------------------+-----------
            Kind of Work.           |     Amount of Work.     | Authority.
  ----------------------------------+-------------------------+-----------
  Pile-driving                      | 312 tons lifted 1 foot. | Coulomb.
  Pile-driving                      | 352      "      "       | Lamaude.
  Turning a winch                   | 374      "      "       | Coulomb.
  Porters carrying goods,           | 325      "      "       |    "
    and returning unladen           |                         |
  Pedlars always loaded             | 303      "      "       |    "
  Porters carrying wood up a stair, | 381      "      "       |    "
    and returning unloaded          |                         |
  Paviours at work                  | 352      "      "       | Haughton.
  Military prisoners                | 310      "      "       |    "
    at shot drill (3 hours),        |                         |
    and oakum-picking and drill     |                         |
  Shot drill alone (3 hours)        | 160.7    "      "       |    "
  ----------------------------------+-------------------------+-----------

Professor Haughton has devised a formula by means of which a certain
amount of walking exercise may be made to represent its equivalent in
manual labour. He points out that walking on a level surface is equivalent
to raising one twentieth part of the weight of the body through the
distance walked.

When ascending any height, the whole weight of the body is, of course,
raised through the ascent. The formula is--

  (W + W_{l}) x D

     20 x 2240

where W is the weight of the person; W_{l} the weight carried (if any); D
the distance walked in feet; 20 the co-efficient of traction; and 2240 the
number of pounds in a ton. The result is the number of tons raised one
foot. To get the distance in feet 5280 must be multiplied by the number of
miles walked.

Supposing a man to weigh 150 lbs. with his clothes, by the employment of
the above formula we should arrive at the following results:--

  +----------------------+------------+
  |                      |Work done in|
  |  Kind of Exercise.   |tons lifted |
  |                      |  1 foot.   |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 1 mile      |   17.67    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 2 miles     |   35.34    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 10 miles    |   176.7    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 20 miles    |   353.4    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 1 mile      |            |
  |  and carrying 60 lbs.|   24.75    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 2 miles     |            |
  |  and carrying 60 lbs.|    49.5    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 10 miles    |            |
  |  and carrying 60 lbs.|   247.5    |
  +----------------------+------------+
  |  Walking 20 miles    |            |
  |  and carrying 60 lbs.|    495     |
  +----------------------+------------+

From the above data something like a rough approximation may be formed of
the daily amount of exercise requisite for a healthy male adult.

Since 500 tons lifted a foot is extremely hard work, the number of miles
corresponding to this extreme amount of labour would, if persevered in, be
objectionable.

Dr Parkes, regarding 300 tons lifted a foot as an average day's work for a
healthy man, thinks that walking exercise equivalent to half that amount
should be taken daily. This, or a 150 tons, represents a nine miles'
walk. He, however, qualifies the suggestion by adding "that, as there is
much exertion taken in the ordinary business of life, this amount may be
in many cases reduced;" and concludes by saying, "It is not possible to
lay down rules to meet all cases, but probably every man with the above
facts before him could fix the amount necessary for himself with tolerable
accuracy."

For muscular exercise to be safe and efficient, it must be taken under
certain conditions and precautions. We have noticed the evil effects of
immoderate bodily exertion on the heart. The lungs are no less seriously
affected by an excessive indulgence in it, which shows itself in spitting
of blood and in congestion of the pulmonary vessels. Congestion of the
lungs brought on by overtaxed bodily strength very frequently causes the
death of horses in the hunting field.

These facts, therefore, not only point to the importance of avoiding undue
or extreme exertion,[293] but also to the necessity of ensuring the full
and uncramped play of the respiratory organs during exercise, and the
consequent removal of any impediment in the way of tight clothing that in
any manner interferes with their freedom of exercise. Laboured respiration
and sighing are indications of pulmonary congestion, and counsel temporary
rest and abstention from exercise.

[Footnote 293: "There must be proper intervals of rest, or the store of
oxygen, and of the material in the muscles which is to be metamorphosed
during contraction, cannot take place."

                                                           --PARKES.]

The great augmentation in the excretion of carbon which leaves the lungs
in the form of carbonic anhydride during exercise has been already
referred to. As this carbon is derived from the food, it follows that in
the intervals of exercise an increase of carbonaceous diet is necessary.
For this purpose physiologists prefer the fatty to the amylaceous
varieties of diet. It has been already stated why at the same time the
nitrogenous food must be increased during periods of great exertion. There
seems little doubt that water is the best drink that can be taken during
moderate as well as great exercise.... It is best taken in small
quantities and frequently. Spirits are decidedly prejudicial, and
indispose to bodily exertion. They are hurtful because they lessen the
exhalation of carbonic anhydride from the lungs. Trainers never allow
them, and but very little wine or beer.

The thirst that not unfrequently accompanies exercise is due to the great
escape of water from the skin which has been already alluded to. This
liberation of moisture, being also accompanied, as already explained, by a
large excretion of the chlorides and, perhaps, by other salts. Dr Parkes
advises the use of an additional supply of chloride of sodium to the diet
of those taking much exercise; he suggests that probably potassium
chloride and phosphate might be added with advantage.

The evaporation from the skin has the effect of reducing the bodily
temperature and rendering it equable. This temperature, however, falls
very rapidly after exertion is over; and hence at this time it is always
advisable to guard against the chance of a chill by covering the body
over. Flannel forms the best protection. Keeping the skin clean by daily
ablution greatly aids in the escape of fluid during exercise.

The large amount of carbonic anhydride given off by the lungs during
bodily exercise explains the advantages of open air exercise, and why
walking in the fresh air produces such excellent effects in some forms of
dyspepsia. This increased exhalation of carbonic anhydride also points to
the importance of thorough ventilation when indoor exercise is taken,
particularly by large bodies of men or women, as in riding schools and on
the treadmill. The mortality amongst miners, whose labour is performed in
confined and ill-ventilated spaces is very great. According to Mr Simon,
with the exception of those who work in the well-ventilated mines of
Durham and Northumberland, the 300,000 miners in England break down
prematurely from bronchitis and pneumonia, caused by the atmosphere in
which they are compelled to work.

=EXPAN'SION.= All substances, solid, liquid, and gaseous, when chemical
change does not take place, expand by heat, and contract by cold. In some
of them this property occurs in a greater degree than in others, but is
constant for the same substance under the same circumstances. The chemist
avails himself of this property in the construction of his thermometer;
the wheelwright, in fixing on the tire of his wheels; the engineer, in
restoring to the perpendicular the leaning walls of buildings, &c.

This expansion by heat is of great importance in the manufactures, as
allowance has to be made of it in every purpose where metals are employed.

The following is a list of the expansion of the chief metals, &c., when
heated from 32 deg. to 212 deg. Fahr., or from 0 deg. to 100 deg. Cent.:--

  _Substance._ _Expansion._
               In bulk.   In length.
  Glass        1 in 384   1 in 1150
  Platinum     1 in 377   1 in 1311
  Steel        1 in 309   1 in  926
  Iron         1 in 282   1 in  846
  Gold         1 in 227   1 in  682
  Copper       1 in 194   1 in  582
  Brass        1 in 179   1 in  536
  Silver       1 in 175   1 in  524
  Tin          1 in 172   1 in  516
  Lead         1 in 117   1 in  351
  Zinc         1 in 113   1 in  340

Of the liquids, they expand as follows, when heated from 0 deg. to 100 deg.
Cent., or from 32 deg. to 212 deg. Fahr.:--

  Mercury         1 in 55 in bulk.
  Water           1 in 21 in bulk.

Gases practically all expand alike; that is to say, for every degree
Fahrenheit a gas expands 1/491 of its bulk at 32 deg., and for every degree
Centigrade 1/273 of their volume at 0 deg.C.

An example will show the importance of this. Suppose an iron bar,
connecting two sides of a building, and of a length of about 85 feet. The
increase in length by heat of this bar would make it 1 inch longer in
summer than in winter; and it would, if no allowance be made, pull or
thrust the walls to this extent each year.

=EXPEC'TORANTS.= _Syn._ EXPECTORANTIA, L. Medicines that promote the
secretion of the trachial and bronchial mucus. According to Dr Good, true
expectorants are "those medicines which rather promote the separation of
the viscid phlegm with which the bronchiae are loaded, than simply
inviscate and dilute it; though these are also treated as expectorants by
many writers." Ammoniacum, antimonials, assaf[oe]tida, the balsams of Peru
and tolu, benzoic acid, benzoin; the fumes of vinegar, tar, and several of
the volatile oils; garlic, ipecacuanha, the oleo-resins, squills,
tartarised antimony, and the smoke of tobacco and stramonium, are among
the principal substances commonly called expectorants. Tartarised
antimony, squills, chlorine, and ammoniacal gases, have also been used
(diluted) to provoke the coughing and favour the expulsion of foreign
bodies from the air-passages; and also to favour the expectoration of
mucus, pus, and membranous concretions, when the local irritation is not
sufficiently great. (Schwilgue.) Expectorants are commonly employed in
pulmonary complaints and affections of the air tubes, attended by a
vitiated state of the mucus, or an imperfect performance of the natural
functions of the secretory vessels. "Of all classes of the materia medica,
none are more uncertain in their action than expectorants." (Pereira.) The
act of ejecting matter from the chest is called EXPECTORATION.

=EXPER'IMENTS= are acts or operations intended to develop some unknown
fact, principle, or effect; or to establish or demonstrate it, when
discovered. Similar operations, performed merely for amusement, are also
often, though incorrectly, called by this name. In rational experiments
these two objects are combined. To experimental research is due the
present high state of advancement and usefulness of the various sciences
most intimately connected with our happiness and well-being. The danger of
taking things for granted has been thus pleasantly and instructively
pointed out by Archbishop Whately:--"It was objected to the system of
Copernicus, when first brought forward, that if the earth turned on its
axis, as he represented, a stone dropped from the summit of a tower would
not fall at the foot of it, but at a great distance to the west; in the
same manner as a stone dropped from the masthead of a ship in full sail
does not fall at the foot of the mast, but towards the stern. To this it
was answered, that a stone, being a part of the earth, obeys the same
laws, and moves with it; whereas it is no part of the ship, of which,
consequently, its motion is independent. The solution was admitted by
some, but opposed by others; and the controversy went on with spirit; nor
was it till one hundred years after the death of Copernicus that, the
experiment being tried, it was ascertained that the stone, thus dropped
from the head of the mast, _does_ fall at the foot of it."

=EXPORTATION.= (EXPORTATION ON DRAWBACK.) By law, a certain allowance, or
drawback of duty, is payable on certain articles, when exported from any
part of the United Kingdom, either as merchandise or ship stores. Thus:--

SUGAR, refined in the United Kingdom, from 4_s._ to 6_s._ per cwt.,
according to quality.

TOBACCO, manufactured in the United Kingdom, 3_s._ 3_d._ per lb. The full
drawback is only allowed on normal tobacco, which contains 13 per cent. of
moisture. If the moisture exceeds 13 per cent., a proportionate reduction
is made in the drawback; if it is found less than 13 per cent., a
proportionate increase is granted.

SNUFF is entitled to drawback at 3_s._ 3_d._ per lb., subject, however, to
an increase if the moisture is less than 13 per cent., and the inorganic
matter not over 18 per cent., and to a decrease if the moisture in organic
matter exceeds these per-centages.

BEER. The amount of this drawback is proportional to the quantity of malt
or sugar used in the brewing of the beer, and is nearly equivalent to the
duty originally paid on such malt or sugar. It is computed according to
the following scale:--For every barrel, or 36 gallons of beer, the
original gravity of which was not less than 1040 deg., a drawback of 4_s._
3_d._, and for every additional 5 degrees, from 1040 deg. to 1125 deg. inclusive,
a further sum of 6_d._ per barrel.

SOLIDIFIED WORTS, made by a licensed brewer, from malt or sugar, or malt
and sugar, a drawback of 2_s._ 10-5/100_d._ per 28 lbs.

MALT. Under certain restrictions, a drawback of the duty charged, after
deducting 7-1/2 per cent. of the measured quantity.

SPIRITS, from 10_s._ to 10_s._ 3_d._ per proof gallon.

In all cases samples are taken by the Custom House officer, and forwarded
to the Inland Revenue laboratory, where they are examined previous to the
payment of the drawback.

=EXPRES'SION.= In the _useful arts_, the mechanical operation by which a
fluid contained in the pores or cells of a solid is pressed out or
expelled. Many of the fluid substances employed in pharmacy and chemistry
are obtained by expression. Thus, the unctuous vegetable oils, as those
of almonds, linseed, &c., are procured by submitting these substances to
powerful pressure between iron plates, which are either made warm, or the
bruised seeds are previously exposed in bags to the steam of boiling
water. The juices of fresh vegetables are also obtained by expression. The
substances are first bruised in a marble mortar, or, on the large scale,
in a mill, and immediately submitted to the press, to prevent them passing
into a state of fermentation, which would injure the quality of the
product. Fruits which contain highly flavoured or fragrant seeds, or which
have rinds containing essential oil, are generally deprived of them before
being sent to the press. The subacid fruits are also allowed to lay
together for some days before pressing them, as the quantity and quality
of the product is thereby increased. The fluid matter absorbed by the
ingredients employed in the preparation of tinctures, infusions,
decoctions, extracts, &c., is generally obtained by powerful pressure.
Expression is also frequently had recourse to for the purpose of obtaining
solids in a state of purity, as in the expulsion of olein from stearin,
water from bicarbonate of soda, &c. On the small scale, the common
screw-press, or one of like construction, is usually employed; but the
power thus obtained is insufficient to expel the whole of a fluid diffused
through the pores of a solid. Hence has arisen the use of the hydraulic
press, which is now almost alone employed on the large scale. In all these
cases the substances are placed in bags made of haircloth, or coarse
canvas, previously to their being submitted to pressure. For tinctures and
like pharmaceuticals, a small screw-press (TINCTURE PRESS) made of
'galvanised' or tinned iron, and varying in capacity from 1 quart to
several gallons, is employed.

=EXSICCA'TION.= See DESICCATION.

=EX'TRACT.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM, L. Among _chemists_ this term is understood
to apply to the residuum of the evaporation of aqueous decoctions or
infusions of vegetable matter. In _medicine_ and _pharmacy_, it has a less
definite signification, being applied to various preparations obtained by
evaporating the expressed juices, or the decoctions, infusions, or
tinctures of vegetable substances, until a mass, of a solid or semi-solid
consistence is formed. Extracts vary in their nature and composition with
the substances from which they are prepared, and the fluids employed as
solvents. When water is employed as the menstruum, the products (AQUEOUS
EXTRACTS, WATERY E.; EXTRACTA AQUOSA, E. SIMPLICIORA, L.) usually consist
of gum, starch, sugar, albumen, extractive and saline and other matter,
along with the peculiar principles on which the medicinal virtue of the
vegetable depends. When spirit is employed as the solvent, the products
(ALCOHOLIC EXTRACTS; EXTRACTA ALCOHOLICA, L.) contain most of the
substances above enumerated, except the gum and starch, together with
several other substances which are soluble in spirit, but which are either
wholly or nearly insoluble in water; as resins, essential oils, and the
proximate principles of vegetables. These preparations, with scarcely an
exception, are considerably more powerful than the aqueous extracts of the
same vegetables. In some cases proof spirit or under-proof spirit is
employed, when the extracts (SPIRITUOUS EXTRACTS; EXTRACTA SPIRITUOSA, L.)
generally possess properties between those of the above. In other cases,
dilute acetic acid or acidulated water is employed as the menstruum, when
the products (ACETIC EXTRACTS; EXTRACTA ACETICA, L.) possess much greater
activity than when prepared with water; and would in many cases prove
fatal, if exhibited in doses as large as those of the aqueous extracts.
Still more active extracts are obtained by a combination of the last two
menstrua. According to Ferrari, plants treated with rectified spirit of
wine, mixed with 1/36th part of acetic acid, yields extracts of remarkable
activity. On the Continent ether is sometimes used as the menstruum for
the active principles of certain substances, as cantharides, cubebs,
worm-seed, &c. (ETHEREAL EXTRACTS; EXTRACTA ETHEREA, L.) The term 'simple
extract' is applied to an extract prepared from a single plant or
vegetable substance, and the term 'compound extract' to one prepared from
two or more of such substances. The FLUID EXTRACTS (EXTRACTA FLUIDA, L.)
of modern pharmacy are those which are only evaporated to the consistence
of a thin syrup, and then mixed with 1-10th to 1-8th of their volume of
rectified spirit.

_Prep._ The preparation of medicinal extracts may be conveniently
considered under two divisions, viz.--1. The production of a solution of
the soluble portion of the substances operated on; and, 2. The reduction
of this solution by evaporation to the consistence of an extract.

1. PREPARATION OF SOLUTIONS:--The preliminary operations in the
manufacture of extracts are similar to those employed in the preparation
of DECOCTIONS, INFUSIONS, and TINCTURES. The proper quantity of the
ingredients being taken, the whole is well bruised or reduced to coarse
powder, or otherwise divided by slicing with a knife, that every portion
may be fully exposed to the solvent action of the fluid. In some few cases
(as with gentian, &c.) the 'slicing,' or reduction to fragments, is often
conveniently deferred until the action of the menstruum shall have so far
softened the ingredients as to render them of easy division by the knife.
Those substances (as sarsaparilla, chamomiles, &c.) whose medicinal
principles reside in the cortical portion, of which are of easy
solubility, are commonly subjected to the action of the menstruum without
being subjected to any particular preparation.

In the preparation of AQUEOUS EXTRACTS, the ingredients are treated with
water until all the soluble matter that it is desirable to obtain is
dissolved out. There are several methods of effecting this object,
depending upon the nature of the substances acted on. In some cases
maceration in cold water is resorted to; in others percolation with that
fluid in a 'displacement apparatus.' More generally, however, boiling
water is poured on the substance, and is digested on it for some time, as
in the preparation of infusions; or the substance is exhausted by boiling
in water, as in the preparation of decoctions. After the ebullition or
infusion has continued a sufficient time, the heat is removed, and the
liquid portion drawn off. The ingredients are then pressed to extract the
remaining liquid; or they are washed or 'sparged' with hot water, which
expels it by displacement. According to the usual practice in the majority
of cases, a second quantity of water is poured on after the first has been
thoroughly drained off, and the effusion or decoction is repeated a second
and even a third time, or until the ingredients are perfectly exhausted of
their soluble portion. The liquor or liquors thus obtained being allowed
to repose for 15 or 20 minutes, for the purpose of depositing the sand or
other gritty and heavy matter that is mechanically mixed with them, are
carefully decanted from the sediment, and, after being run through a fine
hair-sieve, or flannel bag, are ready for concentration. In some
instances, however, this method proves insufficient to render the liquid
clear. In such cases, the solution may generally be rendered transparent
by clarification with a little white of egg, removing the scum as it
rises, straining the liquid through flannel, as before; or the liquid may
be filtered through a bag made of fine 'Welsh flannel,' or of 'tweeled
cotton cloth' (Canton flannel), both of which should be soaked in clean
water for at least an hour before use. In the small way, filters of linen
or paper are sometimes employed; but as all media sufficiently fine to
render vegetable solutions transparent soon choke up, this filtration is
objectionable, from the length of time it occupies. In some houses the
aqueous infusion or decoction is allowed to repose for 24 hours, and then
decanted and evaporated; but such a plan is objectionable, as, however
smooth and glossy extracts so prepared may appear, their medicinal virtues
are lessened by the lengthened exposure to the atmosphere.

When about one half of an aqueous solution has evaporated, it is often
advantageous to repass it through a flannel or horsehair strainer, to
remove the flocculi that generally form by the action of the heat and air.
This is especially necessary with vegetable solutions prepared without
boiling, and should be adopted whenever a smooth and slightly extract is
desired.

II. REDUCTION OF SOLUTIONS:--The reduction of the solution to the proper
consistence is effected by evaporation. The mode in which this is
performed varies for different extracts. The London College directs that,
"unless otherwise ordered, the evaporation should be conducted as quickly
as possible, in a broad, shallow pan, placed in a water bath, until a
proper consistence is acquired for forming pills; stirring assiduously
with a spatula towards the end of the operation." The Dublin College
orders that "all simple (aqueous) extracts (EXTRACTA SIMPLICIORA), unless
otherwise ordered, are to be prepared by boiling the vegetable matter in 8
times its weight of water, till the liquid is reduced to one half; the
liquor is then to be expressed, and, after a short time allowed for
defecation, to be decanted, filtered, and evaporated in a steam or water
bath, until it begins to thicken, and then finally inspissated by a
reduced heat, with continual stirring, until a consistence for forming
pills be attained." The instructions of the Edinburgh College are similar,
with the one important exception, however, of ordering the evaporation to
be conducted in a water bath saturated with chloride of sodium.

Though the water bath has the sanction of the London College, it is ill
adapted for the purpose to which it is here ordered to be applied, as from
its low evaporative power the advantages which are derived from its
equable temperature are vastly overbalanced by the lengthened exposure of
the solution in a heated state to the action of the atmosphere. It has
been shown that a vegetable extract so prepared is inferior in quality to
a similar one formed by rapid evaporation in a shallow pan over a naked
fire, or placed in a sand bath, provided proper care is taken, and
assiduous stirring is adopted during the whole time of the exposure to
heat. In practice, however, the use of a naked fire is perfectly
inadmissible, as the least neglect on the part of the operator would
probably lead to the incineration of the whole. These objections are
obviated by the addition of the 1/5th part of salt to the water of the
bath, which raises its boiling-point to 218-3/4 deg. Fahr., when the
temperature of the contained extract is fully 212 deg.; the remaining 6 deg. being
lost by the interposition of the substance of the evaporating vessel.

ON THE LARGE SCALE, the evaporation of infusions or decoctions for
extracts is usually conducted in very wide, shallow, copper or
tinned-copper pans, having steam-tight jackets of cast iron, and heated by
steam 'playing' between the two.

The rapid deterioration which vegetable juices and solutions undergo by
exposure to the air, especially at high temperatures, has led to the
introduction of apparatus, by which they may be concentrated without
contact with the atmosphere, and at a less degree of heat than is required
for that purpose in open vessels. Such is the method, commonly called
'Barry's process,' in which the air is removed from certain air-tight
refrigerators by the introduction of steam, which is then condensed by the
application of cold, by which means a partial vacuum is obtained. Another
process for attenuating the atmosphere over the surface of fluids during
evaporation is by the action of an air-pump. This plan was introduced by
Howard, and is commonly applied to the concentration of syrups in the
sugar refineries. Extracts obtained by either of these methods are said to
be prepared 'in vacuo,' and are found in practice to be immensely superior
to the common extracts of the shops, and consequently require to be
exhibited in proportionably small doses.

'The American Journal of Pharmacy' for September, 1877, contains a new
process for the preparation of extracts without heat, by Professor
Herrara. We extract the following from the Professor's paper:--

"The results of my observations have satisfied me that, when the water
partially congeals, the dissolved principles remain in solution in the
mother liquors, and that two or three congelations are generally
sufficient for obtaining the solutions concentrated enough to finish the
extract by exposure upon plates to the heat of the sun, or of a drying
closet, heated to about 30 deg. cent. (86 deg. Fahr.). The extracts prepared by
this method accurately represent the properties of the plants, and the
principles which are changed by the influence of heat remain unaltered;
even the volatile constituents are not dissipated, though most of the
water be removed by freezing. Owing to the small cost of the necessary
apparatus, it appears to me that my process for preparing extracts should
be preferable even in those countries where ice is less readily obtainable
than combustibles.

"Extract of conium prepared with unpurified juice by the process
mentioned, has preserved the characteristic odour of conia, and by
dissolving it in water. I have obtained a solution exactly representing
the juice of the plant in appearance and properties, and giving when
heated an abundant coagulation, proving that even albumen had remained
unaltered. 1750 grams of cow's milk at 9 deg. R., left, after three
congelations, 750 grams of a liquid having a density of 148, and by
evaporation in the sun this left a dry extract of milk, which again formed
that liquid on being dissolved in water. A number of other liquids
similarly treated, gave corresponding results, and it seems to me,
therefore, that medicinal extracts are best prepared by congelation. It
may be objected that the medical juices should be previously purified, but
it should be remembered that coagulated albumen always encloses a
considerable portion of the active principles, and that the heat necessary
to effect the coagulation and the evaporation by means of a water-bath is
sufficient to change many principles; also that the extracts thus prepared
are sometimes inert or less active. The careful experiments made by Orfila
and the clinical experience of others demonstrate that extracts prepared
with unpurified juice are stronger.

"The apparatus employed by me is the so-called sorbetiere;[294] for larger
quantities the apparatus of Gougaud is preferable. The frigoric mixture is
composed of ice and sodium chloride, or preferably of crystallised calcium
chloride. After a large portion of the solution has congealed, the mass is
enclosed in a cloth and subjected to pressure, the press-cake of ice is
broken and again pressed, to separate the mother liquor as completely as
possible, and the congelation is repeated two or three times, with the
precaution that it is not carried far enough to cause the precipitation of
the sparingly soluble principles. The mother liquor is then put into
shallow dishes and exposed to the heat of the sun or of a drying room, the
temperature of which does not exceed 30 deg. C. (86 deg. F.) until the extract has
attained the desired consistence."

[Footnote 294: An apparatus similar to that used for ice-cream.]

_Obs._ When water, acidulated with acetic acid, is employed in the
preparation of extracts, the vegetable substances are usually macerated in
it, in the cold, or the dilute acid is sprinkled over the bruised plant in
the fresh or recent state, and the whole is then submitted to strong
pressure, to expel the juice, which is strained and evaporated in the
usual way, but preferably in a well-tinned or plated-copper pan.

ALCOHOLIC and SPIRITUOUS EXTRACTS are prepared by evaporating a filtered
concentrated tincture of the ingredients in any suitable vessel, by which
the volatilized spirit may be saved. In general, rectified spirit is used
as the menstruum; but in some cases proof spirit is employed; and, in
others, the substances are first digested in proof spirit, and afterwards
in water, and the mixed tincture and infusion evaporated in the usual
manner.

ETHEREAL EXTRACTS are obtained in a similar manner to alcoholic ones; but
being merely prepared in small quantities at a time, the process may be
conveniently performed in glass vessels. When it is required to boil
either of the above fluids (alcoholic or ethereal), or any other volatile
liquid on the ingredients, a vessel fitted with a long tube, or a Liebig's
condenser reversed, as noticed under ether, may be used to prevent any
loss of the menstruum.

The INSPISSATED VEGETABLE JUICES (JUICES, E.; SUCCI, L.) of the British
Pharmacop[oe]ia are obtained by expressing the juices from the fresh
plants, and preserving them by the addition of spirit. "By thus preserving
the juice of the plant its properties are not impaired by the action of
the air during the time necessary to dry the leaf for tincture, nor by the
action of both air and heat during the time necessary to evaporate the
juice to the consistence of an extract."--Squire. The directions of the
Edinburgh College for preparing their inspissated juices (SUCCI SPISSATI,
L.) are--"Beat the fresh substance, and press it strongly through a canvas
bag, in order to obtain the juice; which, being put into a wide, shallow
vessel, and heated by means of boiling water saturated with sea-salt, is
to be reduced to the consistence of honey. The mass, when cold, is to be
put into glazed earthen vessels, and moistened with strong alcohol." By
operating in this way a considerable portion of the activity of narcotic
vegetables is lost. Some of their juices, as that of aconite, are impaired
in so short a time as scarcely to compensate for the trouble of preparing
them. This deterioration does not, however, take place in any remarkable
degree, if the expressed juice from the recent vegetable be evaporated by
exposing it in a thin stratum to a current of very dry air, as adopted by
Mr Squire. This may be managed by putting the juice into small, flat trays
or dishes, placed on shelves in a suitably arranged apparatus, alternated
with similar vessels of concentrated sulphuric acid; or by causing a
current of very dry air, at the common temperature of the atmosphere, to
pass over them. It has been shown that 10 gr. of extract, thus prepared,
were more than equal to 20 gr. prepared _in vacuo_; and to more than 60
gr., and in some cases, 90 gr., of those prepared by the common process of
boiling down the juice to an extract.

The concluding portion of the process of extract-making, technically
termed 'finishing-off,' requires the most scrupulous attention. As the
evaporation advances, the heat should be lessened, and as soon as the
extract acquires the consistence of thick treacle it should be removed
altogether, and the remainder of fluid matter evaporated by the heat
retained by the copper pan, the escape of vapour being promoted by
assiduous and laborious stirring with a suitably shaped wooden spatula.
This part of the process should be continued until a proper consistence is
attained and the extract is nearly cold. When high-pressure steam or a
chloride of calcium bath is employed, care must be taken to withdraw the
heat before stirring the semi-liquid mass; as, if an extract having a
temperature of about the boiling-point of water, or even a few degrees
below it, is agitated, it becomes full of bubbles, and appears rough and
puffy, and this appearance cannot be removed by subsequent stirring, or by
any method but redissolving it in water and re-evaporation. This is
especially the case with the extracts of sarsaparilla (simple and
compound), gentian, liquorice, and most others of a similar class. A good
laboratory man knows from experience the proper time for the removal of
the heat, but unpractised persons often fail in this particular. In such
cases should the heat retained by the evaporating pan, and by the extract,
prove insufficient to complete the process, a little more may be
cautiously applied. Without assiduous and laborious stirring in the way
described, a very smooth and glossy extract cannot be produced. To promote
this artificial appearance, some persons add 3% or 4% each of olive oil
and gum arabic, dissolved in water, with about 1% or 2% of spirit of wine.

The consistence of the ordinary extracts of the shops is the same as that
of electuaries and confections, and is described in the Ph. E. as equal to
that of "thick honey." The instructions of the Ph. L. and D., to evaporate
the mass "until it acquires a consistence proper for making pills," except
in 2 or 3 cases (as _Ext. Colocynth. Comp._, &c.), is not adopted, and,
indeed, would be found inconvenient in practice. Extracts evaporated to
such a consistence are commonly termed 'pilular extracts,' and when
evaporated so that they are quite dry, and brittle when cold, they are
called 'hard extracts' (EXTRACTA DURA, L.).

_Pres._ Extracts should be put into pots as soon as taken from the pan,
and, after being carefully and securely tied over with bladder, should be
'stored' in a dry situation. The London College orders "a small quantity
of rectified spirit to be sprinkled upon all the softer extracts, to
prevent them becoming mouldy." A better way is to employ a little spirit,
holding in solution a few drops of oil of cloves, or a still less quantity
of creasote. This should be added to them the last thing before removing
them from the evaporating pan, and when they are nearly cold. The same
object is effected by moistening the inside of the bladder (used to tie
them over) with a few drops of oil of cloves or creasote. Hard extracts
should be kept in bladders or gut skins, placed in stone pots, and well
covered over. With care, extracts prepared from recent vegetable
substances may be preserved twelve months, or from season to season; and
those from dry ingredients, or such as are less inclined to spoil, for
perhaps double that time; but beyond these periods their virtues cannot be
relied on, and they should consequently be discarded, if remaining unused
or unsold.

_Pur., &c._ The quality of an extract cannot be ascertained by mere
inspection, nor is it readily discovered by chemical tests. A knowledge of
these facts has induced the mercenary and fraudulent manufacturer to
employ damaged and inferior drugs in their preparation, alike regardless
of the welfare of the patient and the credit of the practitioner. A common
practice with some manufacturers is, not only to pick out the least
expensive variety of every drug for the preparation of their extracts, but
the most inferior and often damaged and worthless portion of this already
inferior article. The production of a smooth, bright, and glossy extract
is all that is usually attempted by these individuals, and all that is
sought after by the mass of purchasers, who mistake the simulation of the
mere external signs of good quality for its actual existence. It is a
fact, which we can verify from extensive experience in the laboratory,
and from years of practical observation on this point, that extracts
faithfully prepared from good materials do not possess the sightly and
pleasing appearance of those commonly vended by the wholesale druggists.
On comparing the extracts prepared by different metropolitan houses, we
have found that those which have exhibited a remarkably bright and glossy
appearance have been uniformly inferior, and sometimes nearly inert;
whilst others, with a less prepossessing appearance, have been generally
of good quality. These facts are well established by reference to the
extracts of those houses and institutions that are remarkable for the
superior quality of their preparations, and by comparing them with the
common extracts of the shops supplied by the wholesale trade.

A good extract should be--1. Free from grit, and wholly soluble in 20
parts of the menstruum employed in its preparation, forming a nearly clear
solution.--2. It should have a uniform texture and colour, and be of a
proper consistence.--3. If a narcotic or active extract, it may be
exhibited in proper doses, and its effects watched. Its activity may also
be tested on any small animal.--4. An assay for the proximate vegetable
principle (alkaloid, &c.) contained in the plant from which it has been
prepared may be made. The extracts prepared from the expressed juices of
plants, without straining off the coagulated albumen, are, of course,
exceptions to the first test. Unfortunately, these tests are not always
easily performed, and the last two are inapplicable to those extracts that
exercise no very marked physiological action, unless when taken in
repeated doses, long continued. This want of a ready means of accurately
testing the qualities of extracts has enabled the fraudulent manufacturer
to sell inferior articles with impunity, and often without the least fear
or danger of detection.

In general, an extract more than six months old contains only half the
activity of a similar one newly made. When more than twelve months old
they should be rejected as worthless, and the stock renewed.

_Uses, &c._ The extracts of the shops are generally acknowledged to be the
most varying, imperfect, and uncertain class of medicines belonging to
modern pharmacy. They are mostly used in the same cases as the plants from
which they are prepared, but in smaller doses.

_Concluding Remarks._ In the preparation of extracts the great desiderata
to be aimed at are--to suit the menstrua and the methods of manipulating
to the peculiar characteristics of the active constituents of the
vegetable substances operated on. The pharmaceutist should always bear in
mind that a perfect extract should be a concentrated, solid mass,
representing, as near as possible, in medicinal efficacy, the materials
from which it has been prepared, and capable of being redissolved, so as
to form a solution closely resembling that from which it has been derived.
An extract possessing equal strength to the whole mass of the ingredients
from which it has been prepared is almost next to an impossibility,
however desirable such a degree of perfection may be. The medicinal
properties of all solutions of vegetable matter are injured by being
reduced to the solid state; and this deterioration, more or less, takes
place, whether the solvent be water, acetic acid, proof spirit, or
alcohol. The volatile portions (the essential oils, the aroma, &c.) are
nearly or wholly dissipated; and though these do not always form the
principal or active ingredients of the vegetables from which extracts are
prepared, yet they generally exercise a modifying and controlling
influence over the other ingredients, which considerably alters their
therapeutical action. The loss of aroma may often be a trifling
deficiency, but in the extracts of aconite, henbane, hemlock, belladonna,
and other narcotic plants, this is not the case. In these cases it is well
known that the inert preparations are wholly deficient of the odour of the
recent plant, and that in proportion as the odour is developed, so is
their activity preserved. The powerful smell of the recently expressed
juice of hemlock, with the scarcely perceptible odour of the extract
(EXTRACTUM CONII, Ph. L.), offers an excellent example of this fact. The
dose of the one often reaches 20 or 30 gr., whilst that of the other
seldom exceeds 5 or 10 drops, or a portion equivalent in dry ingredients
to considerably less than 1/2 gr.

When extracts are ordered in prescriptions, those of the 'Pharmacop[oe]ia'
should be alone employed by the dispenser, as the substitution of others
for them would not only be violating faith with the prescriber, but might
also produce consequences alike injurious to the dispenser and the
patient. Many medical gentlemen prefer extracts prepared by particular
processes or persons, but such intention is always indicated in their
prescriptions.

=Extract of Ac'onite.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF WOLFSBANE, E. OF MONKSHOOD,
INSPISSATED JUICE OF ACONITE; EXTRACTUM ACONITI (B. P., Ph. L. E. & U.
S.), SUCCUS SPISSATUS ACONITI (Ph. D. 1826), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Take
112 lbs. of the fresh leaves and flowering tops, bruise them, press out
the juice, heat it gradually to 130 deg. F., and separate the green matter by
a calico filter. Heat the strained liquor to 200 deg. F. to coagulate albumen,
and again filter. Evaporate the filtrate by a water bath to the
consistence of a thin syrup; then add to it the green colouring matter
previously separated, and stirring the whole together assiduously,
evaporate at a temperature not exceeding 140 deg. F. to a pill
consistence.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 gr.

2. (Ph. L.) Take of fresh leaves of aconite, 1 lb.; bruise them in a stone
mortar, express the juice, and evaporate it, unstrained, to a proper
consistence. The formulae of the Ph. D. & U. S. are similar.

3. (Ph. E.) Beat the fresh leaves of aconite to a pulp, and express the
juice, then subject the residuum to percolation with rectified spirit
until the latter passes through without being materially coloured; unite
the expressed juice and the percolated tincture, filter, distil off the
spirit, and evaporate in a vapour or a water bath to a proper consistence.
Stronger than the preceding.

_Obs._ A variable and uncertain preparation. Numbness and tingling follow
its application to the limbs or tongue when it is of good
quality.--_Product._ 1 cwt. of fresh leaves yield between 5 lbs. and 6
lbs. of extract. _Prop._ Anodyne, sudorific, and narcotic; very
poisonous.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr. to 2 gr., made into a pill with liquorice
powder; once or twice a day, in neuralgic pains, chronic rheumatism,
glandular swellings, &c., gradually and cautiously increased to 5 or 6 gr.

4. (Alcoholic; E. A. ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ (P. Cod.) Aconite (in coarse
powder), 1 lb.; proof spirit, 3-1/2 lbs. (say 2-1/2 pints); proceed by the
method of displacement, and when all the spirit has penetrated the
powdered mass, keep this covered with distilled water, until the liquid
begins to cause a precipitate in falling into that which has previously
passed through; next distil the spirit from the tincture, and evaporate
the residuum to the proper consistence.

_b._ (Ph. U. S.) Aconite 1 lb.; spirit, sp. gr. .935 (= 13 u. p.), 1
quart, or q. s.; as last.

_c._ (Ph. Baden.) From the tincture prepared with rectified spirit, and by
either maceration or displacement. Stronger than the last two.

_d._ (Ph. Bor.) The juice is expressed from the fresh herb, which is then
sprinkled with about 1/3 of its weight of water, and again pressed; the
mixed and strained liquid is evaporated in a vapour bath, at 122 deg. to 140 deg.
Fahr., to about one half; to this, as soon as cold, an equal weight of
spirit (sp. gr. .900) is added, and after frequent agitation for 24 hours,
the whole is filtered, with pressure; the marc is treated with fresh
spirit (equal to about 1-4th that first used) and again pressed; the mixed
liquors are next filtered, and are, lastly, evaporated, as before, to the
proper consistence.

_Obs._ Resembles the simple extract, but is much more powerful. It has
been exhibited internally in the form of pills, and used externally,
combined with ointment or spread on simple plaster.--_Dose_, 1/12 to 1/6
gr. every three hours.

5. (Ammoniated; E. A. AMMONIATUM, L.--Dr Turnbull.) Extract of aconite, 1
dr.; liquor of ammonia (strongest), 10 or 12 drops; mix.

6. (Dried); E. A. SICCUM, L.--P. Cod.) The expressed juice, strained
through a sieve or coarse linen, is at once, without depuration, exposed
in earthen dishes, in layers of about 2 lines deep, in a stove or current
of dry air, to a temperature ranging between 95 deg. and 104 deg. Fahr., until
reduced to dryness. The dried extract is to be packed in bottles.

7. (Saccharated; E. A. SACCHARATUM, L.) From extract of aconite (Ph.
Bor.), 4 oz.; sugar of milk (in powder), 1 oz.; mix, and dry the mass in a
warm place, adding sugar of milk, q. s. to make the whole equal in weight
to that of the extract used (4 oz.). An excellent preparation, which keeps
well. The other NARCOTIC EXTRACTS, as those of BELLADONNA, HEMLOCK,
HENBANE, &c., are to be treated in a similar manner. See ACONITE, and
_below_.

=Extract of Aconite Root.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ACONITI RADICIS ALCOHOLICUM,
L. _Prep._ (Dr Fleming; Dr Turnbull.) From a tincture of the root made
with rectified spirit. It is said to be 12 times as strong as the extract
of the leaves.

=Extract of Ag'aric=. _Syn._ EXTRACTUM AGARICI, L. _Prep._ (P. Cod.) From
the infusion of white agaric (_Polyporus officinalis_) prepared with cold
water. Purgative.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 gr.

=Extract of Alcorno'co.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ALCORNOCAE, L. _Prep._ From a
decoction of alcornoco bark (South American). Astringent and
tonic.--_Dose_, 5 to 20 gr. in phthisis, &c.

=Extract of Al'oes.= _Syn._ PURIFIED ALOES, WASHED A.; EXTRACTUM ALOES
BARBADENSIS (B. P.), EXTRACTUM ALOES (Ph. L.), E. A. AQUOSUM (Ph. D.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Barbadoes aloes, in small pieces, 1 lb.; treated with 1
gall. of boiling water for 12 hours, and the clear liquid
evaporated.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 gr. B. P. 2 to 6 gr.

2. (B. P.) Socotrine aloes, 1 lb., treated with 1 gall. of boiling water
for 12 hours, and the clear liquid evaporated to dryness.

3. (Ph. D.) Aloes (hepatic), 4 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil till dissolved;
when cold, decant the clear liquid, and evaporate as before.

4. (Ph. Bor. 1847.) By macerating powdered aloes in cold water for 48
hours, with frequent agitation, and then evaporating in a water bath at a
temperature not exceeding 150 deg. to 165 deg. Fahr., until a pilular consistence
is attained.

_Obs._ The second is the form commonly adopted in the laboratory. When
made with the juice of borage, burgloss, &c., it forms the old 'ALOES
INSUCCATA,'--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr. See ALOES and EXTRACT OF BARBADOES ALOES.

=Extract of Aloes, prepared with Sulphuric Acid.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ALOES
ACIDO SULFURICO CORRECTUM (Germ. Ph.). _Prep._ Dissolve extract of aloes,
8 ounces, in distilled water 32 ounces, then gradually add sulphuric acid,
1 oz. (by weight), and evaporate to a dry extract.

=Extract of Anem'one.= See EXTRACT OF PASQUE FLOWER.

=Extract of Angel'ica.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ANGELICAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph.
Baden.) From a tincture of the root, prepared with spirit sp. gr. .944 (=
21-1/2 u. p.).

2. (Ph. Bor.) Angelica root and rectified spirit, of each 2 parts; water,
9 parts; digest, strain, and evaporate. Inferior to the preceding.

3. (Dr Moir.) Angelica root, 2 lbs.; rectified spirit, 1 gall.; make a
tincture; to the 'marc' add proof spirit, 1 gall., and repeat the
digestion; filter the two tinctures separately, mix, distil off the
spirit, and evaporate. Balsamic, stomachic, and tonic.--_Dose_, 10 to 20
gr. The last is the most balsamic and agreeable.

=Extract of Ap'ples.= _Syn._ CHALYBEATED E. OF A.; EXTRACTUM FERRI
POMATUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. Bor.) Crab-apples (unripe), 6 lbs.; peel them
and reduce them to a pulp; add iron wire (in small coils), 1 lb.; digest
in a vapour bath for about a week, express, strain, decant, and evaporate
in a porcelain vessel, with constant stirring, to the consistence of a
soft extract; dissolve the residuum in water, 4 parts, strain and
evaporate as before.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr.; as a chalybeate tonic. The
formula of the Ph. Baden is nearly similar.

2. (Ph. Germ.) Reduce 5 lbs. of unripe apples to a pulp; mix them with cut
straw, and press. To the strained juice after removal of the sediment add
1-1/2 oz. of reduced iron. When this has dissolved, to the cooled liquid
add as much water as will make up 4-3/4 lbs. Filter, and reduce to a thick
extract.

=Extract of Ar'nica.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF ARNICA FLOWERS; EXTRACTUM ARNICAE
FLORUM, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.) From the dried flowers, as ALCOHOLIC
EXTRACT OF ACONITE--P. Cod.

2. (Ph. Graeca, 1837.) From a tincture of the flowers, prepared with
rectified spirit, 3 parts, and water, 5 parts.--_Dose_, 2 to 6 gr.; as a
stimulant in various diseases accompanied with debility, deficient nervous
sensibility, paralysis, dropsies, diarrh[oe]a, amenorrh[oe]a, dysentery,
&c.

=Extract of Arnica-Root.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF ARNICA; EXTRACTUM ARNICAE
RADICIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. Baden.) As EXTRACT OF ANGELICA--Ph. Baden.

2. (Ph. Graeca.) From tincture of the root, prepared as No. 2 (_above_).
The form of the Hamburg Codex is nearly similar.--_Dose, &c._ As the last.

=Extract of Art'ichoke.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CYNARAE, L. _Prep._ From the
fresh leaves of the artichoke, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L.--_Dose_, 3 to
6 gr., twice or thrice daily; in rheumatism, &c.

=Extract of Aspar'agus.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ASPARAGI, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Soubeiran.) From the expressed juice of the shoots, clarified and
evaporated by a gentle heat.

2. From the juice of the roots, as No. 1. Both are diuretic.--_Dose_, 15
gr. to 1/2 dr., or more.

=Extract of Bael.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BELAE LIQUIDUM, L. B. P. Bael, 1;
distilled water, 15; rectified spirit, 1/8; macerate for 12 hours in 5 of
the water, pour off the liquid, repeat the operation twice for 1 hour;
press, filter, and evaporate to 1, including the spirit. A fluid ounce is
equal to a solid ounce.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dr.

=Extract of Balsam Apple.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BALSAMIMAE. The inspissated
juice of the balsam apple.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 drops in dropsy.

=Extract of Bark.= See EXTRACT OF CINCHONA.

=Extract of Belladon'na.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF DEADLY NIGHTSHADE, INSPISSATED
JUICE OF BELLADONNA; EXTRACTUM BELLADONNAE (B. P., Ph. L. E. & D.), SUCCUS
SPISSATUS BELLADONNAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Take 112 lbs. of fresh leaves
and tender branches, bruise in a stone mortar or other suitable apparatus,
and press out the juice, heat it gradually to 130 deg. F., separate the green
colouring matter by a calico filter, heat the strained liquor to 200 deg. F.
to coagulate the albumen, and again filter; evaporate the filtrate by a
water bath to the consistence of a thin syrup, then add to it the green
colouring matter previously separated, and, stirring the whole together
assiduously, continue the evaporation at a temperature not exceeding 140 deg.,
until the extract is of a suitable consistence for forming pills.--_Dose_,
1/4 to 1/2 gr., gradually increased to 1 or 2 gr.

2. (Ph. E.) Express the juice from the bruised fresh plant, sprinkle the
'marc' with water, and again apply pressure; mix the expressed liquids,
filter them, and evaporate the filtered liquor in a vapour bath to the
consistence of an extract.

3. (Ph. D.) From the leaves, collected when the plant begins to flower.
The expressed juice is allowed to stand for 24 hours, and the clear
portion is decanted; the sediment is placed on a calico filter, washed
with an equal bulk of cold water, and the filtrate mixed with the
expressed juice. The mixed liquid is next heated in a water bath, to
coagulate its albumen, and after being skimmed, and filtered through
flannel whilst hot, the washed sediment is added, and the whole
evaporated, as before.

4. (Ph. U. S.) The expressed juice is heated to the boiling-point,
filtered and evaporated (see _below_).

_Obs._ The P. Cod. directs this extract to be made by two different
formulae. The product of the one resembles that of the Ph. L.; that of the
other, that of the Ph. E. That of the Ph. L., from retaining the fecula,
is the weakest preparation.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr. to 1 gr., gradually increased
to 3 or 4 gr.; as an anodyne in neuralgia, tic-douloureux, &c.; as an
antispasmodic to relieve rigidity and spasms, in various affections of the
uterus, rectum, urethra, bladder, &c., and in hooping-cough; in various
maladies of the eyes; and as a resolvent and discutient in several
glandular diseases. It has been highly recommended as a preservative
against scarlet fever. It is most frequently employed externally, under
the form of a plaster, ointment, or lotion. It is poisonous.

5. (Alcoholic; E. B. ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ (P. Cod.) As ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT
OF ACONITE--P. Cod.

_b._ (Ph. U. S.) As the last (nearly), using spirit of .935 (=about 13 u.
p.).

_c._ (Moir.) The expressed juice is coagulated by heat, cautiously
applied, and filtered; the filtrate is reduced to the consistence of a
syrup, and mixed with an equal volume of nearly anhydrous alcohol (say of
90%); the clear portion is lastly evaporated, as before.

_Obs._ The above is much more powerful than the common extract, and is
chiefly used in external applications. See BELLADONNA, and _below_.

=Extract of Belladonna Ber'ries.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BACCARUM BELLADONNAE, L.
_Prep._ (P. Cod.) From the expressed juice of the berries, evaporated to
the consistence of thick honey.--_Dose_, 1 to 5 gr.

=Extract of Bis'tort.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BISTORTAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.)
From the dried root of bistort or snake-weed (_Polygonum Bistorta_), by
percolation with temperate distilled water.

2. From the infusion made with boiling water, or from the decoction.
Astringent and tonic.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr.

=Extract of Bit'ter-sweet.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF WOODY NIGHTSHADE; EXTRACTUM
DULCAMARAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From the decoction of the stalks.

2. (Ph. U. S.) From the dried stalks, by percolation with temperate water.
Diaphoretic, diuretic, and narcotic.--_Dose_, 3 to 6 gr.; in chronic
asthma, rheumatism, and chest diseases; and particularly in chronic skin
diseases.

=Extract, Black.= See EXTRACT OF COCCULUS.

=Extract of Black Pepper.= See EXTRACT OF PEPPER.

=Extract of Bladder-wrack.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM FUCI VESICULOSI. From the
dried plant of the bladder-wrack. Given in obesity.

=Extract of Bor'age.= Syn. EXTRACTUM BORAGINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.)
From the dried herb (_Borago officinalis_).

2. (Ph. Lusit.) From the clarified juice of the fresh plant. Exhilarating,
restorative, and pectoral.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 gr., or more.

=Extract of Box.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BUXI, E. CORTICIS B., L. _Prep._ (P.
Cod.) From the tincture of the root bark, prepared (with proof spirit) by
displacement, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--P. Cod.

=Extract of Broom.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF BROOM TOPS; EXTRACTUM SCOPARII, E.
SPARTII SCOPARII, L. From decoction of broom tops. Diuretic and cathartic;
and, occasionally, emetic.--_Dose_, 20 gr. to 1 dr.; in dropsy, &c. It is
now seldom used.

=Extract of Bry'ony.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BRYONIAE, E. B. ALBAE, E. RADICIS B.
A., L. _Prep._ From the infusion or decoction of the root of white bryony
(_Bryonia dioica_). Purgative, diuretic, and emmenagogue.--_Dose_, 10 gr.
to 1/2 dr. It was once a favourite remedy in asthma, dropsy, epilepsy, &c.

=Extract of Bu'chu.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BUCHU, E. DIOSMAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From
buchu leaves, as the last.

2. (Ethereo-alcoholic; E. B. AETHERO-ALCOHOLICUM, L.--W. Procter.) Buchu
(in coarse powder), 1 lb.; ether, 4 fl. oz.; alcohol (rectified spirit),
12 fl. oz.; percolate without digestion, adding dilute alcohol until a
pint of ethereo-alcoholic tincture is obtained, and suffer this to
evaporate spontaneously; treat the residue in the displacer with dilute
alcohol, till 2 pints are obtained; evaporate to a syrup, add the product
of the first tincture, mix, and complete the evaporation.--_Dose_, 5 to 10
gr.; in diseases of the urinary organs, &c.

3. (Fluid; E. B. FLUIDUM, L.--W. Procter.) Buchu leaves, 8 oz.; rectified
spirit, 16 fl. oz.; for a tincture by displacement, adding water, until 12
fl. oz. have passed through; allow this to evaporate spontaneously until
reduced to one half; next digest the mass in the percolator with cold
water, 1 pint, for 12 hours, express a pint, and evaporate this to 10 fl.
oz.; lastly, add the 6 fl. oz. of residual tincture, agitate together, and
in a few days filter, or decant the clear portion.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
teaspoonfuls. See DIOSMA.

=Extract of Buck'bean.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM MENYANTHIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (P.
Cod.) From the expressed juice of the fresh plant.

2. (Ph. Bor.) From the infusion made with boiling water. Bitter, tonic and
astringent.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr. In large doses it is purgative,
cathartic, and even emetic.

=Extract of Buck'thorn.= Syn. EXTRACTUM RHAMNI, E. BACCARUM R., L. _Prep._
From the filtered expressed juice of buckthorn berries. Some persons allow
it first to run into a state of fermentation; but the quantity of the
product is thereby greatly lessened. Hydragogue and purgative.--_Dose_, 15
gr. to 1 dr., or more.

=Extract of Bur'dock.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM BARDANAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From the
decoction of burdock root.

2. (P. Cod.) As EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod. In gout, rheumatism, skin
diseases, &c.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1 dr. Sir Robert Walpole praised burdock
root as a gout medicine; and others have considered it an excellent
substitute for sarsaparilla. (Lindley.)

=Extract of Butter-nut.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM JUGLANDIS, L. _Prep._ (Ph. U.
S.) From the inner bark of the root of the butter-nut or white walnut
(_Juglanda alba_), as EXTRACT OF BITTER SWEET--Ph. U. S. A mild, yet
efficacious aperient and vermifuge.--_Dose._ As a laxative, 5 to 10 gr.;
as a purgative, 15 to 30 gr.

=Extract of Cainca Root.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CAINCAE. (P. Pharm.) _Prep._
Put 10 oz. of the dried root of cainca into a percolator, pour on it proof
spirit q. s. to penetrate the powder in every part, and let it remain 12
hours; then let the liquid drain, and pass successively through the powder
in the percolator as much proof spirit as will amount with that previously
used to 60 oz. by weight. Distil off the spirit and evaporate to a soft
extract.

=Extract of Calabar Bean.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PHYSOSTIGMATIS. (B. P.)
Calabar bean in coarse powder, 1; rectified spirit, 5; macerate the bean
for 48 hours in one fourth of the spirit in a closed vessel, agitating
occasionally, then transfer to a percolator, and when the fluid ceases to
pass add the remainder of the spirit, so that it may slowly penetrate
through the powder; subject the residue of the bean to pressure, adding
the pressed liquid to the product of the percolation; distil off the
spirit, and evaporate what is left to the consistence of a soft extract by
a water bath.--_Dose_, 1/16 to 1/4 gr.

=Extract of Calum'ba.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CALUMBAE, E. RADICIS C., L. _Prep._
1. (B. P.) Calumba cut small, 1; water, 5; macerate in half the water for
12 hours, strain, and press; macerate again with the remaining water,
strain, and press; mix and filter the liquors, and evaporate with the heat
of a water bath to pill consistency.--_Dose_, 2 to 10 gr.

2. (Alcoholic--Ph. Bor.) Nearly as No. 3 (_below_), but using stronger
spirit; the evaporation is to be conducted at a heat not above 167 deg. Fahr.,
until it acquires the consistence of a pill-mass, which, after being
rendered quite dry by a very gentle heat, is to be reduced to fine powder.
It should have a brownish-yellow colour, and give a turbid solution with
water.--_Dose_, 4 to 12 gr. They are all tonic and stomachic.

3. (Spirituous--P. Cod.) As EXTRACT OF BOX. The Ph. Baden orders spirit of
.944 to be used.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr.

=Extract of Cannabis Indicae.= See EXTRACT OF INDIAN HEMP.

=Extract of Canthar'ides.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF SPANISH FLIES; EXTRACTUM
CANTHARIDES, E. LYTTAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.) From the tincture, as
EXTRACT OF BOX.

2. (Soubeiran.) From a tincture prepared with spirit of the sp. gr. .923
(about 2 u. p.).

3. (Acetic; E. C. ACETICUM, L.) From a tincture prepared with acetic acid,
sp. gr. 1.048.

4. (Ethereal; E. C. AETHEREUM, L.) From the ethereal tincture.

_Obs._ The ether, acid, and spirit distilled from the above must be either
thrown away or used to make fresh extract, as it is highly poisonous. They
are all for external use only, and should have the consistence of soft
butter.

=Extract of Car'damoms.= _Syn._ ETHEREAL E. OF C.; EXTRACTUM CARDAMOMI
AETHEREUM, L. _Prep._ (W. Procter.) By spontaneous evaporation of the
ethereal tincture. It consists of the volatile and fixed oils of the seeds
and is used to aromatise pills, powders, &c.

=Extract of Ca'rob Beans.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CERATONIAE, L. Prep. From the
decoction of the pods (CAROB, or ALGAROBA BEANS) of the '_Ceratonia
siliqua_,' or 'St. John's bread tree.' See ALGAROBA.

=Extract of Caroli'na Pink.= See EXTRACT OF PINK-ROOT.

=Extract of Car'rot.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CAROTAE, E. RADICIS C., L. _Prep._
(Swediaur.) From the clarified expressed juice, evaporated to the
consistence of honey. Recommended as an application to ulcerated cancers.

=Extract of Cascaril'la.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CASCARILLAE, E. CORTICIS C., L.
_Prep._ 1. (Guibourt.) From the alcoholic (rectified spirit) tincture.

2. (Ph. Baden.) As the last, but using spirit of the sp. gr. .944.

3. (Ph. L. 1788.) As EXTRACT OF JALAP--Ph. L.

_Obs._ This extract is tonic, aromatic, and stomachic.--_Dose_, 5 to 15
gr., or more, 2 or 3 times a day. 28 lbs. of bark yield about 5-1/4 lbs.
of extract.

=Extract of Cas'sia.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CASSIAE, L. See CASSIA PULP.

=Extract of Cat'echu.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CATECHU, L. _Prep._ 1. From
decoction of catechu.

2. (P. Cod.) From the infusion in boiling water. Astringent and
tonic.--_Dose_, 5 to 25 gr. See CATECHU.

=Extract of Cel'andine.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CHELIDONII, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph.
Bor.) From the herb (_Chelidonium majus_), as ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--Ph. Bor.--_Dose_, 3 to 10 gr.

2. (Van Mons.) From the expressed juice, coagulated by heat, filtered, and
evaporated, towards the end adding the coagulum.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr., or
more. Used as a drastic hydragogue in dropsies; and in scrofula, &c.

=Extract of Cen'taury.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CENTAURII, L. Extracts under this
name are prepared from 'American centaury' (_Sabbatia angularis_), and
'common centaury' (_Erythraea Centaurium_). Prep. 1. By evaporating the
decoction, or the infusion made with hot water. The dose and properties
resemble those of extract of gentian.

2. (Alcoholic; E. C. ALCOHOLICUM, L.) As EXTRACT OF BOX (see _above_).

=Extract of Cevadil''la.= _Syn._ ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF SABADILLA; EXTRACTUM
SABADILLAE, L. _Prep._ (Dr Turnbull.) From tincture of cevadilla seeds,
made with rectified spirit. Employed by Dr Turnbull as a remedy in painful
rheumatic and neuralgic affections, and, generally, as a substitute for
VERATRIA.--_Dose_, 1/10 to 1/6 gr. It is extremely poisonous.

=Extract of Cham'omile.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ANTHEMIDIS (Ph. E.), E. A.
NOBILIS, L. _Prep._ By evaporating the decoction of the flowers to the
proper consistence.

_Obs._ This extract contains only the bitter portion of the chamomile, the
aromatic volatile oil being dissipated during the evaporation. This,
however is remedied in the formulae given by the British Pharmacop[oe]ia,
which is as follows:---

Boil chamomile flowers 1 lb., in one gallon of distilled water, until the
volume is reduced to one half; strain, press and filter. Evaporate by a
water bath to a proper consistence, adding oil of chamomile, 15 minims at
the end of the process.

It is usually prepared from old flowers that have lost their smell and
colour, and are thus rendered unsaleable. The extract of chamomile that
smells strongly of the flowers, frequently vended by the druggists, is
prepared by adding 1 dr. of the essential oil of chamomile to every pound
of extract, when nearly cold, and just before removing it from the
evaporating pan. This addition, unlike many which are made in the
laboratory, vastly increases the medicinal virtues of this article. The
mass of extract of chamomile met with in the shops is nothing but extract
of gentian scented with a little oil of chamomile. 1 cwt. of chamomiles
yields about 48 lbs. of extract.

Extract of chamomile is bitter, tonic, and stomachic.--_Dose_, 10 to 20
gr., made into a pill, either alone or combined with a little rhubarb and
ginger. See PILLS, &c.

=Extract of Chenopo''dium.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF STINKING GOOSE-FOOT;
EXTRACTUM CHENOPODII, L. _Prep._ 1. From the stinking orache or goose-foot
(_Chenopodium olidum_), as EXTRACT OF ACONITE.--Ph. L.

2. (Mr Houlton.) From the expressed juice by spontaneous evaporation. A
better plan is to expose it to heated air. Antihysteric, emmenagogue, and
vermifuge.--_Dose_, 5 to 20 gr.

=Extract (Fluid) of Wild Cherry.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PRUNI VIRGINIANAE
FLUIDUM. (Ph. U. S.) Wild cherry in fine powder, 16 oz. (troy); glycerin,
4 oz. (old measure); water, 8 oz. (old measure). Mix the glycerin and the
water, and digest the wild cherry in 8 oz. of the mixture for 4 days, then
pack in a percolator and pour on the remaining 4 oz. of glycerin and
water. When this has disappeared from the surface pour on rectified spirit
(.817) until 12 oz. (old measure) of fluid have been obtained, and set
this portion aside. Then percolate with spirit, until 20 oz. (old measure)
more have been obtained; evaporate to 4 oz. (old measure), and mix with
the reserved portion.

=Extract of Cincho'na.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF BARK. Three simple extracts,
prepared respectively from YELLOW, PALE, and RED CINCHONA, are given in
Ph. L.:--_Prep._ 1. (From CALISAYA or YELLOW BARK:--EXTRACT OF CINCHONA,
E. OF YELLOW C., E. OF HEART-LEAVED C.; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE, L.)--_a._
EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE FLAVAE LIQUIDUM (B. P.). Yellow cinchona bark in coarse
powder, 16; distilled water, a sufficiency; rectified spirit, 1; macerate
the bark in 40 of water for twenty-four hours, then pack in a percolator,
and add water until 240 have passed through, or until the bark is
exhausted; evaporate the liquor to 20, at a temperature not exceeding
160 deg.; then filter, and continue the evaporation to 3, or until the sp. gr.
of the liquid is 1.200; when cold, add the spirit gradually, constantly
stirring. Sp. gr. 1.100.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 minims.

_b._ (Ph. L.) Yellow cinchona (coarsely bruised), 3 lbs.; distilled water
(temperate), 4 pints; macerate for 24 hours (constantly stirring), and
strain through linen; what remains, again macerate in water, 1 quart, for
24 hours, and strain; evaporate the mixed liquids to a proper consistence.

_Obs._ The aqueous extracts of cinchona bark possess little medicinal
virtue, owing to the insolubility of the alkaloids (quinine, cinchonine,
&c.) in water, and also from the rapid oxidation of their extractive
matter, when exposed in solution to the joint action of heat and
atmospheric oxygen.--_Dose_, 5 gr. to 1/2 dr., in mixtures, faintly
acidulated with sulphuric acid. Cinchona bark yields from 24% to 30% of
aqueous extract.

2. (From PALE BARK:--EXTRACT OF PALE CINCHONA, E. OF PALE BARK, E. OF
LANCE-LEAVED B.; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE VALLIDAE, L.)--_a._ (Ph. L.) From pale
bark, as EXTRACT OF CINCHONA--Ph. L. (_above_).

_b._ (Ph. L. 1836.) From the decoction.

_Obs._ This forms the EXTRACT OF BARK of the shops. The red and yellow
cinchona barks are scarcely ever used for making extracts. Their richness
in quinine leads to their almost, exclusive employment for the manufacture
of that alkaloid, by which their value is greatly enhanced. As far as our
knowledge extends, no other extract of bark than this is either employed
or asked for.

3. (From RED BARK:--EXTRACT OF RED CINCHONA, E. OF RED BARK, E. OF
OBLONG-LEAVED B.; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE RUBRAE, L.)--_a._ (Ph. L.) From red
bark, as EXTRACT OF CINCHONA--Ph. L. (_above_).

_b._ (Ph. L. 1836.) From the decoction.

_Obs._ These extracts are ordered to be kept in two states, the one (SOFT
EXTRACT OF CINCHONA; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE MOLLE) for making pills, &c.; the
other (HARD EXTRACT OF CINCHONA; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE DURUM) for
powdering.--The dose, &c., of all the above are the same.

4. (Dry:--ESSENTIAL SALT OF BARK; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE SICCUM, L.)--_a._ (P.
Cod.) From an aqueous infusion of pale bark (prepared by displacement with
water at a temperature not above 77 deg. Fahr.), evaporated to the consistence
of a thick syrup, and then spread thinly and uniformly on earthenware
dishes, or sheets of glass, and dried in a stove, by a very gentle heat.
It is separated from the plates with a knife, and preserved in well-closed
phials. Prior to spreading it out on the plates, about 4% or 5% of thick
mucilage is commonly added.

_b._ (Ph. Bor.) As the above (nearly).

_c._ (Ph. Hann. 1831.) Similar to the above; but the liquid, when it
acquires the consistence of treacle, is diluted with water, and again
evaporated to a like consistence; and this dilution and evaporation is
repeated until, on the addition of water, it forms a clear
solution.--_Dose_, 5 to 25 gr. The product of the last formula is nearly
inert, and that of the others possesses little activity.

5. (Fluid:--EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE FLUIDUM, L.)--_a._ See LIQUOR OF CINCHONA.

_b._ (Dr Neligan.) From yellow bark, as FLUID EXTRACT OF BUCHU.

6. (Resinous:--ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF BARK; EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE ALCOHOLICUM,
E. CINCHONAE, L.)--_a._ (Ph. E.) From any variety of cinchona bark (in
powder), 4 oz.; proof spirit, 24 fl. oz.; prepare a tincture by
displacement, distil off most of the spirit, and evaporate the residuum to
the consistence of an extract. This is the only EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE of the
Edinburgh College.

_b._ (Ph. U. S.) Peruvian bark, 1 lb.; rectified spirit, 4 pints; make 4
pints of tincture by displacement; add water to the mass in the
percolator, digest, and obtain 6 pints of infusion; distil off the spirit
from the tincture, and evaporate the infusion to the consistence of syrup,
then mix the two, and complete the evaporation. More active than the
aqueous extract.--_Dose_, 5 to 20 gr.

_c._ (Ellis.) Yellow bark, 2 lbs.; hydrochloric acid, 4 fl. dr.; water, 1
gall.; boil, strain, and repeat the decoction with fresh water and acid;
mix the decoctions, filter, and agitate it with fresh-slaked lime, 2-1/2
oz.; filter or decant; dry the residuum, and exhaust it with hot alcohol,
q. s.; lastly, evaporate the alcoholic tincture to a pilular
consistence.--_Dose_, 1 to 5 gr. Some persons have proposed to call this
'ESSENTIAL SALT OF BARK,'

7. (Vinous:--EXTRACTUM CINCHONAE VINOSUM, L.--Ph. Hesse.) Peruvian bark (in
powder), 1 part; white wine (sherry), 8 parts; digest 3 days, express,
filter, and evaporate.

=Extract of Coc'culus.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF COCCULUS INDICUS, BLACK EXTRACT,
EXTRACT (Brewer's), BEER STRENGTHENER, HARD MULTUM; EXTRACTUM COCCULI, E.
C. INDICI, L. _Prep._ From _cocculus indicus_, by decoction. It is kept in
two states--one having the consistence of thick treacle; the other, that
of a pilular extract. The first is 'put up' in bladders; the last is made
into 1/2-lb. rolls, like lead-plaster-or roll-chocolate. It is narcotic
and poisonous, and is employed by fraudulent brewers and publicans to give
a false strength to their liquors. See COCCULUS INDICUS, BEER, &c.

=Extract of Col'chicum.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF MEADOW SAFFRON, E. OF THE CORMS
OF COLCHICUM; EXTRACTUM COLCHICI (B. P.). _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) The expressed
juice of fresh colchicum corms, cleared of deposit, boiled, strained, and
evaporated to a proper consistency at a temperature of 160 deg. Fahr.--_Dose_,
1 to 2 gr.

2. (Wholesale.) From the decoction of the dried corms. _Prod._ 50% to 55%.

_Obs._ This extract is given in the usual cases in which colchicum is
employed.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 gr., every third or fourth hour. (Thomson.) "A
favorite remedy of Dr Hue, of St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in the early
stages of acute rheumatism. The dose is 1 gr. every four hours."
(Pereira.)

3. (Acetic; ACETIC EXTRACT OF MEADOW SAFFRON; EXTRACTUM COLCHICI ACETICUM
(B. P.)--_a._ (B. P.) Crushed fresh corms, previously peeled, 19; acetic
acid, 1; stir together, press, boil, and strain through flannel, and
evaporate to a soft extract.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 gr. with an equal weight of
liquorice powder.

_b._ (Wholesale.) Dried corms, 14 lbs.; acetic acid (pyroligneous), 6
pints; distilled water, 5-1/4 gall.; digest for 14 days, express, filter,
and evaporate. Product, 2-1/2 to 3 lbs.

_Obs._ The above extracts are generally prepared from the dried corms, and
hence the very uncertain and inferior quality of those commonly met with.
They also possess less activity than pharmacop[oe]ial preparations. They
rapidly get dry and crumbly, and, unless a little spirit and oil of cloves
are added, will scarcely keep a week in warm weather without becoming
mouldy.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 gr. two or three times a day. It is much stronger
than the common extract, and contains the acetate of colchicine. Sir C.
Scudamore prefers the acetic extract prepared by the formula _b_
(_above_).

4. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM COLCHICI ALCOHOLICUM, L.--P. Cod.). As EXTRACT OF
BOX. More active than even the acetic extract. All the preparations of
colchicum are poisonous in large doses.

=Extract of Colo'cynth.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF BITTER APPLE; EXTRACTUM
COLOCYNTHIDIS (Ph. L. & E.), E. C. SIMPLEX, E. C. MOLLE, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Ph. L.) From colocynth pulp (cut in pieces and the seeds removed), by
simple maceration in cold water for 36 hours, frequently pressing it with
the hands, and afterwards strongly pressing out the liquor, which must be
strained before evaporating it.

2. (Ph. E.) From the decoction. This is the plan adopted at Apothecaries'
Hall, and in the laboratory generally. Many houses do not even remove the
seeds.

_Obs._ This extract rapidly gets hard, crumbly, and mouldy by keeping. For
the remedy, see observations on EXTRACT OF COLCHICUM, _above_.--_Dose_, 5
gr. to 20 gr.; as a cathartic. Colocynth pulp yields above 65% of extract.

3. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM COLOCYNTHIDIS ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ (Ph.
Baden.) As EXTRACT OF ANGELICA--Ph. Bad.)

_b._ (P. Cod.) From a tincture prepared with proof spirit. Much more
active than the simple extract.--_Dose_, 2 to 7 gr.

4. (Dry; EXTRACTUM COLOCYNTHIDIS SICCUM, L.)--(Ph. Bor.) As the last, but
using spirit of the sp. gr. .900 (about 16 o. p.), digesting at a tepid
heat, evaporating to dryness, and powdering.--_Dose_, 1 to 6 gr.

=Extract of Colocynth (Compound).= _Syn._ COMPOUND EXTRACT OF BITTER
APPLE, CATHARTIC EXTRACT; EXTRACTUM CATHARTICUM, E. COLOCYNTHIDIS
COMPOSITUM, B. P. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Colocynth free from seeds, 6; extract
of Socotrine aloes, 12; scammony, or resin of scammony in powder, 4; hard
soap in powder, 3; cardamoms free from capsules in fine powder, 1; proof
spirit, 160. Macerate the colocynth in the spirit for four days, press out
the tincture, distil off the spirit, and add to it the extract of aloes,
the soap, and the scammony; then evaporate the residue by a water bath to
a pilular consistence, adding the cardamoms towards the end of the
process.--_Dose_, 2 to 5 gr., with 2 or 3 gr. of extract of hyoscyamus to
prevent griping.

2. (Ph. L. 1836.) Colocynth pulp (sliced, without the seeds), 6 oz., proof
spirit, 1 gal.; digest with a gentle heat for 4 days, express, strain, and
add, of extract of aloes (Ph. L. 1836), 12 oz., powdered scammony, 4 oz.,
Castile soap (cut small), 3 oz., and evaporate (distil) to a proper
consistence; adding, towards the last, powdered cardamoms, 1 oz.

3. (Wholesale.) The formulae adopted by the wholesale druggists are mere
modifications of that of the Ph. L. 1809; water being used instead of
spirit as the menstruum, with actual benefit, as we honestly believe, to
the quality of the preparation. The following are extensively employed by
those who do most in this article, and we can speak highly of the quality
of the products obtained by their use.

_a._ Turkey colocynth, 18 lbs., is boiled in about 20 times its weight of
water for five or six hours; to the strained decoction is added hepatic
aloes, 40 lbs., which are boiled until dissolved, when the solution is
decanted. In the mean time the colocynth is exhausted with a second
quantity of water (less than the first), and the strained liquor is added
to the undissolved residuum of the aloes, and boiled for a few minutes;
after which it is drawn off and mixed with the first decoction of aloes;
the mixed liquors are then allowed to stand until quite cold (commonly
until the next day), to deposit the resinous portion. The liquor is next
decanted or drawn off, and set evaporating as quickly as possible; as soon
as the consistence of treacle is arrived at, the whole is allowed to cool
considerably, and moist sugar (clean), 4 lbs., and Castile soap, 10 lbs.
(previously melted with a little water), are added; powdered scammony, 6
lbs., is next gradually sifted in, the extract all the time being
assiduously stirred by a second person. Lastly, the heat is further
moderated, and the stirring continued until a rather harder consistence is
acquired than is proper for the extract, when the steam is wholly 'shut
off,' or the vessel removed from the heat, and as soon as the whole has
become sufficiently cool to prevent any considerable evaporation of the
spirit, essence of cardamoms, 2 lbs. (say 1 quart), is expertly stirred
in; and the extract at once (whilst still warm) put into stone jars or
pots, and tied or covered over for store or use. The product is usually
labelled 'EXT. COLOCYNTH. COMP. OPT.' It looks well, and smells very
aromatic, and is really an excellent preparation.

_b._ Turkey colocynth, 2-1/4 lbs.; hepatic aloes, 5-1/2 lbs.; powdered
scammony, 1-1/2 lb.; powdered cardamoms, 6 oz. (or essence, 1/2 pint);
Castile soap (genuine), 1 lb. 2 oz.; pale moist sugar, 1/2 lb.; proceed as
last. This produces a beautiful article, and of unquestionable quality,
equally effective, and milder in its action than the College preparation.
It is labelled and sent out as EXT. COLOCYNTH. COMP. PH. L. (1836).

4. (Ph. L. 1809.) Colocynth, 6 dr. (6 parts); aloes, 1-1/2 oz. (12 parts);
scammony, 1/2 oz. (4 parts); hard soap, 3 dr. (3 parts); cardamoms, 1 dr.
(1 part); as No. 3, _a_ (nearly).

_Qual., &c._ Compound extract of colocynth is often adulterated with acrid
cathartics to make up for the deficiency or inferiority of its proper
ingredients, and foreign matter often becomes mixed with it by the use of
impure scammony. The presence of cape aloes may usually be detected by the
nauseous odour; chalk (an article frequently present in bad scammony), by
placing a little ball of the extract in a glass tube, and pouring over it
some dilute hydrochloric or acetic acid, when an effervescence will ensue
if that substance be present; jalap, scammony adulterated with fecula, and
other starchy substances, by the filtered decoction of the extract turning
blue on the addition of tincture of iodine; gamboge, by the decoction
becoming deep red on the addition of liquor of potassa, and by a filtered
alcoholic solution of the extract forming a yellow emulsion with water,
which becomes transparent and assumes a deep-red colour on the addition of
caustic potassa; and further, by this solution (if the alkali is not in
excess) giving a yellow precipitate with acids and with acetate of lead, a
brown precipitate with sulphate of copper, and a very dark brown one with
the salts of iron; also by the ethereal solution of the extract dropped on
water yielding an opaque yellow film, soluble in caustic potassa if it
contains gamboge.

_Dose_, 3 gr. to 15 gr. It is a safe and mild, yet certain, purgative. It
may be mixed with calomel without the latter being decomposed. 2-1/2 or 3
gr., mixed with an equal weight of blue pill and taken overnight forms an
excellent aperient in dyspepsia, liver complaints, &c. See ABERNETHY
MEDICINES.

_Obs._ There are few formulae which have undergone so many alterations in
the hands of the College as that for compound extract of colocynth. Before
1809, proof spirit was ordered to be employed as the menstruum, and,
omitting the soap, the preparation resembled that of the Ph. L. 1836. In
1809, the College directed water to be used instead of spirit, and added a
certain quantity of soap. In the next edition of the Pharmacop[oe]ia
(1815), the soap was again omitted; but in the edition of 1824, the
formula of 1809 was again adopted, substituting, however, proof spirit for
the water. These directions were also continued in the edition of 1836. In
the last London Pharmacop[oe]ia (1851) the formula for this extract is
omitted altogether, and in its place a pill (PILULA COLOCYNTHIDIS
COMPOSITA) is inserted.

The compound extract of colocynth and the simple and compound extracts of
sarsaparilla are in greater demand in the wholesale trade, and are sold in
larger quantities at a time, than all the other medicinal extracts put
together. As a proof, if it were necessary, that honesty is the best
policy, it may be mentioned that a certain metropolitan druggist,
remarkable for the superiority of this preparation, has obtained no
inconsiderable fortune by its sale alone; while the host of miserable
vendors of the evaporated decoction of musty colocynth seed, Cape aloes,
worthless scammony, and scentless cardamoms, sold under the name, attempt
to ruin each other by offering their rubbish at a price that precludes the
possibility of a large profit, or even of the establishment of a
respectable connection.

=Extract of Conia.= See EXTRACT OF HEMLOCK.

=Extract of Contrayer'va.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CONTRAYERVAE, L. _Prep._
(Palat. Cod.) From contrayerva root, as EXTRACT OF CINCHONA--Ph.
L.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr.; as a diaphoretic tonic in low conditions of
the system.

=Extract of Copai'ba.= _Syn._ RESINOUS EXTRACT OF COPAIBA; EXTRACTUM
COPAIBAE, E. C. RESINOSUM, L. _Prep._ (Mr Thorn.) From balsam of copaiba,
by distilling off the oil until the residuum assumes the consistence of an
extract.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr., or more. One of the many useless
preparations which encumber modern pharmacy. It may be taken in 3 dr.
doses without any perceptible effect beyond a fit of indigestion.

=Extract of Copal'che.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM COPALCHI, E. CORTICIS C., L.
_Prep._ From copalchi bark (_Croton pseudo-China_), as EXTRACT OF
CASCARILLA, which it for the most part resembles.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 gr.

=Extract (Fluid) of Cotton Root.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GOSSYPII RADICIS
FLUIDUM (Ph. U. S.). Cotton root in very fine powder, 16 oz. (troy);
macerate with glycerin, 3 fluid oz. (old measure); rectified spirit, 8 oz.
(old measure); water, 5 oz. (old measure), in closed percolator for 4
days; then let the percolation commence, and finish it by adding dilute
alcohol (eq. vols. of alcohol .835 and water) until 24 oz. (old measure)
have been obtained; reserve the first 14 oz., and evaporate the remaining
10 oz. (to which previously add 1 fluid oz., old measure) of glycerin to 2
fluid oz. (old measure), and mix with the reserved portion.

=Extract of Couch Grass.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF DOG'S GRASS; EXTRACTUM
GRAMINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.) From the root of couch grass, or dog's
grass (_Triticum repens_), as EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.

2. From the fresh root, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L.

3. (Fluid; MELLAGO GRAMINIS, EXTRACTUM GRAMINIS FLUIDUM, L.--Ph. Hann.
1831.) From the decoction of the fresh root of couch grass, evaporated to
the consistence of new honey. Pectoral.--_Dose_, 15 gr. to 1/2 dr., or
more.

=Extract of Cu'bebs.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CUBEBAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From the
alcoholic tincture evaporated by a very gentle heat.--_Dose_, 5 gr. to 30
gr.

2. (Mr Toller.) To the last add a little powdered Castile soap, when it
begins to thicken, and evaporate to a pilular consistence.--_Dose_, 10 gr.
to 30 gr.

3. (Fluid: LIQUOR CUBEBAE, EXTRACTUM C. FLUIDUM, L.)--_a._ Cubebs (ground
in a coffee-mill), 1-1/4 lb.; rectified spirit, 1 quart; prepare a
tincture, either by displacement or by digestion for a week, and reduce
it, by distillation at a very gentle heat, until the whole measures
exactly 1 pint. Every fl. oz. represents 2 oz. of cubebs.--_Dose_, 20 to
40 drops.

_b._ (M. Puche.) From cubebs and proof spirit, equal parts, by
percolation; without subsequent evaporation. Represents its own weight in
cubebs.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1 fl. dr.

_c._ (Ph. U. S. 1851.) Cubebs, 1 lb. (nearly); ether, q. s.; make 1 quart
of tincture; then distil off 1-1/2 pint of the ether by the heat of a
water bath, and expose the residuum in a shallow vessel until the
remainder of the ether has evaporated.

_d._ (Ph. U. S.) EXTRACTUM CUBEBAE FLUIDUM. Cubebs in moderately fine
powder, 16 oz. (troy); alcohol (.817), 16 oz. (old measure). Macerate in a
closed percolator for 4 days, and then let the percolation commence, and
finish it by adding more menstruum until 24 oz. (old measure) have been
obtained; reserve the first 14 oz., evaporate the remaining 10 oz. to 2
oz., and mix this with the reserved portion.

4. (Oleo-resinous; EXTRACTUM CUBEBAE, E. CUBEBRUM, E. C. OLEO-RESINOSUM,
L.)--_a._ (M. Dublanc.) The essential oil resulting from the careful
distillation of any given quantity of cubebs, is mixed with the resinous
extract obtained by evaporating a tincture of the dried residuum made with
rectified spirit; the whole being reduced to the consistence of a thick
syrup. 1 lb. of cubebs yields about 6 oz. of this extract.

_b._ (Labelonge.) Cubebs are first exhausted with ether, and then with
proof spirit, in a displacement apparatus; the alcoholic tincture is
evaporated to an extract over a water bath, and when cold, the ethereal
tincture is mixed with it, and the mixture abandoned to spontaneous
evaporation until the ether is volatilised.

_c._ (W. Procter.) An ethereal tincture (by displacement) is poured into a
large retort, and 5-6ths is drawn over by the heat of a water bath; the
evaporation of the residuum, to the proper consistence, is carried on at a
heat not exceeding 120 deg. Fahr. The formula of the Ph. Baden is nearly
similar. Said to represent 6 to 8 times its weight in cubebs. 1 lb. yields
2 oz. of this extract.

_d._ (Hamb. Cod. 1845.) This resembles _a_ (_above_).

_Obs._ This extract has a darkish brown colour, and tastes and smells
strongly of cubebs. It is only slightly soluble in water.--_Dose_, 5 gr.
to 20 gr.; made into an emulsion or pills, or enclosed in a capsule. See
CUBEBS.

=Extract of Cu'cumber.= See ELATERIUM.

=Extract of Cuspa''ria.= EXTRACT OF ANGOSTURA BARK; EXTRACTUM CUSPARIAE, E.
CORTICIS C., E. ANGOSTURAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From angostura bark, as EXTRACT
OF CINCHONA--Ph. L.

2. (Alcoholic.) As EXTRACT OF CINCHONA--Ph. E. Stronger than the last.
Both are aromatic, bitter, tonic, and stimulant.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2
dr.; in dyspepsia, chronic diarrh[oe]a, dysentery, &c.

=Extract of Daff'odil.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM NARCISSI, L. _Prep._ 1. From the
fresh flowers of daffodil or yellow narcissus (_Narcissus
pseudo-narcissus_), as EXTRACT OF ANCONITE--Ph. L.

2. (Alcoholic.) From the dried flowers, as EXTRACT OF BOX. Both are
pectoral and expectorant; and in large doses nauseant and emetic.--_Dose_,
1/2 gr. to 2 gr.; in hooping-cough, &c.

=Extract of Dandeli'on.= See EXTRACT OF TARAXACUM.

=Extract of Digita'lis.= See EXTRACT OF FOXGLOVE.

=Extract of Dog's Grass.= See EXTRACT OF COUCH GRASS.

=Extract of Dog'wood.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CORNUS, E. CORNI, L. _Prep._ From
American or tree dogwood (_Cornus Florida_), as EXTRACT OF CINCHONA BARK.

_Obs._ In its general effects, American dogwood approaches the cinchonas,
and is said to be not inferior to them in the cure of intermittents.
(Bigelow.) It contains a peculiar bitter principle, called cornine.
Several other varieties of the genus _Cornus_, as round-leaved dogwood
(_Cornus circinata_), swamp dogwood (_Cornus sericea_), &c., are used in
America, but are less valuable.

=Extracts, Dried or Powdered.= _Syn._ EXTRACTA SICCA VEL PULVERATA (Ph.
Prus.). These are made by mixing 4 parts of the extract with 1 part of
powder of sugar of milk, and setting the mixture in a warm place till dry.

Triturate the mass to powder, adding more of the sugar of milk if
necessary, to make the weight the same as the extract used. The German
Pharmacop[oe]ia directs them to be mixed with dextrin, and then dried at a
temperature of 122 deg. Fahr., and, while still warm, triturated into a
uniform powder, with dextrin q. s. to make the weight of the powder equal
to twice the weight of the extract employed.

=Extract of Dulcama''ra.= See EXTRACT OF BITTER SWEET.

=Extract of Elate'rium.= _Syn._ INSPISSATED JUICE OF THE SQUIRTING
CUCUMBER; SUCCUS SPISSATUS MOMORDICAE ELATERII. For preparation and recent
synonyms, see ELATERIUM.

=Extract of El'der Berries.= _Syn._ ELDER ROB; ROOB SAMBUCI, EXTRACTUM
SAMBUCI, E. S. NIGRAE, E. BACCARUM S., SUCCUS SAMBUCI INSPISSATUS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ph. L. 1788.) The expressed and depurated juice of elder
berries, evaporated to the consistence of honey.

2. (Ph. E. 1744.) To the above, when it begins to thicken, add 1-5th part
of sugar.

3. (Ph. Bor.) As the last (nearly), but adding only 1 oz. of white sugar
to each pound of the extract whilst still warm.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 dr.; in
rheumatism, gout, and various skin affections.

=Extract of El'ecampane.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM INULAE, E. RADICUM I. CAMPANAE,
E. HELENII, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L. 1746.) From a decoction of the dried
root.

2. (P. Cod.) As EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.

3. (Ph. Suec 1845.) From a tincture prepared with proof spirit and water,
equal parts.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr.; as a diaphoretic, expectorant,
and tonic; in asthma, hooping-cough, various skin diseases, &c.

=Extract of Elm.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ULMI, E. CORTICUS U., L. _Prep._ 1.
From the decoction of the bark of the common elm (_Ulmus campestris_).

2. (Soubeiran.) As EXTRACT OF BOX. Astringent and alterative.--_Dose_, 20
gr. to 1 dr.; in secondary syphilis, chronic skin affections, &c.

=Extract of Er'got.= _Syn._ AQUEOUS EXTRACT OF ERGOT, HAEMOSTATIC EXTRACT;
EXTRACTUM ERGOTAE, E. E. AQUOSUM, E. SECALIS CORNUTI, E. HAEMOSTATICUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) _Extractum Ergotae Liquidum._ Ergot in coarse powder,
16; ether, 20; distilled water, 70; rectified spirit, 8. Shake the ether
in a bottle with half its bulk of the water, and, after separation, decant
the ether. Place the ergot in a percolator, and free it from oil by
passing the washed ether through it; remove the marc and digest it in the
remainder of the water for twelve hours at 160 deg. F. Press out the liquor,
and evaporate it to 9, and when cold add the 8 of spirit; allow it to
stand for an hour to coagulate, filter, and make up the quantity to
16.--_Dose_, 15 to 30 minims.

According to Squire, the amount of ether employed should be double the
above, in two percolations, and the marc should be dried in the air before
digesting with water. See ERGOTINE (Bonjeau's).

2. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM ERGOTAE ALCOHOLICUM, L.) See ERGOTINE (Wigger's).

=Extract of Eucalyptus Globulus.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM EUCALYPTI GLOBULI.
(Griffith.) _Prep._ Eucalyptus leaves cut at will. Distil the volatile oil
with water; exhaust the residue in the still with water, prepare an
extract, exhaust this with alcohol, evaporate to the consistence of an
extract, and, while cooling, stir in the volatile oil.--_Dose_, 2 gr. to 8
gr.

=Extract of Fern.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM FILICIS 1IQUIDUM--B. P. see EXTRACT OF
MALE FERN.

=Extract of Fleabane (Canadian).= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ERIGERONIS. _Prep._ 1.
From Canadian fleabane, by evaporating an aqueous infusion.--_Dose_, 5 to
10 gr.

2. (EXTRACTUM ERIGERONTIS CANADENSIS FLUIDUM--Ph. U. S.) Canadian erigeron
in moderately coarse powder, 16 oz. (troy); rectified spirit, 16 oz. (old
measure). Proceed as for fluid extract of cubebs (Ph. U. S.).

=Extract of Flesh.= See EXTRACT OF MEAT, ESSENCE OF BEEF, TEA (Beef), &c.

=Extract of Fox'glove.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM DIGITALIS (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1.
(Ph. L. 1836.) From the leaves of _Digitalis purpurea_, as EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--(Ph. L.)

2. (Ph. E.) From the filtered expressed juice, either evaporated _in
vacuo_, with the aid of heat, or by exposure to a current of dry air.

3. (P. Cod.)--_a._ As EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.

_b._ As EXTRACT OF BOX--P. Cod.

4. (Ph. Baden.) As ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. Bad.

_Obs._ The juice of foxglove is very readily injured by exposure to air
and heat. The evaporation should therefore be conducted as rapidly as
possible, but at a low temperature. It is narcotic, sedative, and is
powerfully poisonous.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr., cautiously increased to 2 or 3 gr.
It is principally given in fevers, dropsy, diseases of the heart,
pulmonary consumption, epilepsy, scrofula, and asthma. This extract spoils
by long keeping. The last two are stronger than the rest, and keep better.
It is omitted in the present Ph. L.

=Extract of Fu'mitory.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM FUMARIAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From
either the infusion or decoction of the dried leaves of common fumitory
(_Fumaria officinalis_).

2. (B. Cod.) From the clarified juice of the fresh herb. Slightly
aperient, diaphoretic, and alterative. It has been given in obstructions
of the liver and cutaneous affections of the leprous kind.

=Extract of Galls.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GALLAE, E. GALLARUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
From the infusion by maceration or displacement with cold water.

2. From the hot infusion or decoction. The first is to be preferred.
Astringent. Used chiefly in ointments and injections for piles, foul
ulcers, &c., and, internally, in haemorrhages, spitting of blood, &c.

=Extract of Gen'tian.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GENTIANAE (B. P.), L. _Prep._ 1.
(Ph. L.) Gentian root (sliced), 3 lbs.; distilled water (temperate), 4
pints; macerate for 12 hours, and gently express the liquor; repeat the
maceration with water, 1 quart, for 6 hours; and evaporate the mixed
liquors.

2. (Ph. L. 1836.) From the ordinary infusion of the root made with 10 or
12 times its weight of boiling water, the maceration being continued for
24 hours.

3. (Ph. E.) From an infusion prepared by percolation with cold water. The
formulae of the Ph. Baden, Paris, and U. S. are similar.

4. (B. P.) Gentian, 1 lb.; water (boiling), 10; macerate for 2 hours, boil
15 minutes, strain, and evaporate to a soft pilular consistence.--_Dose_,
10 to 15 gr.

5. (Ph. D. 1826.) From the decoction.

_Obs._ On the large scale, this extract is almost universally prepared by
exhausting the root by coction with water, as in the last formula. When
well prepared it is one of the smoothest and brightest extracts of the
Pharmacop[oe]ia. Good gentian root yields by infusion in hot water fully
50%, and by decoction about 60% of extract.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 30 gr., two
or three times daily, as a stomachic bitter and tonic; either alone or
combined with rhubarb, ginger, or aloes. It is, however, more especially
used as a vehicle for chalybeates and other metallic preparations. The
principal consumption of extract of gentian is by the brewers, in lieu of
hops.

6. (HARD E. OF G.; E. D. DURUM, L.) The last dried by a gentle heat until
brittle enough to powder.

=Extract (Fluid) of Ginger.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ZINGIBERIS FLUIDUM. (Ph. U.
S.) As fluid extract of cubebs, but using rectified spirit.

=Extract (Fluid) of Golden Seal.= _Syn._ (Ph. U. S.) EXTRACTUM HYDRASTIS
FLUIDUM. _Prep._ Hydrastis (Golden Seal) in very fine powder, 16 oz.
(troy); macerate with 2 oz. (old measure) of glycerine; rectified spirit,
14 oz. (old measure), in closed percolator for 4 days; then let the
percolation commence, and finish it by adding a mixture consisting of 2
parts of spirit and 1 of water, until 24 oz. (old measure) have been
obtained. Remove the first 14 oz.; evaporate the remaining 10 oz. to 2
oz. (old measure), and mix with the reserved portion.

=Extract, Goulard's.= See SOLUTION OF SUBACETATE OF LEAD.

=Extract of Guaiac'um.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GUAIACI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.
1746.) From lignum vitae shavings or sawdust, exhausted by coction with
water; as soon as the mass becomes thick, 1-8th of rectified spirit is to
be added.

2. As the last, omitting the spirit. Diaphoretic, diuretic, and
alterative; in dropsy, gout, rheumatism, skin diseases, &c.

=Extract of Guarana'.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GUARANAE, E. PAULLINIAE, L. _Prep._
(Dr Gavrelle.) From tincture of guarana (seeds of _Paullinia sorbilis_),
prepared by coction with proof spirit. Tonic and alterative.--_Dose_, 2 to
5 gr., twice or thrice daily.

=Extract, Haemostat'ic.= See EXTRACT OF ERGOT.

=Extract of Hedge Hyssop.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GRATIOLAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph.
Bor.) From the herb (_Gratiola officinalis_), as ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--Ph. Bor.

2. (Ph. Baden.) As EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. Baden.

3. (Vinous.) As VINOUS EXTRACT OF CINCHONA. Purgative, diuretic, and
vermifuge.--_Dose_, 2 to 5 gr., gradually increased, watching its effects;
in dropsy, jaundice, gout, &c. It has been said to be the basis of the
celebrated 'EAU MEDICINALE D'HUSSON,'

=Extract of Hel'lebore.= The extracts prepared from three different plants
may be included under this head:--

1. (EXTRACT OF BLACK HELLEBORE; EXTRACTUM HELLEBORI, E. H. NIGRI,
L.)--_a._ (Ph. L., 1788.) From the infusion or decoction of black
hellebore (_Helleborus officinalis_).--_Dose_, 5 to 12 gr.

_b._ (Alcoholic--P. Cod. & Ph. U. S.) As EXTRACT OF BOX (nearly). That of
the Ph. Bad. is similar.--_Dose_, 3 to 8 gr.

_c._ (Vino-alcoholic--Cottereau.) Powdered black hellebore, 2 lbs.; salt
of tartar, 1/2 lb.; dilute alcohol (sp. gr. .935), 7 pints; digest 12
hours, and express the tincture; add to the marc, white wine, 7 pints;
digest for 24 hours, express, mix the tincture, filter, and
evaporate.--_Dose_, 2 to 6 gr.

_Obs._ When prepared by coction with water till exhausted of soluble
matter, black hellebore root yields about 40% of extract. In small doses
it is alterative, purgative, and resolvent; in larger ones, it is a
drastic, hydragogue cathartic, and emmenagogue, dangerous unless combined
and its effects carefully watched.

2. (EXTRACT OF GREEN HELLEBORE, E. OF AMERICAN H., E. OF ITCH-WOOD;
EXTRACTUM VERATRI VIRIDIS, L.) From the fresh root (rhizome) of the green
hellebore (_Veratrum viride_), as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L.--_Dose_, 1/6
to 1/2 gr. Used in America in the same cases as white hellebore.

3. (EXTRACT OF WHITE HELLEBORE; EXTRACTUM VERATRI, E. HELLEBORI ALBI, L.)
From the root (rhizome) of the white hellebore (_Veratrum album_), as
EXTRACT OF BLACK HELLEBORE.--_Dose_, 1/12 gr. to 1/4 gr. Emetic,
purgative, stimulant, and highly acrid. In gout, rheumatism, and nervous
affections, mania, &c. See VERATRINE.

=Extract of Hem'lock.= _Syn._ INSPISSATED JUICE OF HEMLOCK; EXTRACTUM
CONII (B. P.), SUCCUS SPISSATUS CONII, L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) The
inspissated juice of the fresh plant, prepared as directed for EXTRACTUM
BELLADONNAE.--_Dose_, 4 to 6 gr.

2. (Ph. L.) From the fresh plant (_Conium maculatum_), as EXTRACT OF
ACONITE.--Ph. L.

3. (Ph. E.) As EXTRACT OF FOXGLOVE--Ph. E.

4. (Ph. D.) As EXTRACT OF BELLADONNA--Ph. D.

_Obs._ Of all the inspissated juices (not even excepting that of aconite),
this is the one most readily injured by exposure to the air and heat, and
which soonest loses its qualities by age. Its active principle is CONINE.
Extract of hemlock has a greenish colour, and a strong odour of the
fresh-bruised plant. It is "of good quality only when a very strong odour
of conia (a 'mouse-odour') is disengaged by degrees, on its being
carefully triturated with liquor of potassa." (Ph. E.) "The extracts of
hemlock may become feeble, if not inert, in one of two ways,--either by
the heat being continued after the concentration has been carried to a
certain extent, or by long keeping. On the one hand, I have always
observed that from the point at which the extract attains the consistence
of thin syrup, ammonia begins to be given off in abundance, together with
a modified odour of conine; and, on the other hand, I have found extracts
which were unquestionably well prepared at first, entirely destitute of
conine in a few years." (Christison.) "The most active extract is that
which is procured by moderate pressure from the leaves only." (Brande.)
"The extract of the Ph. D., being freed from the inert albumen and
chlorophyll, contains most of the active principle, and is nearly soluble
in water." (Royle.) On the large scale, the whole of the green portion of
the plant is pressed for juice. 1 cwt. of hemlock yields from 3 to 5 lbs.
of extract.--_Dose_, 2 gr., gradually increased to 5 gr., or more, until
some obvious effect is produced; as an anodyne, alterative, and resolvent
in various obstinate disorders, as glandular and visceral enlargements,
foul and painful ulcers, scrofula, cancer, neuralgia, rheumatism,
troublesome coughs, &c.

5. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM CONII ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ (Ph. Baden.) As
ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. Baden.

_b._ (P. Cod.) As the last, but using proof spirit.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 gr.

6. (Dried; EXTRACTUM CONII SICCUM, L.)--_a._ As the DRIED EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--P. Cod.

_b._ (Archer.) By drying the extract of the Dublin College with a
continuous current of warm air.

7. (EXTRACTUM CONII SEMINIS ALCOHOLICUM.) (P. Cod.) _Prep._ Hemlock seeds
in coarse powder, 1 lb; percolate with proof spirit until exhausted.
Distil off most of the spirit, and evaporate residue in a water bath to
pilular consistence.

=Extract of Hemp.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF AMERICAN HEMP; EXTRACTUM APOCYNI, E.
A. CANNABINI, L. _Prep._ From the root of the _Apocynum cannabinum_, as
EXTRACT OF GENTIAN. A hydragogue cathartic.--_Dose_, 2 to 6 gr.; in
dropsy, &c. The plant from which this extract is prepared is called
'Indian HEMP' in the United States of America, a practice which should be
avoided, as this name is now almost exclusively appropriated to _Cannabis
Indica_, a variety of the common hemp (_Cannabis sativa_, var. _Indica_)
growing in India. See EXTRACT OF INDIAN HEMP.

=Extract of Hen'bane.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF HYOSCYAMUS; EXTRACTUM HYOSCYAMI
(B. P.), SUCCUS SPISSATUS HYOSCYAMI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L.) From the fresh
leaves and leafstems of common henbane (_Hyoscyamus niger_), as EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--Ph. L.

2. (Ph. E.) As EXTRACT OF FOXGLOVE--Ph. E.

3. (Ph. P.) From the fresh leaves and young branches, as EXTRACT OF
BELLADONNA.--_Dose_, 3 to 6 gr.

4. (Ph. U. S.) From the expressed juice coagulated by heat and strained.

_Obs._ In the Paris Codex Extracts are ordered to be prepared from henbane
both by the processes Nos. 1 and 4 above.--_Product_ (by the ordinary
method):--1 lb. of the fresh leaves yielded fully 8 dr. of extract
(Geiger); 1 cwt. yielded 4 to 5 lb. (Brande); 1 cwt. of the recent plant
yielded, by an ordinary screw press, 59-1/2 lbs. of juice, and this
evaporated in a water bath gave 5 lbs. 9 oz. of extract (Squire); 1-3/4
cwt. of the green herb yielded 11 lbs. of extract (Gray).--_Dose_, 2 to 10
gr.; as an anodyne, hypnotic, antispasmodic, sedative, and narcotic, more
especially in those cases in which the use of opium is objectionable.
_Externally_, as a topical application to sore or inflamed parts, either
made into an ointment or spread on plaster.

5. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM HYOSCYAMI ALCOHOLICUM, L.) The formulae of the Ph.
Bad., Par. & U. S. are similar to those for ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF ACONITE.

6. (E. OF HENBANE SEEDS; EXTRACTUM SEMINUM HYOSCYAMI, L.--P. Cod.) An
extract of the seeds made with spirit sp. gr. .900 (=about 16 o. p.) is
dissolved in 4 parts of cold water, and the solution filtered and
evaporated. Stronger than the simple extract.--_Dose_, 1/4 to 3 gr.

=Extract of Ho'ly This'tle.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CARDUI BENEDICTI, L. _Prep._
1. (Ph. Baden.) From holy or blessed thistle (_Carduus Benedictus_) by
displacement with cold water.

2. (Ph. Bor.) As EXTRACT OF GENTIAN--Ph. L. (nearly). Tonic, diaphoretic,
febrifuge, often diuretic, and occasionally emetic.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr.,
as a tonic or stomachic chiefly.

=Extract of Hops.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM LUPULI (B. P., Ph. L. & E.), E. HUMULI
(Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Hop, 8; rectified spirit, 15; distilled
water, 80. Macerate the hop in the spirit for 7 days, press out the
tincture, filter, and distil off the spirit, leaving a soft extract; boil
the residual hop with the water for one hour, then express the liquor,
strain, and evaporate on a water bath to the consistence of a soft
extract. Mix the two extracts, and evaporate at a temperature not
exceeding 160 deg. to a pilular consistence.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr.

2. (Ph. L.) From commercial hops (the strobiles or catkins of _Humulus
Lupulus_), 2-1/2 lbs.; boiling distilled water, 2 galls.; macerate for 24
hours, boil to a gallon, strain whilst hot, and evaporate to a proper
consistence. The form of the Ph. E. is nearly similar.

3. (Ph. D.) As EXTRACT of ALOES--Ph. D. Tonic and stomachic, and slightly
anodyne and hypnotic.--_Dose_, 5 gr. to 30 gr.; in dyspepsia, and cases
that do not permit of the use of opium. 1 cwt. of ordinary hops yield
about 40 lbs. of extract. (Brande.) The druggists usually employ hops 2 or
more years old, called by the dealers 'yearlings,' 'olds,' or 'old olds,'
because these may be purchased at 2/3 to 1/2 the price of those of the
last season's growth. The first of the above are estimated to have only
2/3 the strength of new hops; the second about 1/2; and the last little or
none, at least in a medical point of view.

4. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM LUPULI ALCOHOLICUM, L.--Cottereau.) By
displacement with proof spirit. Stronger than the aqueous extract.

=Extract of Hore'hound.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM MARRUBII, L. _Prep._ 1. From the
fresh herb, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE.

2. From the infusion or decoction. Antispasmodic, pectoral, tonic, and
emmenagogue.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1 dr.

3. (Ph. Baden.) By displacement with cold water.

4. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM MARRUBII ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ From a tincture
made with proof spirit. Said by M. Thoriel to possess considerable power
as a febrifuge.--_Dose_, 5 gr. to 20 gr.

_b._ (Ph. Lusit.) From a tincture made with a mixture of rectified spirit,
1 part, and water, 7 parts. Inferior to the last.

=Extract of Ind'ian Hemp.= _Syn._ CANNABINE, HEMP RESIN, ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT
OF INDIAN HEMP; EXTRACTUM CANNABIS INDICAE, E. C. I. ALCOHOLICUM, RESINA
CANNABIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Indian hemp in coarse powder, 1;
rectified spirit, 5; macerate seven days, press out the tincture, distil
off the spirit, and evaporate.--_Dose_, 1/4 to 1 grain in pill.

2. (O'Shaughnessy.) The dried resinous tops of Indian hemp ('GUNJAH') are
boiled in rectified spirit until all the resin is taken up, when most of
the spirit is distilled off, and the evaporation completed by the heat of
a water bath. 1 cwt. yields about 7 lbs.

3. (Robertson). By slowly acting on the 'gunjah' with the vapour of
alcohol, by a species of percolation; the spirit of the resulting tincture
is partly removed by distillation, and the rest by slow evaporation at a
temperature not above 150 deg. Fahr. 1 cwt. yields about 8 lbs.--_Dose_ of the
last two, 1 to 3 gr., gradually increased.

4. (Messrs Smith.) The bruised 'gunjah' is exhausted with tepid water,
then with a solution of carbonate of soda (1 of carbonate to 2 of gunjah),
and next with pure water; it is then pressed, dried, and exhausted by
displacement with rectified spirit; the tincture is agitated with a milk
of lime (containing 1 oz. of lime for every lb. of gunjah), and, after
filtration or decantation, any retained lime is precipitated by a little
sulphuric acid in slight excess; the tincture is next agitated with animal
charcoal, and again filtered; most of the spirit is now removed by
distillation, and 3 or 4 times its bulk of water being added, the
remaining spirit is removed by a gentle heat; lastly, the remaining water
is poured off, and the resin remaining washed with fresh water, and dried.
Product, 6%.--Commencing dose, 1/4 gr.

3. (Purified; EXTRACTUM CANNABIS INDICAE PURIFICATUM, L.--Ph. D.) From the
crude extract of Indian hemp, as imported ('CHURRUS'), 1 oz.; rectified
spirit, 4 fl. oz.; dissolve, and after defecation, decant, and evaporate.

_Obs._ The preparations of Indian hemp are said to be anaesthetic, anodyne,
hypnotic, stimulant, phrenic, and aphrodisiac, and, in overdoses, to
produce catalepsy. They have been recommended in hysteria, hydrophobia,
cholera, rheumatism, chorea, convulsions, and various other painful
spasmodic and nervous affections of a serious character. According to the
observations of Dr O'Shaughnessy, 1 gr. of the extract produced catalepsy
in a rheumatic patient. The extract prepared with the plant grown in our
botanic gardens has quite a different effect to that of the Indian plant;
and it also appears that the inhabitants of this country are less
susceptible to its action than those of India, and consequently bear the
drug in larger doses. This hemp is known in India as the 'increaser of
pleasure,' the 'exciter of desire,' the 'cementer of friendship,' the
'causer of a reeling gait,' the 'laughter-mover,' &c. See EXTRACT OF HEMP
(_above_), HEMP, &c.

=Extract of Ipecac'uanha.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM IPECACUANHA, L. _Prep._ 1. (P.
Cod.) From ipecacuanha, as EXTRACT OF BOX.--P. Cod.

2. (Ph. Bor.) As EXTRACT OF HENBANE SEEDS. Expectorant and
emetic.--_Dose_, 1-1/2 to 8 gr.

=Extract of I'ron.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM FERRI, E. MARTIS, L. _Prep._ 1. From
tincture of tartarised iron.--_Dose_, 2 to 10 gr.; as a chalybeate tonic.

2. (Compound.) See EXTRACT OF APPLE.

=Extract of Jabor'andi (Fluid).= (F. V. Greene, 'Amer. Journ. Pharm.,'
1877.) _Prep._ Jaborandi leaves in moderately fine powder, 16 troy oz.;
alcohol (50 per cent.), a sufficient quantity. Moisten the powder
thoroughly with the menstruum, pack in a conical glass percolator, place a
layer of two inches of well-washed sand on the top of the cloth covering
the material, add menstruum until the liquid begins to drop from the
percolator, when the lower orifice is to be closed with a cork, and the
percolator securely covered; set aside in a moderately warm place for four
days. At the expiration of this time remove the cork, and add more
menstruum by degrees until the material is exhausted. The first 14 ounces
(old measure) of the percolate are to be reserved, and the remainder
evaporated on a water bath, with constant stirring towards the close, to 2
fluid ounces (old measure), which are to be added to the reserved portion.
If the percolation and evaporation have been properly performed the fluid
extract will not be required to be filtered.

=Extract of Jal'ap.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM JALAPAE (B. P.), E. SIVE RESINA
JALAPAE (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Jalap in coarse powder, 1;
rectified spirit, 5; distilled water, 10; macerate the jalap in the spirit
for seven days, press out the tincture, then filter, and distil off the
spirit, leaving a soft extract; again macerate the residual jalap in the
water for four hours, express, strain through flannel, and evaporate by a
water bath to a soft extract; mix the two extracts, and evaporate at a
temperature not exceeding 140 deg. F. to a proper consistence for forming
pills.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr.

2. (Ph. L.) Jalap (powdered) 2-1/2 lbs.; rectified spirit, 1 gall.; digest
four days, and express the tincture; boil the 'marc' in water, 2 galls.;
until reduced to 1/2 gall.; filter the tincture and decoction separately,
and let the one distil and the other evaporate until each thickens;
lastly, mix the two and complete the evaporation.--_Product._ About 66% =
16% of alcoholic and 50% of aqueous extract. (Brande.) 18 lbs. yield 12
lbs. of extract. (Lab. Journ.)--_Dose_, 6 to 15 gr.

3. (Ph. E.) From tincture of jalap prepared by displacement with rectified
spirit. It consists of impure resin of jalap. It is more active than the
last.--_Prod._ 16%.--_Dose_, 2 to 6 gr.

4. (Ph. Ed. 1744, EXTRACTUM JALAPAE ALKALINUM.) As extract jalap (B. P.)
adding for every pound of jalap, 1 oz., or q. s. of carbonate of potash.

_Obs._ Extract of jalap is an active purgative. It should be well beaten
up with a little sulphate of potassa, sugar, or some aromatic powder, to
prevent it griping. The substance commonly sold as extract of jalap in the
shops is prepared by boiling jalap root for 3 or 4 hours in water, when it
is taken out, and well bruised or sliced, and again boiled with water
until exhausted of soluble matter. The mixed decoctions are then allowed
12 or 14 hours for defecation, after which the supernatant portion is
decanted and evaporated.

Extract of jalap "should be kept in the soft state (EXTRACTUM JALAPAE, E.
J. MOLLE), so as to form pills; and in the hard state (HARD EXTRACT OF
JALAP; EXTRACTUM JALAPAE DURUM), that it may be rubbed to powder." (Ph. L.)

=Extract of Jasmine (Yellow).= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GELSEMII FLUIDUM. (Ph. U.
S.) _Prep._ Yellow jasmine in very fine powder, 16 oz. (troy); rectified
spirit, 16 oz. (old measure). Proceed as for fluid extract of cubebs. (Ph.
U. S.)

=Extract of Ju'niper.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM JUNIPERI, E. BACCARUM J., L.
_Prep._ (P. Cod.) Macerate juniper berries in water at 77 deg. to 86 deg. Fahr.,
for 24 hours, strain, repeat the process with a fresh quantity of water,
mix the liquors, filter, and evaporate.--_Dose_, 20 gr. to 1 dr.; as a
stimulant diuretic, in dropsy, &c.; and also as a pill-basis.

=Extract of Kalada'na.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM KALADANAE, L. _Prep._ (Bengal
Disp.) From the tincture of the seeds of kaladana (_Pharbitis Nil_).
Purgative said to be equal to EXTRACT OF JALAP, and of double the
strength.

=Extract of Lettuce=. _Syn._ INSPISSATED JUICE OF LETTUCE; EXTRACTUM
LACTUCAE (B. P.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) The inspissated juice evaporated to
a pillular consistence, according to the directions given for EXTRACTUM
BELLADONNAE.

2. (Ph. L.) From the fresh leaves of garden lettuce (_Lactuca sativa_), as
EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L. Anodyne, sedative, hypnotic, and
antispasmodic.--_Dose_, 3 to 10 gr. 1 cwt. of lettuce yields 4 lbs. to 5
lbs. of extract.

3. (Probait.) From the external parts of the stalks and the old and yellow
leaves, after the plants have flowered, by maceration in water for 24
hours, and decoction for 2 hours; the expressed liquid is first evaporated
by a gentle heat, and afterwards spread on shallow dishes, and dried by
exposure to a current of air. Stronger than the last.--_Dose_, 1 to 5 gr.

4. (E. OF WILD LETTUCE, INSPISSATED JUICE OF W. L.; EXTRACTUM LACTUCAE
VIROSAE, SUCCUS SPISSATUS L. V.--Ph. E., L.)--_a._ (Ph. E.) From the leaves
of strong-scented wild lettuce (_Lactuca virosa_).[295]

[Footnote 295: See general instructions, p. 682.]

_b._ (P. Cod.) As ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF ACONITE.--P. Cod.

_c._ (Ph. Baden.) As EXTRACT OF FOXGLOVE--Ph. Baden. See LACTUCARIUM.

=Extract of Liq'uorice.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GLYCYRRHIZAE (B. P.), L. _Prep._
1. (SOFT E. OF L.; EXTRACTUM GLYCYRRHIZAE MOLLE, L.)--_a._ (Ph. L.) From
fresh liquorice root, as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L.

_b._ (Ph. E.) From the fresh root, cut into slices, dried, and powdered,
as EXTRACT OF GENTIAN--Ph. E. The form of the Ph. Baden is very similar.

_c._ (Ph. D.) As ordered for simple extracts (EXTRACTA SIMPLICIORA--Ph.
D.).

_d._ (B. P.) Liquorice root in coarse powder, 1; cold distilled water, 5;
macerate the root in half the water for twelve hours, strain, and press;
again macerate the pressed marc with the remainder of the water for 6
hours, strain and press, mix the strained liquors, heat to 212 deg. F.,
strain, and evaporate to a pill consistence.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1 dr.

_e._ (B. P. EXTRACTUM GLYCYRRHIZAE LIQUIDUM.) _Prep._ Liquorice root in
coarse powder, 1 lb.; distilled water, 4 pints. Macerate the liquorice
with two pints of water for twelve hours, strain, and press; again
macerate the pressed marc with the remainder of the water for six hours,
strain, and press. Mix the strained liquors, heat to 212 deg. Fahr., and
strain through flannel; then evaporate by a water bath until it has
acquired, when cold, a specific gravity of 1.160; add to this one eighth
of its volume of rectified spirit; let the mixture stand for twelve hours
and filter.

_f._ (U. S. Disp.) Crude liquorice (SPANISH JUICE), q. s. is dissolved in
water, and the solution filtered and evaporated. To produce a good article
(EXTRACTUM GLYCYRRHIZAE PURIFICATUM) in this way, the solution should be
allowed some hours for defecation, and should not be decanted and strained
until quite cold.

_Obs._ Soft extract of liquorice is often employed as a pill-basis, and
the hard extract (SPANISH JUICE, &c.) is used as a lozenge to allay
tickling cough. The principal portion of the latter is, however, consumed
by the porter brewers and brewers' druggists. The product of the last
formula, evaporated until it is quite solid when cold, and made into small
pipes, sticks, or rolls, forms the BEST REFINED LIQUORICE or REFINED JUICE
of the shops.

2. (HARD E. OF L., SPANISH JUICE, S. LIQUORICE, GLYCYRRHIZIN, BLACK SUGAR;
EXTRACTUM GLYCYRRHIZAE SIMPLEX, E. G. DURUM, SUCCUS G., S. G. SPISSATUS,
L.) This is seldom prepared by the English druggists, being principally
imported in the dry state from Spain and Italy. That from Solazzi (SOLAZZI
JUICE) is the most esteemed. A great deal of the foreign extract is mixed
with fecula, or the pulp of plums, hence its inferior quality. It also
frequently contains copper, derived from the boilers in which it is
prepared. The extract prepared from the fresh root is usually preferred to
the best foreign, as the latter has a less sweet and agreeable taste.
REFINED JUICE is prepared by dissolving the foreign juice in water,
filtering and evaporating. See LIQUORICE, and _above_.

=Extract of Lobe'lia.= _Syn._ ACETIC EXTRACT OF INDIAN TOBACCO; EXTRACTUM
LOBELIAE, E. L. INFLATAE, L. _Prep._ (W. Proctor.) Lobelia seeds (bruised),
8 oz.; dilute alcohol (sp. gr. .935), 4 pints; acetic acid, 1 fl. oz.; by
maceration for 24 hours, and subsequent displacement. Expectorant and
diaphoretic, in small doses; emetic and narcotic, in larger ones. It is
principally used in asthma and other chest diseases.--_Dose_, 1/4 gr. to 5
gr.

=Extract of Log'wood.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM HAEMATOXYLI (B. P.), E. H.
CAMPECHIANI, (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Logwood in chips, 1; boiling
distilled water, 10; macerate 24 hours, boil to 5, strain, and evaporate
to an extract, but not in iron vessels.

2. (Ph. L.) From cut logwood (logwood chips), as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L.

3. (Ph. E.) As the last (nearly).

4. (Ph. D. 1826 and Wholesale.) From the decoction.

_Obs._ The Ph. U. S. 1841 orders the wood to be rasped. The Ph. Baden
directs displacement with cold water. On the large scale, this extract is
prepared solely by decoction. 1 cwt. of wood yields about 20 lbs. of
extract (Brande); 80 lbs. yield 14 lbs. of extract (Gray.) It is kept in
two states--hard (EXTRACTUM HAEMATOXYLI DURUM) and soft (E. H. MOLLE). The
dose of the first is 10 to 20 gr., dissolved in wine, or any cordial
water; as an astringent, after each motion in diarrh[oe]a; the second is
often employed as a lozenge in the same disease, and is an inexpensive and
agreeable remedy for simple relaxation of the bowels.

=Extract of Lov'age.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM LEVISTICI, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Baden.)
From lovage (_Levisticum officinale_), as EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.
Aromatic, stomachic, and diaphoretic.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr.

=Extract of Lu'puline.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM LUPULINAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From
lupuline (the powder separated from hops by rubbing and sifting), by
infusion in cold water, or by displacement.

2. (EXTRACTUM LUPULINAE COCTIONE PARATUM.) From the decoction. Both similar
to extract of hops, but stronger. The first is the most aromatic; the last
the most bitter.

=Extract of Mad'der.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM RUBIAE. L. _Prep._ (Ph. Hamb.) From
the tincture of dyer's madder (_Rubia tinctorum_), made with rectified
spirit, 1 part, and water, 3 parts.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 30 gr.; as a
diuretic, emmenagogue, and parturifacient; and in jaundice, &c.

=Extract of Mahog'any.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SWIETENIAE, L. From the chips and
sawdust of mahogany (_Swietenia Mahogoni_). It is astringent, and is
frequently sold for kino. It is also employed in tanning.

=Extract of Male Fern.= _Syn._ ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF MALE FERN; EXTRACTUM
FILICIS, B. P. _Prep._ 1. (Dr Ebers.) From the tincture of the dried root
of male fern (_Lastraea Filix-mas_), made with rectified spirit. In
tape-worm.--_Dose_, 20 gr. to 1/2 dr., twice a day, made into an electuary
with powdered sugar, and followed by a strong dose of castor oil.

2. (Ethereal.) B. P. (EXTRACTUM FILICIS LIQUIDUM.) Fern root, in coarse
powder, 1; ether, 2-1/2, or a sufficiency. Pack closely in a percolator
with 1 of the ether, add the rest at intervals, until it passes through
colourless, distil off the ether, and the liquid extract remains.--_Dose_,
30 to 60 minims. See OIL OF MALE FERN.

=Extract of Malt.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM MALTI, E. BYNES, L. _Prep._ 1. From
the infusion made with water at a temperature ranging between 160 deg. and
170 deg. Fahr., drained off, without pressure, and evaporated to the
consistence of honey. Nutritious and laxative.--_Dose._ A table-spoonful,
or more, _ad libitum_.

2. EXTRACT OF MALT, FERRATED. (Ph. G.) Extract of malt, 47-1/2 oz., mixed
with 1 oz. of pyrophosphate of iron and citrate of ammonia, dissolved in
1-1/2 oz. of water.

=Extract of Ma''rygold.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CALENDULAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Guibourt.) By maceration of the herb and flowers of the common marygold
(_Calendula officinalis_) in tepid water for 24 hours, and subsequent
coction for 15 or 20 minutes.

2. (Ph. Baden.) As EXTRACT OF ANGELICA--Ph. Baden.--_Dose_, 2 to 10 gr.;
cordial, diaphoretic, alterative, and emmenagogue; in dyspepsia, and
scirrhous and cancerous affections.

=Extract of May-apple.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PODOPHYLLI. L. _Prep._ (Ph. U. S.
1841.) From the tincture of the root (rhizomes) of may-apple (_Podophyllum
peltatum_).--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr.; as a substitute for extract of jalap.
See PODOPHYLLIN.

=Extract of Mea'dow Saf'fron.= See EXTRACT OF COLCHICUM.

=Extract of Meat.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF FLESH; EXTRACTUM CARNIS, L. _Prep._
(Liebig.) The lean of recently killed meat (chopped very small), 1 part;
cold water, 8 parts; agitate it well together for 10 minutes; then heat it
gradually to the boiling-point, let it simmer gently for a few minutes,
and strain through a hair sieve whilst still hot; lastly, evaporate to a
soft mass. 1 lb. of meat yields barely 1 oz. See ESSENCE OF BEEF, TEA
(Beef), &c.

=Extract of Mezere'on.= _Syn._ MEZEREON RESIN; EXTRACTUM MEZEREI, RESINA
MEZEREI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Alcoholic; E. M. ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ (Ph.
Hamb.) By distilling off 5/6ths of the tincture made with rectified
spirit, and filtering the residue, retaining what is left on the filter.

_b._ By the simple distillation of the tincture.

_Obs._ Green or brownish green; insoluble in water. 1/2 oz. mezereon
root-bark yielded 1-1/2 oz. (Hamb. Disp.) It is chiefly used in preparing
blistering ointments and plasters.

2. (Ethereal; GREEN OIL OF MEZEREON; EXTRACTUM MEZEREI AETHEREUM. B.
P.)--_a._ B. P. Mezereon bark cut small, 1 lb.; rectified spirit, 8 pints;
ether, 1 pint. Macerate the mezereon in 6 pints of the spirit for 3 days,
with frequent agitation, strain, and press. To the residue of the mezereon
add the remainder of the spirit, and again macerate for 3 days, with
constant agitation, strain, and press. Mix and filter the strained
liquors, recover the greater part of the spirit by distillation, evaporate
what remains to the consistence of a soft extract, put this in a stoppered
bottle with the ether, and macerate for 24 hours, shaking them frequently;
decant the etherial solution, recover part of the ether by distillation,
and evaporate what remains to the consistence of a soft extract.

_b._ (Ph. Bor.) By digesting alcoholic extract of mezereon in ether for
some days with agitation, reducing the tincture to 1-4th by careful
distillation, and evaporating the residuum by a gentle heat to the
consistence of an extract.

_c._ (Ph. U. S. EXTRACTUM MEZEREI FLUIDUM.) Mezereon in moderately coarse
powder, 16 oz. (troy); alcohol (.817), 16 oz. (old measure); proceed as
for fluid extract of cubebs. (Ph. U. S.)

_Obs._ Both the alcoholic and ethereal extract of mezereon must be kept in
stoppered bottles. The latter, like the former, is used as an external
irritant.

=Extract of Mil'foil.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM MILLEFOLII, _E. Achiliae m._, L.
_Prep._ From the herb milfoil or yarrow (_Achillea millefolium_), as
EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L. Astringent, tonic, and alterative.--_Dose_, 10 gr.
to 1/2 dr.

=Extract of Mimo'sa Bark.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CORTICIS MIMOSAE, L. _Prep._
From the bark of several Australian species of Acacia or Mimosa (_Acacia
mollissima_, _A. decurrens_, _A. melanoxylon_, &c.). It is chiefly
imported from Van Diemen's Land. Astringent. Said to be superior to oak
bark for tanning.

=Extract of Mone'sia Bark.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM MONESIAE, E. M. PURIFICATUM,
L. _Prep._ From the monesia or buranheim bark (bark of _Chrysophyllum
Buranheim_); or from commercial monesia, as EXTRACT OF CATECHU.
Astringent.--_Dose_, 4 to 8 gr.

=Extract of Mug'wort.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ARTEMISIAE, L. _Prep._ From the
tops of the common mugwort (_Artemisia vulgaris_), as EXTRACT OF BOX,--P.
Cod. An active emmenagogue.

=Extract of Myrrh.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM MYRRHAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Aqueous;
EXTRACTUM MYRRHAE AQUOSUM, L.)--_a._ From the strained decoction.

_b_. (Ph. Bor.) As EXTRACT OF ALOES--Ph. Bor., afterwards reducing it to a
fine powder. The formula of the Ph. Baden is similar.--_Dose_, 6 to 15
gr., or more.

2. (Alcoholic; RESIN OF MYRRH; EXTRACTUM MYRRHAE ALCOHOLICUM, E. M.
RESINOSUM, L.) From the tincture. Tonic and stimulant.--_Dose_, 5 to 10
gr., or more.

3. (Compound; EXTRACTUM MYRRHAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Swediaur.) Myrrh, 2 oz.;
gum arabic (in powder), 2 dr.; triturate, add water, q. s. to form a thick
emulsion, and add extract of couch grass, 4 oz. Much recommended in
phthisis and uterine ulcerations.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dr. in water, twice or
thrice daily.

=Extracts, Narcotic, with Sugar.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM NARCOTICA CUM SACCHARO.
(Guager.) _Prep._ Dissolve 6 oz. of alcoholic extract of the plant in 14
dr. or 2 oz. of strong alcohol by trituration in a porcelain mortar, and
mix with it 30 oz. of powdered white sugar, gradually added, with constant
stirring. Set the mixture in a warm situation until dry. Add sugar q. s.
to make up 36 oz. These preparations are less liable to lose their
efficacy than the simple extracts. 6 gr. represent one of the extract.

=Extract of Net'tles.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM URTICAE, L. _Prep._ (P. Cod.) From
the juice of nettles (_Urtica dioica_), as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L.
Antiscorbutic, diuretic, and narcotic.

=Extract of Nose'gay.= _Syn._ ESSENCE OF NOSEGAY; EXTRAIT DE BOUQUET, Fr.
_Prep._ Flowers of benzoin, 1 dr.; essence of ambergris, 2 fl. oz.;
spirits of jasmine and extract (esprit) of violets, of each 1 pint;
spirits of cassia, roses, orange flowers and gillyflowers, of each 1/2
pint; mix. A delightful perfume.

=Extract of Nux Vom'ica.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF KOOCHLA NUTS; EXTRACTUM NUCIS
VOMICAE, B. P. _Prep._ 1. (Aqueous; E. N. V. AQUOSUM, L.--Ph. Bor.) From
the powdered nut, as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L. (nearly.)--_Dose_, 1 to 5 gr.

2. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM NUCIS VOMICAE--Ph. L. E. and D., E. N. V.
ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ (B. P.) Soften nux vomica by steam, dry rapidly,
and reduce to fine powder; boil with rectified spirit until exhausted,
strain, distil off the spirit, and evaporate to the consistence of a soft
extract.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 2 gr.

_b._ (Ph. L.) Koochla or poison nuts (seed or fruit of _Strychnos
Nux-vomica_), 8 oz.; rectified spirit, 3 pints; expose them to steam until
softened, then bruise, slice, and dry them, and macerate them in 2-3rds of
the spirit for 7 days; express the tincture, and repeat the maceration
with the remaining 1-3rd of the spirit; again express the liquid; lastly,
filter the mixed tinctures, distil off the greater part of the spirit, and
complete the evaporation by a gentle heat. The formula of the P. Cod. is
similar, but using spirit sp. gr. .863 (=41 o. p.).

_c._ (Ph. E.) The sliced and dried nuts are to be ground in a coffee-mill,
and either exhausted by percolation with rectified spirit or by boiling
the powder in repeated portions of the menstruum. The formulae of the Ph.
Baden and U. S. are similar.

_d._ (Ph. D. 1826.) From a tincture of the rasped nut made with proof
spirit, observing that the extract, whilst thickening, should be properly
stirred.

_Obs._ This extract consists chiefly of impure igasurate of strychnia, and
is exhibited in similar cases to that alkaloid. Used as a stimulant of the
nervous system in paralysis.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr., gradually and cautiously
increased to 2 gr. It is very poisonous. On the large scale, the nuts are
ground in a drug-mill.

=Extract of Oak Bark.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM QUERCUS, E. CORTICIS QUERCUS, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. D. 1826.) From the decoction. Astringent.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to
1/2 dr. Now seldom used.

=Extract of O'pium.= _Prep._ 1. (AQUEOUS EXTRACT OF OPIUM, SIMPLE E. OF
O.; EXTRACTUM OPII (B. P.), E. O. AQUOSUM (Ph. D.), E. O. PURIFICATUM,
L.)--_a._ (B. P.) Opium in thin slices, 1 lb.; distilled water, 6 pints.
Macerate the opium in 2 pints of the water for 24 hours, and express the
liquor. Reduce the residue of the opium to a uniform pulp, macerate again
in 2 pints of the water for 24 hours, and express. Repeat the operation a
third time. Mix the liquors, strain through flannel, and evaporate by a
water bath to a proper consistence for forming pills.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1
gr., or more.

_b._ (Ph. L.) Opium (powdered), 1-1/2 lb.; distilled water (cold), 2-1/2
pints; mix gradually, and macerate for 24 hours, frequently stirring with
a spatula; (press), strain, and repeat the maceration for 24 hours with a
fresh quantity (2-1/2 pints) of water; lastly, evaporate the (mixed)
strained liquors to a proper consistence. The formulae of the Ph. E. D. and
Baden, and P. Cod., are essentially the same.

_c._ (Ph. D. 1826.) As the last, but using boiling water, and exposing the
mixed liquors to the air for 2 days, before filtering, and evaporating
them. Inferior to the last.

_d._ (Purified.) The extract, prepared with cold water, is evaporated to
dryness, powdered, and redissolved in cold water; after 48 hours'
exposure, and defecation, it is decanted from the dregs, filtered, and
gently evaporated, as before. Superior to any other extract of opium made.

_Obs._ Good opium yields from 60% to 70% of its weight of extract, but
much depends upon the variety used.--_Dose_, 1/4 gr. to 2 gr., as an
anodyne, sedative, and hypnotic. It is less stimulating than ordinary
opium. That prepared by the third formula is, indeed, scarcely inferior in
its action to the salts of morphine.

This extract is kept in both the hard and soft state (EXTRACTUM OPII
DURUM, E. O. MOLLE). A solution of the former, in distilled water, with
the addition of a little spirit to keep it, forms Battley's 'LIQUOR OPII
SEDATIVUS,' The Dublin formula is that adopted by the wholesale druggists.

Besides the aqueous extract, there are the following preparations:--

2. (EXTRACTUM OPII LIQUIDUM, B. P.; EXTRACT OF OPIUM.) Distilled water,
16; rectified spirit, 4. Digest the extract of opium in the water for an
hour, stirring frequently; filter, and add the spirit. The product should
measure 20.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 minims.

3. (Acetic; EXTRACTUM OPII ACETICUM, L.--Soubeiran.) Opium, 1 oz.;
distilled vinegar, 1 quart; digest 2 days (with heat), decant, filter, and
evaporate.

4. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM OPII ALCOHOLICUM, L.--Ph. Antwerp.) From the
tincture.

5. (Aqueo-alcoholic; E. OPII AQUO-ALCOHOLICUM, L.--Taddei.) The opium,
exhausted by spirit, is digested in warm water, and the infusion and
tincture, separately filtered, are mixed and evaporated.

6. (De-narcotised; EXTRACTUM OPII ABSQUE NARCOTINA, L.--_a._ (P. Cod.) The
aqueous extract is reduced with hot water to the consistence of a syrup,
and when cold this is mixed with 8 times its volume of ether, and the
whole is frequently shaken for a day or two; the ethereal solution is then
decanted, and the process repeated with fresh ether, as long as it
dissolves anything. The original form of Robiquet is similar. Said to
consist entirely of impure MURIATE OF MORPHINE, GUM, and EXTRACTIVE.

_b._ (M. Lamousin-Lamothe.) Aqueous extract, 4 parts; resin, 1 part; beat
well together; add boiling water, 16 parts; boil to one half; add cold
water, 8 parts, filter, and evaporate.

7. (By fermentation; EXTRACTUM OPII PER FERMENTATIONEM, L.)--_a._ Opium
and sugar, of each 4 oz.; water, 1 quart; rub together, and keep the
mixture, loosely covered, in a warm situation (about 70 deg. Fahr.), for 10
days or more; then add of cold water, 1 quart, and the next day filter and
evaporate.

_b._ (Duyeux.) From an unstrained mixture of opium, 1 part, with water, 8
parts, and a little yeast; left for a week at a temperature of 68 deg. to 77 deg.
Fahr., and then diluted, filtered, and evaporated. Some parties have
recommended quince juice as the menstruum.

8. (Roasted; EXTRACTUM OPII TORREFACTI, L.--Guibourt.) Powdered opium is
heated on a flat dish over a moderate fire, with constant stirring, as
long as fumes are given off; it is then exhausted by treating it twice
with 6 times its weight of water, and the mixed liquor, after filtration,
is evaporated.

9. (Vinous; EXTRACTUM OPII VINO PARATUM, L.--P. Cod.) From wine of opium.
The above extracts of opium (excepting the alcoholic) are regarded as less
exciting than the other preparations of the drug. The dose of each is
similar to that of the aqueous extract.

=Extract of Or'ange Peel.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CORTICIS AURANTII, L. _Prep._
1. From the thin yellow peel, as EXTRACT OF MADDER.

2. See AURANTII.

=Extract of Ox-gall.= _Syn._ INSPISSATED OX-GALL; EXTRACTUM FELLIS BOVINI,
L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.) From ox-gall, strained, and evaporated in a water
bath.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 gr.; in pills.

2. (Hunter Lane.) As the last, but reducing the gall to dryness, and then
powdering it. It must be preserved in well-corked bottles.--_Dose_, 3 to
12 gr.

=Extract of Parei'ra.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PAREIRAE (B. P.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B.
P.) Pareira root in coarse powder, 1; boiling distilled water, 10, or a
sufficiency; digest the pareira with 1-1/2 of water for twenty-four hours,
then pack in a percolator, and water till by slow percolation
10 has passed through; evaporate in a water bath to a pilular
consistence.--_Dose_, 13 to 20 gr.

2. (Ph. L.) From the root of velvet leaf or pareira brava (_Cissampelos
Pareira_), as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L.

3. (P. E.) As EXTRACT OF LIQUORICE--Ph. E. The P. Cod. formula is similar.
Alterative, tonic, and diuretic.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr.; chiefly in
affections of the bladder.

4. EXTRACTUM PAREIRA LIQUIDUM (B. P.). Pareira in coarse powder, 16;
boiling distilled water, 160, or a sufficiency; rectified spirit, 3;
macerate in 20 of water for twenty-four hours; pack in a percolator,
adding more of the water; allow the liquor slowly to pass until 160 has
been collected, or the pareira is exhausted; evaporate to 13, and, when
cold, add the spirit; filter and make up to 16.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 2 dr.

=Extract of Par'sley.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PETROSELINI, L. _Prep._ (P. Cod.)
From the root, as EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.

2. (M. Peraibe.) From the fresh leaves, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE. Febrifuge
and tonic.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr.

=Extract of Pasque Flower.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ANEMONIS, L. _Prep._ (P.
Cod.) From the recent or dried flower, as either of the EXTRACTS OF
ACONITE--P. Cod.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 gr.

_Obs._ Several species of _Anemone_ have been used in medicine, especially
_Anemone pratensis_ and _A. pulsatilla_. According to Baron Stoerck, the
former is resolvent, and is an effectual remedy in various chronic
diseases, particularly in amaurosis, cataract, opacity of the cornea,
nocturnal pains, suppressions, &c. 1/2 to 1 gr., combined with sugar of
milk, has been highly recommended in hooping-cough.

=Extract of Pa'tience Dock.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PATIENTIAE, L. _Prep._ From
the root of _Rumex Patientia_ or garden patience, as EXTRACT OF HOPS.
Aperient and stomachic. Used in double doses in lieu of extract of
rhubarb.

=Extract of Paullin'ia.= See EXTRACT OF GUARANA.

=Extract of Peach Blos'som.= _Prep._ From essence of lemons, 1 oz.; pure
balsam of Peru, 2 dr.; essence (oil) of bitter almonds, 1 dr.; rectified
spirit, 3 pints; spirit of orange flowers, 1 pint; spirit of jasmin, 1/4
pint; mix. A pleasant and powerful perfume.

=Extract of Pel'litory.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PYRETHRI, E. P.
AETHERO-ALCOHOLICUM, L. Prep. (W. Procter.) Alcohol (rectified spirit), 1
pint; ether, 1/2 pint; mix, and pour it gradually on root of pellitory
(_Anacyclus Pyrethrum_), 1 lb., placed in a percolator; afterwards pour on
alcohol, 1 pint; and subsequently sufficient dilute alcohol (proof spirit)
to displace 2-1/2 pints of tincture (ESSENCE OF PELLITORY, TOOTHACHE
ESSENCE); the latter is either suffered to evaporate spontaneously, or by
a very gentle heat, until a soft extract is attained. Used to destroy the
sensibility of the nerves of the teeth, previous to plugging, and for
toothache.

=Extract of Pep'per.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PIPERIS, E. P. NIGRI, L. _Prep._ 1.
From decoction of black pepper (bruised). Stimulant; stronger tasted than
the berries, but less aromatic.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1 dr.; in agues.

2. (Fluid; EXTRACTUM PIPERIS FLUIDUM, L.)--Ph. U. S. From black pepper, as
FLUID EXTRACT OF CUBEBS--Ph. U. S., separating the PIPERINE by expression
through a cloth, and keeping the fluid portion for use.

=Extract of Pimpinel'la.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PIMPINELLAE, L. _Prep._ From the
root of burnet saxifrage (_Pimpinella saxifraga_), as EXTRACT OF HOPS.
Astringent.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr.

=Extract of Pink'root.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF WORM GRASS, E. OF WORMSEED ROOT;
EXTRACTUM SPIGELIAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From Carolina pinkroot (_Spigelia
Marylandica_), as EXTRACT OF BOX--P. Cod.--_Dose_, 5 to 20 gr.

2. (Fluid; ESSENCE OF PINKROOT, LIQUOR OF P.; EXTRACTUM SPIGELIAE FLUIDUM,
L.) Pinkroot, 1 lb.; proof spirit, 3 pints; make a tincture, evaporate to
10 fl. oz., add sugar, 3/4 lb., and rectified spirit, q. s. to make the
whole measure exactly a pint.--_Dose._ For a child, beginning with 1/2 a
teaspoonful.

3. (Compound; COMPOUND LIQUOR OF PINKROOT; EXTRACTUM SPIGELIAE FLUIDUM
COMP., L.)--_a._ (Estlack.) Carolina pinkroot or spigelia (bruised), 4
oz.; senna, 3 oz.; savine, 1 dr.; pour on boiling water, 1 quart; when
cold, add rectified spirit, 1/2 pint; digest 24 hours, express (or
percolate), filter, evaporate to 12 fl. oz., in which dissolve, manna, 1
oz.; sugar, 8 oz. Every fl. oz. is equal to 2 dr. of pinkroot and 1-1/2
dr. of senna.--_Dose._ For a child, 1/2 to 1 teaspoonful; for an adult, a
tablespoonful.

_b._ (W. Procter.) Pinkroot, 16 oz.; senna, 8 oz. (both in coarse powder);
dilute alcohol (sp. gr. .935), 2 pints; macerate for 2 days, then proceed
by displacement, adding fresh spirit, until 4 pints have passed through;
filter, evaporate to 20 fl. oz., and add carbonate of potassa, 1 oz.; next
add oils of caraway and aniseed, of each 1/2 dr.; (previously triturated
with) powdered sugar, 24 oz.; lastly, apply a gentle heat to dissolve the
sugar.

_c._ (EXTRACTUM SPIGELIAE ET SENNAE FLUIDUM--Ph. U. S.) As the last
(nearly).--_Dose._ As above. All the above preparations of pinkroot are
regarded as powerful and certain anthelmintics; particularly the last two.

=Extract of Pipsis'sewa.= See EXTRACT OF WINTER-GREEN.

=Extract of Poi'son Oak.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM RHOIS TOXICODENDRI, L. _Prep._
(P. Cod.) From the expressed juice of the leaves of _Rhus toxicodendron_.
Narcotic, stimulant, and alterative.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr. to 1 gr., gradually
increased; in chronic rheumatism, obstinate skin diseases, &c.

=Extract of Pomegran'ate.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM GRANATI, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Soubeiran, & P. Cod.) From the root-bark of pomegranate, as EXTRACT OF
BOX. In tapeworm.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr.; followed by a purgative.

2. (E. G. CORTICIS FRUCTUS, L.) From the decoction of the fruit-rind. As
the last.

=Extract of Pop'pies.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PAPAVERIS (B. P.), E. P. ALBI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Capsules coarsely powdered, 16; rectified spirit, 2;
distilled water, a sufficiency; mix the poppy capsules with 40 of the
water, stirring them frequently during 24 hours; then pack in a
percolator, and pass water slowly through them until about 160 have passed
through; evaporate the liquor by a water bath to 20; when cold, add the
spirit. After 24 hours filter the liquor, and evaporate to a pilular
consistence.--_Dose_, 2 or 5 grains.

2. (Ph. L.) Bruised poppy-heads (without the seeds), 15 oz.; boiled
distilled water, 1 gall.; macerate 24 hours, boil to one half, strain, and
complete the evaporation.

3. (Ph. E.) As the last, with "capsules not quite ripe."

_Obs._ The medical action of extract of poppies, for the most part,
resembles that of opium; but it is considerably weaker, and is generally
regarded as less prone to produce headache and delirium.--_Dose_, 2 to 12
gr. It is usually prepared by the large manufacturers, by exhausting the
capsules, by coction with water; hence the inferior quality of the extract
of the shops, which contains a considerable quantity of inert matter.

The principal consumption of this extract is among the brewers, brewers'
druggists, and wine merchants. For this purpose it is evaporated until it
becomes hard on cooling, when it is formed into half-pound rolls, and
covered with paper, like lead plaster. One of these rolls added to a
hogshead of ale, stout, or sherry, materially increases the 'headiness' or
apparent strength of these beverages.

=Extract of Pota'to.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SOLANI TUBEROSI, L. _Prep._ (Dr J.
Latham.) From the stem and leaves of the potato plant, as EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--Ph. L. Narcotic.--_Dose_, 2 to 10 gr.

=Extract of Pur'ging Flax.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM LINI CATHARTICI, L. _Prep._
(Dr B. Lane.) From the dried herb, as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L. Aperient and
diuretic--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr.; 14 lbs. yielded 2-1/4 lbs. of extract.

=Extract of Quas'sia.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM QUASSIAE (B. P.), EX. Q. LIGNI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Quassia scraped, 1 lb.; distilled water, a sufficiency;
macerate the quassia in 8 oz. of water for 12 hours; pack in a percolator;
add water till the quassia is exhausted; evaporate, filter before it
becomes thick, and again evaporate in a water bath to a proper consistence
for pills.--_Dose_, 2 to 5 gr.

2. From the decoction of quassia chips. Product, 5% to 6%.

3. (Ph. E.) From the rasped wood, as EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod. Bitter
and stomachic.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr., or more.

_Obs._ This extract is almost universally prepared by coction, and is
principally consumed by the brewers, who employ it as a substitute for
hops, in large quantities. The bark is frequently substituted for the
wood, but is considerably less bitter. The Ph. Baden has an extract
prepared with spirit of .944.

=Extract of Quince Seeds.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CYDONIAE, E. C. SEMINUM.
_Prep._ From the decoction. Sucked as a lozenge, in hoarseness, &c.

=Extract of Ragwort.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM JACOB[OE]AE. The inspissated juice
of rag-wort.

=Extract of Rha'tany.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM RHATANIAE; E. KRAMERIAE (B. P.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Rhatany in coarse powder, 1; cold distilled water, 15;
macerate 24 hours in 2 of the water, then percolate the whole; evaporate
by water bath to dryness.--_Dose_, 5 to 20 grains.

2. (Ph. E. Baden and U. S.) From dried rhatany root (_Krameria
triandria_), as EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.

3. (Ph. Bor.) By two successive macerations in boiling water of 24 hours
each, and evaporating at a temperature not exceeding 165 deg. Fahr.

_Obs._ Extract of rhatany is astringent and tonic.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr. A
large quantity of this extract, of very inferior quality, is imported from
Brazil, and other parts of South America. It is kept in two states, hard
and soft; the former resembles KINO, and is often sold for it; the latter
is chiefly consumed by the manufacturers and 'improvers' of port wine.

=Extract of Rhu'barb.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM RHEI (B. P.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B.
P.) Rhubarb (sliced or bruised), 8 oz.; rectified spirit, 5 oz.; distilled
water, 50 oz.; macerate 4 days, strain, and set it aside, that the faeces
may subside; next decant the clear portion, strain, mix, and evaporate to
a proper consistence over a water bath at 160 deg. F.

2. (Ph. L.) As EXTRACT OF CINCHONA--Ph. L. (nearly). "The extract is
obtained of finer quality by evaporation in a vacuum with a gentle heat."
The Baden formula is similar.

_Obs._ This extract is usually prepared by decoction from inferior and
damaged rhubarb, picked out from the chests on purpose; hence the inferior
quality of the extract of the shops. When made of good Turkey, or even
East India rhubarb, it is a very valuable preparation.--_Dose._ As a
stomachic, 5 to 10 gr.; as a purgative, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr. It is seldom
exhibited alone. _Product._ 5%.

3. (Fluid; LIQUOR OF RHUBARB, ESSENCE OF R.; LIQUOR RHEI, EXTRACTUM RHEI
FLUIDUM, L.)--_a._ (W. Procter.) Rhubarb (in coarse powder), 8 oz.; mix it
with an equal bulk of coarse sand, and moisten it with dilute alcohol (sp.
gr. .935, = 13 u. p.) to form a pasty mass; in a short time introduce it
into a percolator, shake it until uniformly settled, and cover it with
cloth or paper; then pour on the rest of the spirit (the remainder of 2
pints) until the product has little odour or taste of the root; next
gently evaporate the tincture to 5-1/2 fl. oz., and add sugar, 5 oz., when
the whole should measure 8 fl. oz.--_Dose_, 15 to 30 drops.

_b._ (Ph. U. S.) As the last, adding of oils of fennel and anise, of each
4 drops; (dissolved in) tincture of ginger, 4 fl. dr.

4. (Compound; EXTRACTUM RHEI COMPOSITUM, E. PANCHYMAGOGUM, L.--Ph. Bor.)
Extract of rhubarb, 3 dr.; extract of aloes, 1 dr. (softened with) water,
4 dr.; mix, and add of soap of jalap, 1 dr. (dissolved in) proof spirit, 4
dr.; lastly, evaporate to an extract, dry this in a warm place, and
powder. Stomachic and purgative.--_Dose_, 4 to 20 gr.

=Extract of Rue.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM RUTAE, E. FOLIORUM RUTAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
From rue leaves (_Rutae graveolens_), as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L.

2. (Alcoholic--P. Cod.) As ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF ACONITE--P. Cod. (nearly.)
The formula of the Ph. Wert. is similar.

_Obs._ This extract is stomachic, carminative and emmenagogue.--_Dose_, 10
to 20 gr., twice a day. It is usual to add a little of the essential oil
to the extract, just before taking it out of the evaporating-pan, and when
nearly cold. The first is the form adopted in trade in this country.

=Extract of Saf'fron.= _Syn._ POLYCHROITE, EXTRACTUM CROCI, L. _Prep._ 1.
From hay saffron, as EXTRACT OF COLOCYNTH--Ph. L.

2. (P. Cod.) From the tincture. Superior to the last.

_Obs._ The first is used chiefly as a colouring and flavouring substance
by cooks, confectioners, wine and cordial brewers, &c.--_Dose_, 5 to 15
gr.; as an excitant, antispasmodic, and emmenagogue.

=Extract of Sarsaparil'la.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SARZAE, E. SARSAPARILLAE, L.;
EXTRAIT DE SALSEPAREILLE, Fr. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. L. 1836.) From sarsaparilla,
as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L. The Ph. D. 1826 is similar.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to
1 dr. _Product._ (From Jamaica sarsaparilla) 32% to 36%.

2. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM SARZAE ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._ From a tincture of
the root-bark, prepared with proof spirit, either by digestion or
percolation.

_b._ (P. Cod. and Ph. U. S.) From sarsaparilla root (powdered), as
ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF ACONITE--P. Cod. Superior to the aqueous
extract.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr.

3. (Fluid; LIQUOR OF SARSAPARILLA, ESSENCE OF S.; LIQUOR SARZAE, ESSENTIA
SARSAPARILLAE, EXTRACTUM SARZAE LIQUIDUM--Ph. L., E. S. FLUIDUM--Ph. E. &
D., L.); EXTRACTUM SARZAE LIQUIDUM--(B. P.) _a._ Jamaica sarsaparilla cut
transversely, 16; distilled water (temp. 160 deg. Fahr.), 280; rectified
spirit, 1. Macerate in half the water for 6 hours, and decant the liquor;
digest the residue in the remainder of the water for 6 hours more, mix the
liquors, express and filter; evaporate by water bath to 7, or until it has
a sp. gr. of 1.130; when cold add the spirit. Sp. gr. should be about
1.025.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 dr.

_b._ (Ph. L.) Sarsaparilla, 3-1/2 lbs.; distilled water, 3 galls.; boil to
12 pints, pour off the liquor, and strain whilst hot; again boil the
sarsaparilla in water, 2 galls., to one half, and strain; evaporate the
mixed liquors to 18 fl. oz.; and when cold, add of rectified spirit, 2 fl.
oz. Each fl. oz. represents 2-1/8 oz. of the root (nearly).

_c._ (Ph. E.) Sarsaparilla, 1 lb.; boiling water, 4 pints; digest 2 hours,
then bruise the root, boil it for 2 hours, filter, and express the liquid;
repeat the coction with water, 2 pints, as before; evaporate the mixed
liquors to the consistence of a thin syrup, and, when cold enough, add of
rectified spirit q. s. to make up 16 fl. oz. Each fl. oz. represents 6 dr.
of the root, and 6 fl. oz. of the decoction.

_d._ (Ph. D.) Sarsaparilla, 1 lb. (avoir.); proceed as before, and add of
rectified spirit, q. s. to make the product up to 20 fl. oz. Strength, as
the last (nearly). In the Ph. D. 1826 the decoction of sarsaparilla, 1 lb.
(troy), was ordered to be evaporated to 30 oz., which with the spirit (2
oz.) made the preparation only half the strength of the present one.

4. (Compound; EXTRACTUM SARZAE COMPOSITUM, E. SARSAPARILLAE COMP., L.) There
is no form for this preparation in the Pharmacop[oe]ias, but it is
nevertheless in immense demand, from its great convenience in dispensing.
The following formulae are employed by one of the wholesale houses that
does largest in this preparation:--

_a._ Guaiacum shavings (from which the small has been sifted), 30 lbs.,
Italian juice, 24 lbs., mezereon root, 6 lbs., are boiled with water
q. s., for 1 hour; the decoction is then drawn off, and the boiling
repeated with fresh water a second and a third time; the mixed decoctions
are allowed to deposit for 6 or 8 hours, or longer, and the clear portion
decanted and strained through flannel; the liquid is now reduced to the
consistence of treacle, when extract of sarsaparilla, 9 lbs., is added,
and the evaporation conducted at a considerably lower temperature until
near its completion, when the source of heat is removed, and the remaining
evaporation conducted at the expense of that retained by the metal of the
'pan,' when nearly cold, and just before removing the extracts to the
'pots' or 'jars,' essential oil of sassafras, 2 dr., dissolved in
rectified spirit, 1 quart, is added, and quickly but completely stirred
in. The product is a very showy article, if well managed, and weighs about
45 lbs., the precise quantity depending on the quality of the juice
employed. It is labelled 'EXT. SARZAE COMP.'

_b._ As the last, but only using 15 lbs. of juice, and that Solazzi.
_Prod._ About 35 lbs. It is labelled and sent out as 'EXT. SARZAE CO. OPT.'

_c._ By any of the forms given under COMPOUND DECOCTION OF SARSAPARILLA,
either common or concentrated, by continuing the evaporation.--_Dose._
Same as that of the simple extract.

5. (Fluid Compound; COMPOUND LIQUOR OF SARSAPARILLA.)--_a._ From any of
the preceding formulae by arresting the evaporation when the fluid has
acquired the consistence of a thin syrup, and adding to each pint, when
cold, rectified spirit, 4 fl. oz.

_b._ (Alcoholic--W. Hodgson.) Sarsaparilla (bruised), 16 oz.; liquorice
root (bruised), guaiacum wood (rasped), and sassafras bark (sliced), of
each 2 oz.; mezereon (sliced), 6 dr.; spirit, sp. gr. .935 (= 13 u. p.) 7
pints; digest 14 days, express, filter, evaporate to 12 fl. oz.; add of
sugar, 8 oz., and as soon as this is dissolved, withdraw the heat.
Stronger than the last.--_Dose_, 1 fl. dr.

_c._ (Ph. U. S. EXTRACTUM SARSAPARILLAE COMPOSITUM FLUIDUM.) _Prep._
Sarsaparilla in moderately fine powder, 16 oz. (troy); liquorice root in
moderately fine powder, 2 oz. (troy); sassafras in moderately fine powder,
2 oz. (troy); mezereon in moderately fine powder, 360 grains; glycerin, 4
oz. (old measure); rectified spirit, 8 oz. (old measure); water, 4 oz.
(old measure). Macerate in a closed percolator for 4 days, and then let
the percolation commence, and finish it by adding diluted alcohol (equal
volumes of alcohol at .835, and water), until 2 pints (old measure) have
been obtained. Reserve the first 12 oz., having added 4 oz. (old measure)
of glycerin to the remainder of the percolate, which evaporate to 6 oz.
(old measure), and mix with the reserved portion.

6. (From the root-bark; EXTRACTUM CORTICIS SARZAE, L.) From the decoction
or tincture of the root-bark. The cortical portion of sarsaparilla yields
fully 50% of aqueous extract. "Five times as much as the meditullium."
(Pope.)

_Obs._ Each of the above extracts of sarsaparilla (simple, fluid, and
compound), when of good quality, dissolves in water, forming a deep
reddish-brown solution, perfectly transparent, and depositing little
sediment, even by standing some days. See SARSAPARILLA.

1. =Extract of Savine.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SABINAE. (Ph. L. 1788.) By
evaporating a decoction of dry savine.

2. (Ph. U. S. EXTRACTUM SABINAE FLUIDUM.) As fluid extract of cubebs. (Ph.
U. S.)

=Extract of Scam'mony.= _Syn._ RESIN OF SCAMMONY; RESINA SCAMMONII, E. S.
ALCOHOLICUM, E. SIVE RESINA SCAMMONII (Ph. E.), L. _Prep._ 1. From
powdered scammony, exhausted with proof spirit, and the resulting tincture
distilled until little but water passes over; the remaining water is then
poured from the resin, which is next well washed in boiling water and
dried at a temperature below 240 deg. Fahr. Brown; impure.

2. As the last, but using either alcohol of 90% or ether, and animal
charcoal. White; pure.

_Obs._ Scammony resin is translucent, fusible, and combustible; and freely
soluble in alcohol, ether, and oil of turpentine. It is frequently
adulterated with jalap resin, a fraud readily detected by its insolubility
in the last two menstrua.--_Dose_, 5 to 10 gr. "When pure or virgin
scammony can be procured it is an unnecessary preparation." (Pereira.)

=Extract of Scurvy-grass.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM COCHLEARIAE, L. _Prep._ (P.
Cod.) From the clarified juice of fresh scurvy-grass, by exposure to warm
air. Anti-scorbutic, stimulant, anti-rheumatic, and diaphoretic.--_Dose_,
1 to 2 dr. The valuable principles of the juice are dissipated by much
heat.

=Extract of Sen'ega.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SENEGAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.)
From seneka or snake-root (_Polygala Senega_), as EXTRACT OF BOX--P. Cod.

2. Compound; EXTRACTUM SENEGAE, COMPOSITUM, E. S. ET SCILLAE, L.--Ecky.)
From equal parts of squills and senega, as the last, but by displacement.
Both the above are stimulant, expectorant, sudorific, and
diuretic.--_Dose_, 1 to 12 gr.

3. (Ph. U. S. EXTRACTUM SENEGAE FLUIDUM.) As EXTRACT OF COTTON-ROOT. (Ph.
U. S.)

=Extract of Sen'na.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SENNAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (EXTRACTUM
SENNAE AQUOSUM, L.)--_a._ As EXTRACT OF COLOCYNTH--Ph. L.

_b._ (P. Cod.) As EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod.

_c._ (Ph. Bor.) From senna leaves, by maceration in tepid water (104 deg.
Fahr.) for 24 hours, and expression and filtration; the operation is
repeated with fresh water, and the strained liquors evaporated to a thick
extract (at 149 deg. to 157 deg. Fahr.), which is dissolved in water, 4 parts, the
solution filtered, and again evaporated.--_Dose_, 10 to 20 gr. It is
principally used as a basis for purgative pill. When prepared by decoction
it is nearly inert. A better extract is prepared from the common tincture
made with proof spirit.

2. Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM SENNAE ALCOHOLICUM, L.--(Guibourt.) Senna (in
powder), 1 part; rectified spirit, 5 parts; heat gradually to boiling, let
it cool; in 24 hours express, strain, and repeat the process with fresh
spirit; lastly, distil and evaporate. Proof spirit answers for this
purpose.

3. (Fluid; EXTRACTUM SENNAE FLUIDUM, L.--Ph. (U. S.) Senna (in coarse
powder), 2-1/2 lbs.; spirit (at or near proof), 64 fl. oz.; macerate 24
hours, then act by displacement, subsequently adding weak spirit (1 of
rectified spirit to 3 of water) until 10 pints of tincture are obtained;
evaporate to 1 pint, filter, add sugar, 20 oz., and oil of fennel, 1 fl.
dr. (dissolved in) compound spirit of ether, 2 fl. dr. Every fl. oz.
represents 1 oz. of senna.

=Extract of Smoke.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM FULIGINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Aqueous.)
Wood-soot, 2 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil to 16 fl. oz., filter, and
evaporate.

2. (Acetic.) Wood-soot, 2 oz.; distilled vinegar and water, of each, 1/2
pint; as the last. Formerly reputed antispasmodic, alterative,
&c.--_Dose_, 3 to 6 gr., 2 three times a day; in dyspepsia, hysteria,
cancer, scrofula, and various syphilitical affections.

=Extract of Snake-root.= See EXTRACT OF SENEGA.

=Extract of Black Snake-root (fluid).= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CIMICIFUGAE FLUIDUM
(Ph. U. S.). _Prep_. As FLUID EXTRACT OF CUBEBS. (Ph. U. S.)

=Extract of Soap'wort.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SAPONARIAE, L. _Prep._ (P. Cod. &
Ph. Bad.) From the dried roots of soapwort (_Saponaria officinalis_), as
EXTRACT OF BISTORT--P. Cod. Aperient and alterative.--_Dose_, 15 gr. to
1/2 dr.

=Extract of Spruce.= See ESSENCE OF SPRUCE.

=Extract of Squills.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SCILLAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Aqueous; E.
S. AQUOSUM.--_a._ (Ph. Baden.) From squills, as EXTRACT OF COLOCYNTH--Ph.
L. (nearly).

_b._ (Ph. Bor.) From squills, as EXTRACT OF SENNA--Ph. Bor. (nearly), but
using boiling water, avoiding ebullition during the evaporation, and
powdering the residuum.--_Dose_, 1 to 5 gr.

2. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM SCILLAE ALCOHOLICUM, L.--P. Cod.) From the
tincture prepared with proof spirit, by distillation and
evaporation.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 3 gr., as an expectorant and diuretic, twice
or thrice a day. In larger doses it is nauseant and emetic.

3. (Acetic; EXTRACTUM SCILLAE ACETICUM.) Digest powder of squills, 1 lb.,
in acetic acid, 3 oz.; and distilled water, 1 pint, with a gentle heat,
for 48 hours.

Express strongly, and without straining; evaporate to a proper
consistence. (One grain of this is said to equal three of the powder.)

=Extract (fluid) of Stillingiae.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM STILLINGAE FLUIDUM (Ph.
U. S.). _Prep._ Stillingia, in fine powder, 16 oz. (troy); macerate with
12 oz. (old measure) of rectified spirit; 3 oz. (old measure) of glycerin;
and 1 oz. (old measure) of water, for four days in a closed percolator,
and proceed as for FLUID EXTRACT OF COTTON-ROOT. (Ph. U. S.)

=Extract of Stor'ax.= See STYRAX.

=Extract of Stramo''nium.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF THORN-APPLE; EXTRACTUM
STRAMONII, (Ph. L. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Pack stramonium seeds,
coarsely powdered, in a percolator, and pass about their own weight of
washed ether slowly through them, remove the ether, and set aside. Now
pour over them proof spirit until the seeds are exhausted; distil off the
spirit, and evaporate the residue by a water bath to a proper pill
consistence.--_Dose_, 1/4 gr., gradually increasing.

2. (Ph. L.) Seeds of thorn-apple (_Datura stramonium_), 15 oz.; boiling
distilled water, 1 gall.; macerate for 4 hours in a vessel lightly
covered, near the fire; afterwards take out the seeds, bruise them in a
stone mortar, and return them to the liquor; then boil down to 4 pints,
strain whilst hot, and evaporate. The Ph. D. is similar. _Product._
(About) 12%, Anodyne and narcotic.--_Dose_, 1/4 gr. to 1/2 gr., gradually
increased, twice or thrice a day; neuralgia, rheumatism, tic doloureux,
spasmodic asthma, epilepsy, worms, &c.

3. (P. Cod. & Ph. U. S.) From the expressed juice of the fresh leaves,
heated to boiling, and filtered. The P. Cod. also orders it to be prepared
as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L. Anodyne and narcotic.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr. to 1
gr.

_Obs._ On the large scale, this extract is prepared by expressing the
juice of the fresh herb, and boiling the remainder in water; the juice and
decoction are then mixed, filtered, and evaporated. 1-1/2 cwt. of
stramonium yielded 37 lbs. of juice, and this, with the decoction, gave 31
lbs. of extract. (Gray.)

4. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM STRAMONII--Ph. E., E. S. ALCOHOLICUM, L.)--_a._
(Ph. E. & Ph. U. S.) From the seeds (ground in a coffee-mill), by
percolation with proof spirit. _Product._ (About) 14%; 1 lb. yielded 2-1/4
oz. (Recluz.)

_b._ (P. Cod.) From the leaves, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--P. Cod.--_Dose_,
1/4 gr. gradually increased. (See _above_.)

=Extract of Suc'cory.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CHICORII, L. _Prep._ (Guibourt.)
From the fresh root, as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L. Aperient, deobstruent,
and tonic.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr.

=Extract of Sweet Flag.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ACIDI, E. CALAMI AROMATICI, L.
_Prep._ From the rhizomes, as EXTRACT OF RHUBARB--Ph. L. See SWEET FLAG.

=Extract of Tan'sy.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM TANACETI, L. _Prep._ 1. From the
herb (_Tanacetum vulgaris_), as EXTRACT OF HOP--Ph. L.

2. (Giordano.) As EXTRACT OF HOREHOUND--Ph. Lusitan.

_Obs._ This extract is said to be tonic, stomachic, anthelmintic,
emmenagogue, and febrifuge. Dr Clark says that in Scotland it was found to
be serviceable in various cases of gout. The infusion is, however,
preferable.--_Dose_, 5 gr. to 20 gr.

=Extract of Taraxacum.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF DANDELION; EXTRACTUM TARAXACI
(Ph. L. & E.), E. T. HERBAE ET RADICIS (Ph. D. 1826), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.)
Crush fresh dandelion root, press out the juice, and allow it to deposit;
heat the clear liquor to 212 deg. F., and maintain the temperature for 10
minutes; then strain and evaporate by a water bath, at a temperature not
exceeding 160 deg. F. to a proper consistence.--_Dose_, 5 to 15 grains.

2. (Ph. L.) From the recent root of dandelion (_Leontodon Taraxacum_), as
EXTRACT OF HOP--Ph. L. The formulae of the Ph. E. & U. S. are nearly
similar.

3. (Ph. D.) From the herb and root, as the other simple extracts (EXTRACTA
SIMPLICIORA).

4. (P. Cod.) From the expressed juice, as EXTRACT OF STRAMONIUM--P. Cod.)

5. (Ph. Bor.) As EXTRACT OF SENNA--Ph. Bor. (nearly).

6. (Ph. Baden.) By displacement with cold water.

7. (Wholesale.) From the decoction.

8. (Fluid.) See LIQUOR OF TARAXACUM.

_Obs._ The extract of the shops is usually prepared by exhausting the root
by coction with water. The products of the first two of the above formulae,
when recent, have a faint and agreeable odour, and a sweet bitter taste;
those of Nos. 4, 5, and 6, smell strongly of the recent root, have a pale
and lively brownish-yellow colour, and a bitter acidulous taste, without
any trace of sweetness; that of the last one is devoid of odour, and
possesses a coffee-brown colour, and a sweetish, burnt taste, not much
unlike a solution of burnt sugar. The medicinal virtue of this extract is
greatest when the aroma and bitter taste of the recent root is well
developed; and when sweet, its efficacy as a remedy is impaired. (Squire.)

Taraxacum root should be gathered during the winter months, when the
quantity of the product is looked at; as then a given weight of the juice
yields more extract; but in summer and autumn it possesses more bitterness
and aroma. 4 lbs. of juice from roots gathered in November and December
yielded 1 lb. of extract, while it took from 6 to 9 lbs. of juice from the
root, gathered in spring or summer, to yield a like quantity. (Squire.)
The herb yields by the evaporation of its expressed juice about 5% of
extract. According to Mr Jacob Bell, the average yield of 1 cwt. of root
is about 7-1/8 lbs. ('Pharm Journ.,' x, 446.)

Good extract of taraxacum should be wholly soluble in water.--_Dose_, 10
gr. to 1/2 dr.; as a resolvent, aperient, and tonic, in liver and stomach
complaints, &c.

=Extract of Tea.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM THEAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From an infusion of
any of the rougher kinds of black tea. Astringent. Has been recommended in
diarrh[oe]a; formed into pills.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr. A hard,
black-looking substance, smelling and tasting faintly of tea, is imported
under the same name from China.

2. (Pidding's.) The joint products of distillation and infusion combined.
Proposed to be made in China, and exported as a condensed preparation of
tea. (ESSENCE OF TEA; ESSENTIA THEAE); to be used as a substitute for the
leaves, in order to save the expense of freight, &c.

=Extract of Thorn-Apple.= See EXTRACT OF STRAMONIUM.

=Extract of Tobac'co.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM TABACI, E. NICOTIANAE, L. _Prep._
1. (Chippendale.) From decoction of tobacco. Proposed as an external
application in neuralgia, &c.

2. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM TABACI ALCOHOLICUM, L.--Ph. Bor.) Tobacco leaves,
1 lb.; spirit (sp. gr. .900), 2 lbs.; digest in a warm place for some
days, express strongly, and again digest in a mixture of water and spirit
(.900), of each, 1 lb., for 24 hours; again press out the liquor, and
evaporate the strained and mixed liquors into a vapour bath, at a
temperature not exceeding 167 deg. Fahr.

=Extract of Tor'mentil.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM TORMENTILLAE, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
Amst.) From the root of _Potentilla Tormentilla_, as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph.
L. The Ph. Baden directs its preparation by displacement with cold water.
Astringent and febrifuge.--_Dose_, 15 to 30 gr.; in diarrh[oe]a. It was
formerly regarded as a specific in syphilis. (Lindley.)

=Extract of U'va Ur'si.= See EXTRACT OF WHORTLEBERRY.

=Extract of Valer'ian.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM VALERIANAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From
valerian root, as EXTRACT OF HOP--Ph. L.; but using a covered vessel.

2. (Ph. Bor. and Baden.) As EXTRACT OF CINCHONA--Ph. L. (nearly),
employing strong force in the expression of the liquor, and only
evaporating to the consistence of syrup.

_Obs._ It is usual to add to this extract a little of the ESSENTIAL OIL OF
VALERIAN, dissolved in a small quantity of rectified spirit, just before
removing it from the evaporating-pan, and when nearly cold. Anti-spasmodic
and nervine.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 dr. In hysteric and spasmodic
diseases. Valerian yields about 40% of soft extract.

3. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM VALERIANAE ALCOHOLICUM, L.--P. Cod.) As EXTRACT OF
BOX.--P. Cod.

4. (Fluid; EXTRACTUM VALERIANAE FLUIDUM, L.--Ph. U. S.). Rectified spirit,
12 fl. oz.; mix, add of valerian (in coarse powder), 8 oz. digest and
percolate, adding, subsequently, spirit (at or near proof) until 16 fl.
oz. of tincture have passed through; let this evaporate spontaneously, in
a shallow vessel, until reduced to 5 fl. oz.; in the meantime add fresh
spirit to the mass in the percolator, until 10 fl. oz. more of tincture
are obtained, which add to the above residuum of the evaporation,
observing to dissolve any oleo-resinous deposit in a little rectified
spirit, and add to it to the rest; lastly, filter, and add of rectified
spirit, q. s. to make the whole measure 16 fl. oz.

=Extract of Vanil'la.= See LIQUOR OF VANILLA.

=Extract of Wall Pel'litory.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM PARIETARIAE, L. _Prep._ From
fresh wall-pellitory (_Parietaria officinalis_), as EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--Ph. L. Aperient, diuretic, and pectoral.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2
dr.

=Extract of Wal'nut.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM JUGLANDIS IMMATURAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
From unripe walnuts (_Juglans regia_), as EXTRACT OF ACONITE--Ph. L.

2. From the decoction of the green shells. Vermifuge.--_Dose_, 20 to 30
gr. in cinnamon water.

=Extract of Walnut Leaves.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM JUGLANDIS FOLIORUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. From the decoction of dried walnut leaves.

2. (Soubeiran.) By displacement with tepid water. Diaphoretic and
alterative.--_Dose_, 2 to 4 gr., twice or thrice a day; in scrofula,
scirrhus, &c.

3. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM JUGLANDIS FOLIORUM ALCOHOLICUM, L.--Ph. Bor.)
From walnut leaves (cut), as ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF TOBACCO--Ph. Bor.
(nearly).

=Extract of Wa'ter-dock.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM RUMICIS AQUATICI, L. _Prep._
From the root, as EXTRACT OF HOPS, Ph. L. Astringent and
antiscorbutic.--_Dose_, 15 gr. to 1 dr.; in skin diseases, &c.

=Extract of Whor'tleberry.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF BEARBERRY; EXTRACTUM UVAE
URSI. (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ 1. From the dried leaves of the bearberry
(_Arctostaphylos Uva-Ursi_), as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L.--_Dose_, 5 to 15
gr., twice or thrice a day; in chronic diseases of the bladder and
kidneys, attended with increased secretion of mucus, without inflammation.

2. (Ph. U. S. EXTRACTUM UVI-URSI ELUIDUM.) As fluid extract of
cotton-root. (Ph. U. S.)

=Extract of Willow Bark.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM SALICIS. (Ph. Par.) From
Powdered willow bark, as EXTRACT OF RHATANY.

=Extract of Win'ter Cher'ry.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ALKEKENGI, L. _Prep._ From
the berries of _Physalis alkekengi_, as EXTRACT OF ELDER. Aperient,
detergent, and diuretic. _Dose_, 2 to 4 dr.

=Extract of Win'ter-green.= _Syn._ EXTRACT OF PIPSISSEWA; EXTRACTUM
CHIMAPHILAE, L. _Prep._ From the herb winter-green or pipsissewa
(_Chimaphila umbellata_), as EXTRACT OF HOPS--Ph. L.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to
1/2 dr.; in dropsy, scrofula, and chronic affections of the urinary
organs.

=Extract of Wood Sor'rel.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ACETOSELLAE, L. _Prep._
(Pideret.) From the expressed juice of the fresh herb (_Oxalis
acetosella_.) Acid, bitter, and antiscorbutic.--_Dose_, 15 gr. to 1/2 dr.

=Extract of Worm Grass.= See EXTRACT OF PINKROOT.

=Extract of Worm'seed.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM CINAE AETHEREUM, E. SEMINUM C. AE.,
L. _Prep._ (Hamb. Cod. 1845.) Wormseed, 1 oz.; ether, 4 oz.; digest 3 or 4
days, press, filter, distil off 4-5ths, and evaporate the residuum to a
proper consistence. _Prod._ 25% to 30%. Vermifuge.--_Dose_, 3 to 10 gr.,
night and morning, for 2 or 3 successive days, followed by a brisk purge.

=Extract of Worm-wood.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM ABSINTHII; EXTRACTUM ARTEMESIAE
ABSINTHII, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. D., 1826.) From the dried flowering tops of
wormwood, as the other simple extracts (EXTRACTA SIMPLICIORA--Ph. D.)

2. (Ph. Bor.) As EXTRACT OF RHATANY--Ph. Bor.

3. (P. Cod. and Ph. Baden.) By displacement by cold water.

_Obs._ Bitter, stomachic, tonic, and vermifuge.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 20 gr.,
2 or 3 times daily; in dyspepsia, loss of appetite, gout, &c. It is usual
to add a few drops of the oil of wormwood to the extract before taking it
from the pan.

4. (Alcoholic; EXTRACTUM ABSINTHII ALCOHOLICUM, L.--Guibourt.) From a
tincture prepared from the dried tops of wormwood boiled in proof spirit.
More active than the last.

=Extract of Yew.= _Syn._ EXTRACTUM TAXI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Loder.) From the
inspissated juice of the fresh leaves of the yew (_Taxus baccata_). Its
action on the circulation greatly resembles that of digitalis, but is more
manageable.--_Dose_, 1 to 7 gr.; in epilepsy, &c.

2. (Alcoholic,--Ph. Baden.) From the dried leaves, as ALCOHOLIC EXTRACT OF
ACONITE--Ph. Baden.

_Obs._ In addition to the preparations given above, there are many others
which are often called 'EXTRACTS,' These may be grouped under the
following heads:--

=Extracts, Concentra'ted.= _Syn._ RESINOIDS. Pharmaceutical preparations
of more or less value, largely employed by the American physicians who
style themselves 'ECLECTICS,' They are supposed to present in the most
concentrated form the medicinal virtues of the plants from which they are
derived. See RESINOIDS.

=Extracts, Fluid.= _Syn._ EXTRACTA FLUIDA, EXTRACTA LIQUIDA, L. This name
has been applied in modern pharmacy to various preparations differing
materially from each other in their degree of fluidity and concentration.
Some of these have been already noticed, and others will be found under
one or other of their synonyms. Much confusion would be avoided by
confining the name 'FLUID EXTRACT' to those preparations only which differ
from the ordinary officinal extracts in being in the liquid form; whilst
others of a like character, but of less consistence or concentration,
might be conveniently classed under the general denomination of 'LIQUORS'
(LIQUORES, L.). The various condensed preparations of vegetable
substances, now common in trade, professedly several times stronger than
the common DECOCTIONS, INFUSIONS, and TINCTURES, might be simply and
advantageously distinguished by the addition of 'CONCENTRATED' to their
names. Tinctures made with rectified spirit, and of (say) at least 8 times
the usual strength, might be appropriately termed 'ESSENCES,' See
DECOCTION, ESSENCE, EXTRACT, INFUSION, OLEO-RESIN, SYRUP, TINCTURE, &c.

=Extracts, Perfu'matory.= See EXTRAIT.

=Extracts, Pulver'ulent.= _Syn._ DRIED EXTRACTS, DESICCATED E.;
SACCHARATED E.; EXTRACTA PULVERATA, E. SICCA, E. CUM SACCHARO, L. _Prep._
1. Ordinary soft extract of the drug, 4 parts; white sugar (in powder), 1
part; mix, and dry by exposure in a warm situation; lastly, reduce the
mass to powder, and if it weighs less than 4 parts, triturate it with more
powdered sugar until its weight is equal to the original weight of the
extract used in its preparation. The strength of the extract thus
continues unchanged.

2. (Ph. Bor.) As the last, but using powdered sugar of milk, in lieu of
cane sugar.

3. (Gauger.) Alcoholic extract, 3 parts, rectified spirit, 1 part, are
triturated together in a porcelain mortar until thoroughly incorporated,
when white sugar (in powder), 15 oz., is gradually added, and the two
carefully and completely blended together; the mixture is dried as before,
and more sugar added until the whole weighs exactly 18 oz. Six grains
represent one grain of the unprepared extract.

_Obs._ The above are admirable preparations, intended chiefly to render
the perishable extracts of the narcotic plants (EXTRACTA NARCOTICA) less
liable to suffer by age. See EXTRACT OF ACONITE (Saccharated), &c.

=EXTRAC'TIVE.= _Syn._ EXTRACTIVE PRINCIPLE. Fourcroy entertained the
belief that all vegetable extracts contained a common basis of definite
composition, to which he gave the name of _extractive_. Chevreul and other
chemists have shown, however, that Fourcroy's _extractive_ is not a
chemical compound but a heterogeneous mixture, varying in composition with
the plant from which it is obtained. Extractive has a brown colour, or one
becoming so in the air; it speedily putrefies, and becomes oxidised, and
is rendered insoluble by long exposure to air, and by repeated solutions
and evaporations. In its unaltered state it is soluble in water and in
alcohol, is nearly insoluble in ether, and is precipitated from its
solutions by the acids and metallic oxides. With alumina it forms the
basis of several brown dyes.

=EXTRAIT.= [Fr.] Literally an extract. Among perfumers, extraits are
mostly spirituous solutions of the essential oils or odorous principles of
plants and other fragrant substance. The French commonly apply the term to
any concentrated spirit, either simple or compound. In the shops of the
Parisian perfumers upwards of 60 preparations of the kind are
distinguished by this name. The extracts of JASMINE, JONQUIL, MAY-LILY,
ORANGE BLOSSOMS, VIOLETS, and other like flowers of delicate perfume, are
obtained by agitating and digesting the 'huiles' and 'pomades' of the
flowers with the purest rectified spirit in the manner described under
SCENTED SPIRITS ('esprits'). This process is repeated with fresh oil or
pomade until the spirit is rendered sufficiently fragrant. The other
extracts (both simple and compound) are made by the common methods of
infusion and distillation. See ESSENCE, EXTRACT, SPIRIT, &c.

=EYE.= In _anatomy_ and _physiology_, the organ of vision. In order that
vision may be distinct, it is necessary that the pencil of rays diverging
from each point of the object and entering the pupil should converge to a
focus on the retina. Near-sightedness ('MYOPIA,' L.) is due to the too
great convexity of either the 'lens' or 'cornea,' causing the rays to
converge to a focus before reaching the retina. The spectacles worn by
myopic persons have concave glasses, which, by increasing the divergence
of the rays falling upon the eye, have the effect of carrying back each
focal point towards the retina. In the long sight of old people
('PRESBYOPIA,' L.) the foci of the refracted pencils are situated behind
the retina, the 'lens' or the 'cornea' being not sufficiently convex. This
defect is corrected by convex glasses, which increase the convergence of
the incident rays.

_Foreign Bodies in the Eye._--Particles of dust, small insects, hairs, and
such like minute bodies frequently get under the eyelid, and thus become a
source of considerable discomfort, and very frequently of great pain.
Hence the necessity of their prompt removal. In order to effect this the
inside of the lids should be so exposed as to reveal the intruding
substance. The lower lid may be easily turned down so as to show the inner
surface, but the upper lid cannot be so easily manipulated. The end,
however, may be attained by taking firm hold of the lid with the finger
and thumb, drawing it downward and forward, placing a quill or a small
pencil-case on the outer upper part, and turning the lid backwards over
it. When the annoying particle is seen it should be removed by gently
drawing over it, with a wiping motion, a piece of rag or linen
handkerchief, wrapped round the finger, or by means of a camel-hair brush,
if this latter be at hand.

If these means fail to remove it, and it should be imbedded too firmly in
the membrane, it may be picked off with a tooth-pick, the end of a pair of
tweezers, a fine ivory paper-knife, or with a stiff hair from a
clothes-brush bent at right angles. If lime-dust has blown into the eye it
is only the larger particles that can be removed in this manner; the finer
particles may be dissolved out by washing the eye with a lotion made of
one part of common vinegar and two parts of water. A drop or two of pure
sugar syrup will also frequently dissolve the lime. When a powerfully
destructive substance, such, for instance, as sulphuric acid or oil of
vitriol, is, as sometimes happens, thrown by some person into the eye, the
best course is to wash it out with a solution containing four grains of
washing soda in an ounce of water. This should be done as quickly as
possible, and pending the time the soda lotion is being got ready, the
eye, being kept open, should be diligently washed with cold water. Grains
of gunpowder should be carefully removed. Hot fluid, such as melted fat or
pitch, may be got rid of by putting into the eye a few drops of almond or
olive oil.

Upon removal of the foreign body the pain generally subsides; but it
sometimes happens that the membranes may be lacerated, in which case more
or less inflammation may ensue. Under these circumstances a medical
practitioner should be consulted. For _animals_ the same treatment may be
followed. See BLINDNESS, COLOUR BLINDNESS, VISION, &c.

=Eye Balsam=, Vegetable (Martin Reichel, Wuerzburg). Opium, 5 parts; oxide
of mercury, 5 parts; camphor, 2 parts; wax cerate, 52 parts. (Hager.)

=Eye Drops.= See WATER (Eye).

=Eye Essence= (Dr Romershausen). A tincture prepared from fennel seeds and
fresh young fennel. (Hager.)

=Eye Powder= (Laeyson, Paris), also known as Odorous Powder. For the
strengthening, restoration, and preservation of the sight. A powder
composed of--Burnt chalk, 100 parts; ammonia, 50 parts; charcoal, 6 parts;
oxide of iron, 2 parts; cinnamon bark, 2 parts. (P. L. Geiger.)

=Eye Pow'ders.= See COLLYRIA.

=Eye Salt.= Powdered alum. (G. Graefe.)

=Eye Salve.= See OINTMENT (Eye).

=Eye Snuff.= See SNUFF.

=Eye Water= (Biedermann, Annaberg). 2 grms. sulphate of zinc in 60 grms.
distilled water, with a little infusion of cloves.

=Eye Water= (Brun) is a solution of 4 parts of aloes in 32 parts of white
wine, with 32 parts of rose water, and 1-1/2 part of tincture of saffron.

=Eye Water= (Chantomelanus) "makes spectacles superfluous." A turbid
yellow-brownish liquid, consisting of a weak extract of lavender flowers
in diluted spirit, in which some oil of lavender has also been dissolved.
(Opwyrda.)

=Eye Water, Dr Graefe's= (L. Roth, Berlin). Sulphate of zinc, 1.5 grms.;
fennel water, 100 grms., slightly coloured with fennel seed tincture.
(Schaedler.)

=Eye Water= (J. P. H. Hette). A solution of ethereal oils of lavender,
bergamot, rosemary, and tincture of opium in spirits of wine, 50 per cent.
(Wittstein.)

=Eye Water= (Bernhard Kraft, Calbe) for acute inflammation of the eyes and
for strengthening the sight. Seven grammes of an impure muddy
sediment-leaving spring water containing half a gramme of native sulphate
of zinc containing iron. (Schaedler.)

=Eye Water= (Inspector Stroinski, Neisse). One part of sulphate of zinc
dissolved in 500 parts of common river water. (Schreiber.)

Once a trace of patchouli perfume was added to this water. (Hager.)

=Eye Water, Dr White's= (T. Ehrhard, Altenfeld, Thuringia). Four cloves, a
piece of cinnamon the size of a large pea, 2 teaspoonfuls of rose water, 1
drop of vinegar, 10 drops of arnica tincture. Digest for an hour and
filter. Dissolve in the filtrate some white vitriol of the size of a pea.
(Hager.)

Sulphate of zinc, 3 parts; honey, 4 parts; water, 80 parts; perfumed with
oil of cloves and a trace of mustard oil. (Wittstein.)

=Eye Waters.= See WATER.


=FACE A'GUE.= The common name for the intermittent form of facial
NEURALGIA or TIC DOULOUREUX. See NEURALGIA.

=FACE PAINTS.= _Syn._ FARDS, Fr. See BLOOM, CARMINE, PEARL WHITE, ROUGE,
&c.

=FAC-SIM'ILE.= An exact imitation of an original in all its traits and
peculiarities. The term is chiefly used in relation to copies of old
manuscripts, or of the handwriting of famous men, or of interesting
documents, produced by engraving or lithography. See SIGNATURES.

=FACTI''TIOUS.= _Syn._ FACTITIUS, L. Artificial; made by art, in
distinction from that produced by nature. Numerous illustrations of the
application of this word occur in the pages of the present work.

=FAECES.= Excrement. In the _laboratory_, the 'settling' or sediment
deposited by a liquor. See DEFECATION, EXCRETA.

=FAINT'ING.= _Syn._ SWOONING; SYNCOPE, DELIQUIUM ANIMI, L. In _pathology_,
a state in which the respiration and circulation are apparently suspended
for a time, or are extremely feeble. The symptoms are too well known to
require description. The causes are supposed to be--diminished energy of
the brain, and organic affections of the heart or neighbouring vessels.
This has led nosologists to divide syncope into two varieties:--

1. _Occasional_ (SYNCOPE OCCASIONALIS, S. ACCIDENTALIS, L.), primitively
induced by sudden and violent emotions of the mind, powerful odours,
derangement of the stomach or bowels, constrained position of the body,
tight-lacing, pressure, loss of blood, debility from disease, &c. This
variety is frequently followed by vomiting, and, occasionally, by
convulsions or epileptic fits. The recovery is accelerated by the
horizontal position, without the head being the least elevated, by which
the arterial blood is more vigorously thrown upon the brain, and thereby
stimulates it to resume its usual functions. Pungent substances
(smelling-bottle, vinaigrette, &c.) may be applied to the nostrils, and
cold water sprinkled on the face and chest. In all cases the dress
(corset, waist-band, neck-cloth, &c.) should be instantly loosened, and
indeed this is the first assistance which should be given, either in
syncope or apoplexy. As soon as the patient can swallow, a little
brandy-and-water, or wine, or a few drops of ether or spirit of sal
volatile, may be given.

2. _Cardiac_ (SYNCOPE CARDIACA, L.), arising without any apparent cause,
with violent palpitation during the intervals, and altogether of a more
formidable character than the preceding. The subsequent treatment must
here be directed to the cure or alleviation of the original disease.

=FAINTS.= The first and last runnings of the whiskey-still. The one is
technically termed the 'strong faints,' the other, the 'weak faints.' They
are both purified by rectification, &c. See DISTILLATION.

=FAITH.= Dr Pereira remarks, that "faith in the beneficial agency of
remedies, and confidence in the skill of the medical attendant, are
important adjuvants in the treatment of disease. To them both the
physician and empiric owe part of their success."

=FAL'LING SICK'NESS.= See EPILEPSY.

=FAMILIENSALBE=, Family Ointment (Goering). 16 grammes of a hard yellow
salve in a round box; a mixture of 9 parts wax, 3 parts fat; 2 parts
turpentine, 2 parts inspissated juice of _Ornithogalium scilloides_
Jacquin, or _O. candatum_ Aiton. These plants are known to the public as
Meerzwiebel (sea onion or squill), but they are only related to that plant
in appearance. (Hager.)

=FAR'CY.= See GLANDERS.

=FARDEL-BOUND.= _Syn._ CLUE-BOUND, WOOD-EVIL. An affection of the third
stomach of cattle, induced by their unduly partaking of coarse
indigestible food. Cattle are most commonly attacked by fardel in summer
and autumn, when they are able to get at tough, strong, and hard grass. It
is also frequently caused by rye-grass in seed and ripe vetches, as well
as by eating largely of the shoots of trees or the cuttings of hedges, a
circumstance which has given rise to the disease being called 'wood-evil.'
Sometimes an attack may be brought on through over-feeding, combined with
a deficiency of water. The symptoms vary greatly in intensity, and are
often some days before they definitely manifest themselves. The animal
ceases to ruminate, refuses food, and, if a cow, the secretion of milk is
stopped. Then, after a day or two fever (indicated by heat and dryness in
the nose and mouth) comes on, with somewhat quickened circulation and
breathing, the breathing by the second or third day being accompanied by a
grunt at the beginning and end of respiration, which is very noticeable
when an attempt is made to move the animal.

In all attacks the animal suffers from obstinate constipation. The first
stomach is frequently much distended, and if any faeces are passed they are
caked, dark coloured, and of variable consistence.

When the disease is attended with most of these symptoms, the animal may
live ten days or a fortnight; but unless relief is afforded, nausea very
frequently sets in, and continues to increase, the pulse at the same time
getting gradually weaker, and the strength failing. In some instances the
animal has an epileptic fit, and in others death is preceded by great
stupor; whilst in others, again, if it be a horse, it is attacked with
stomach staggers.

"The _treatment_ consists in removing the obstinate constipation by
powerful purgatives, advantage being taken to gain their utmost efficacy
by combining several together, and giving them along with plenty of fluid.

"Three-quarters of a pound each of Epsom and of common salt, twenty croton
beans, and a drachm of calomel, will suffice for a full-grown,
middle-sized ox or cow, and must be administered in three or four bottles
of water or very thin gruel. In this disease there is little fear of
giving too much medicine.

"The action of the purgatives is greatly expedited by the use of
occasional stimulants, which in diseases of the digestive organs of cattle
may be given without fear of engendering or aggravating inflammation.
Every encouragement must be used to get the animal to drink, for large
quantities of fluid are obviously most essential in washing out the
obstruction which causes the evil. The cessation of the grunt, the passage
of some hard cakes of dung, with the subsequent abatement of the fever,
are the signs of amendment for which we watch; but even after the first
movement of the bowels considerable attention, a sloppy diet, and several
doses of purgative medicine, are requisite to empty the canal and prevent
the recurrence of the obstruction. If twenty hours elapse after the
administration of the above combination without any action of the bowels,
the same dose may be repeated, along with a good quantity of some
stimulant, such as a bottle of ale, with two ounces of oil of turpentine
and two ounces of ginger. Half the quantity of the purgative may be given
at the end of a like interval, if no effect be produced; but the further
employment of purgatives is injurious, inasmuch as it increases the nausea
without expediting the action of the bowels.

"A week will sometimes elapse without any alvine evacuation; in some cases
I have known ten or eleven days, and in some fifteen days. Yet even in
these recovery took place; and so long as stupor and frenzy are staved
off, there is always hope of a cure. After the prompt and energetic
adoption of the treatment recommended, little further remains to be done
except to withhold all solid indigestible food, administer frequent
quantities of water, or any simple fluid, which must be horned over if the
beast will not take it; allow also plenty of treacle, and encourage the
action of the medicine by clysters, scalding the belly, and occasional
exercise. Blood-letting is not only useless, but even injurious." (FINLAY
DUN.)

=FAR'INA.= The flour of any species of corn, pulse, tuber, or starchy
root. The most important kinds of farina are noticed under their
respective heads. The following dietetic articles of a farinaceous
character are extensively advertised:--

BAKER'S ALIMENTARY COMPOUND. Fine flour (pastrycook's), 2 parts; finely
ground rice, 1 part.

BASTER'S COMPOUND FARINA. Wheat flour, 14 oz.; white sugar, 2 oz.

BRADEN'S FARINACEOUS FOOD. Similar to Hard's (_below_).

BRIGHT'S NUTRITIOUS FARINA. Rice flour and potato starch, equal parts.

BRIGHT'S BREAKFAST POWDER. Chocolate, 1 part; nutritious farina (Bright's)
2 parts.

BULLOCK'S SEMOLA. Wheat flour, from which a portion of the starch has been
removed, so as to leave an excess of gluten.

DENHAM'S FARINACEOUS FOOD. Wheat flour, 3 parts; barley meal, 1 part; the
mixture is slightly baked, and again ground and sifted. Said to be
slightly laxative.

DURYEA'S MAIZENA. Indian corn starch prepared for food.

GARDINER'S ALIMENTARY PREPARATION. Pure rice flour, very finely ground.

HARD'S FARINACEOUS FOOD. Wheat flour, slightly baked, and resifted.

KINGSFORD'S OSWEGO PREPARED CORN. An excellent preparation of Indian corn.

LEATH'S ALIMENTARY FARINA. Wheat flour (baked), with some sugar, Indian
corn meal, and tapioca. According to some, it also contains potato starch.

MAIDMAN'S NUTRITIOUS FARINA. Potato starch tinged with beet-root or other
pink colouring matter.

PLUMBE'S FARINACEOUS FOOD. South-sea arrow-root, with about 1-3rd its
weight of pea flour.

POLSON'S CORN FLOUR. The starch of Indian corn or maize prepared with
great care. It is much used as a substitute for arrow-root, and for
custards, puddings, &c.

SMITH'S NURSING FARINA. Equal parts of baked wheat flour and rice flour.

_Obs._ Many of the above compounds are deficient in the nitrogenous
elements of nutrition, and all of them nearly destitute of the mineral and
saline matters which are absolutely necessary to the formation of the
bones and tissues, and the support of the body in health, and are
consequently utterly unsuitable as an exclusive article of diet,
especially for young children. Unfortunately, it has been too much the
fashion of medical men of late years to recommend these compounds, and
even to furnish testimonials as to their excellence, apparently relying
solely on the representation of their proprietors or vendors. We deem it,
however, to be a public duty to caution parents and nurses against their
injudicious use. As mere adjuvants or auxiliaries, when the natural food
supplied by the mother may be insufficient for the nutrition of the
infant, some of them may doubtless be of value; but in all other cases
they should be largely combined with pure cow's milk, beef tea, meat
broths or gravies, eggs, or other substances rich in the nitrogenous and
saline elements of nutrition.

=FARM'ING.= The business or management of a FARM. Formerly farming was
looked upon as a profession easily understood, and successfully pursued
only by an empiric. It is now, however, regarded in a different light, and
the farmer, to succeed, not only requires perseverance and observation,
but also a sound knowledge of natural sciences. See BUTTER, CHEESE,
IMPLEMENTS, MANURES, SOILS, &c.

=FARMS, SEWAGE.= See SEWAGE FARMS.

=FAT.= _Syn._ ADEPS, L. The fat of animals is a concrete oil contained in
the cellular membrane of their bodies, more especially round the kidneys,
in the folds of the omentum, at the base of the heart, upon the surface of
the intestines, and among many of the muscles. Fat varies in consistence,
colour, and odour, with the animal from which it is obtained. That of the
carnivora is usually soft and rank-flavoured; that of the ruminantia solid
and nearly scentless. It is generally whitest and most copious in the
well-fed young animal, and yellowish and more scanty in the old. That
under the skin and surrounding the kidneys (suet) is also more solid than
that in the neighbourhood of the movable viscera. In the cetacea, or whale
tribe, the fatty secretion assumes the form of oil. These variations in
consistency depend upon the relative proportions of solid stearin and
liquid olein present in the fat.

The vegetable fats are found in various parts of certain plants, but are
generally most abundant in the seeds. They are extracted by simple
pressure or else by boiling. Two kinds of vegetable fat, namely, palm-oil
and cocoa-nut oil, are extensively employed in the useful arts.

All fats are lighter than water. They are all soluble in ether, benzol,
and turpentine, and may be mixed with each other in any proportion.

In former times the fats of many animals were employed in pharmacy, but at
present those principally used are lard and suet. In perfumery, in
addition to these, beef marrow and bear's grease are employed. For both
these purposes the crude material is cut into small pieces, and freed as
much as possible from all extraneous membranes; after which it is placed
in a boiler with water, and heated until it is completely fused, when the
whole is strained, and allowed to cool very slowly. By this means a cake
of cleansed fat is obtained, which may be readily separated from any
adhering water.

Fats and the fat oils are best preserved by being run into glazed jars,
and secluded from the action of the air. A little benzoic acid or
gum-benzoin, dissolved in them by heat, will generally prevent, and in all
cases greatly defer, the accession of rancidity. We introduced this method
into the laboratory in our early days of manipulation, and ourselves, and
others to whom we have made it known, have since employed it with
undeviating advantage in the manufacture of cerates, ointments, and other
preparations containing fatty matter or the fixed oils. It has been shown
by Dr Griesler that nitric ether, and its alcoholic solution, act in the
same manner. A few drops are not only sufficient to prevent rancidity,
but, it is said, will even destroy the disagreeable odour of rancid fat.
When heated to remove the alcohol, they immediately become bright, clear,
and scentless. See OIL, GLYCERIN, OLEIN, PALMITIN, STEARIN, TALLOW, &c.,
also _below_.

=Fat, to melt down.= Let all the small pieces of fat cut off joints, &c.,
be collected, divided into small pieces, put in a stew pan (a little water
being added to prevent their burning), and placed on the fire. This must
be stirred carefully at intervals to prevent any of the pieces of fat
sticking to the bottom.

When thoroughly melted (which it will be in about an hour and a half) pour
through a strainer into a basin with some cold water in it. Thus prepared,
dripping or fat may be used instead of suet, and there are few who would
know any difference between them. Dripping, if clarified as above, may be
used over and over again for frying, provided it has not been previously
employed in dressing fish, in which case it will impart a fishy taste. But
it can be used repeatedly for fish if it is kept for that purpose only.
The skimmings off the top of the saucepans, while a piece of meat is
boiling, will also do capitally for light puddings.[296]

[Footnote 296: 'Artisan Cookery.' Griffith and Farran.]

=FAT'TY ACIDS.= In _chemistry_, compounds having acid properties derived
from the various fats and oils. The radicals of these acids exist in the
natural fats combined with a base called glyceryl. When fats are
saponified by an alkali, stearate, palmitate, and oleate of potassa or
soda, as the case may be, are produced and glycerin is set free. On
decomposing either of these compounds with sulphuric acid a sulphate of
the alkali is formed, and the fatty acid is precipitated. Some of the
fatty acids, as stearic, cerotic, palmitic, and lauric, are solid at
ordinary temperatures; others, as oleic, are liquid. The hard fatty acids
are extensively used as candle materials, being superior in every respect
to the natural fats from which they are derived.

=FAT'TENING.= Until comparatively a recent date, the plan used to fatten
domestic animals was to prevent their taking exercise, and to gorge them
with food. The excessive fat produced by these means was, however, found
to be far from wholesome, and was less delicate than that arising in the
natural way. This system was therefore gradually abandoned in favour of
the present one, which consists in supplying the animal with abundance of
wholesome food, and with the means of taking exercise as far as the
disposition or feelings dictate. Hence the farmers "in the most
enlightened districts, such as Berwickshire, East Lothian, &c., instead of
tying up their fattening cattle in stables like horses, and placing their
food before them, put two or three together in small yards with sheds
attached, in which they can run about, eat when they choose, and take
shelter from the rain, or cold, or the sun, at pleasure, under the open
shed. Swine are treated in the same manner, and also spring lambs that are
fattened for the market. Poultry are no longer kept in coops and crammed,
or rabbits in hutches; but the former are allowed to take exercise in
fields sown with various herbs, and the latter are kept in a species of
artificial warren, where they can take exercise by burrowing." (Loudon.)

=FAVOURITE PRESCRIPTION (Dr Pierce's)= for the cure of those chronic
weaknesses and complaints peculiar to females. 280 grammes of a turbid
greenish-brown fluid with a bulky deposit of the same colour, made
according to the following recipe:--Savin tops, 10 grammes; larch agaric
and cinnamon, of each 5 grammes; China Jaen (ash cinchona bark), 10
grammes; boil with sufficient water to make 220 grammes when strained.
Dissolve in the filtrate gum Arabic, 10 grammes; white sugar, 5 grammes;
and add tinct. digitalis and tinct. opii, of each 2 grammes; star anise
oil, 8 drops; 90 per cent. spirit, 45 grammes. (Hager.)

=FEAR.= Although fear is a depressing and debilitating emotion, and
sometimes acts prejudicially on the health, it frequently acts as a
curative or preventive of disease. It is a well-known fact that females
who are the most faint-hearted and desponding during the period of their
sex's trial, generally experience a more rapid convalescence than those
who are more confident and resolute. During the raging of an epidemic fear
generally induces temperance, cleanliness, and the adoption of other
precautions which tend powerfully to prevent disease. Boerhaave, according
to Pereira, is said to have prevented the occurrence of epileptic attack
(brought on by the sight of a person falling down in a fit in the sight of
the hospital patients), by directing a red-hot iron to be applied to the
person who should next be affected.

=FEA'THERS.= Ostrich feathers are those most esteemed as articles of
personal decoration, and goose feathers for beds; but the feathers of
other birds are commonly used for both purposes.

Feathers are prepared for ornamental purposes by scouring them with white
soap-and-water (1 oz. to the pint), used hot; they are next well rinsed in
several successive portions of pure water, and after being drained and
shaken, are, lastly, passed through water slightly blued with pure indigo,
and dried out of the dust. When dry, the ribs are generally rubbed with a
piece of glass, having a curved notch in it, for the purpose of increasing
their pliancy, and the filaments are curled by drawing them, between the
edge of a blunt knife and the ball of the thumb of the hand which holds
it.

=Feathers, Bleaching of:=--

A new trade has sprung up within the past ten years, by which black,
brown, or grey feathers are bleached sufficiently to enable them to be
dyed any required colour.

The process is as follows:--The feathers are first thoroughly washed with
soap-and-water, to free them from any oil they may contain. They are next
transferred to a bath composed of bichromate of potash dissolved in water,
to which has been added a few drops of nitric or sulphuric acid. In this
bath they rapidly lose their black, brown, or grey colour, and become
almost white. On being removed from this bath they are well rinsed in
water, and are then fit to be dyed, even the most delicate colour. Great
care is required in the process, as the flue of the feather is apt to be
destroyed, if kept too long in the bath. A bleached feather may be readily
known by the yellow colour of its stem.

Other methods have been adopted, such as a bath of chloride of lime,
peroxide of hydrogen, or sulphurous acid, &c., but the bichromate bath
gives the best results.

=Feathers, Dyeing of:=--

BLACK. By immersion for 2 or 3 days in a bath (at first hot) of logwood, 8
parts, and copperas or acetate of iron, (about) 1 part.

BLUE. With the indigo vat.

BROWN. By any of the brown dyes for silk or woollen.

CRIMSON. A mordant of alum, followed by a hot bath of brazil wood, and
afterwards by a weak one of cudbear.

PINK or ROSE. With safflower and lemon juice.

PLUM. The red dye, followed by alkaline bath.

RED. A mordant of alum, followed by a hot brazil-wood bath.

YELLOW. From an alum mordant, followed by a bath of turmeric or weld.
Other shades may be obtained by a mixture of the above dyes.

Feathers may also be dyed by simple immersion, for two or three minutes,
in a bath of any of the aniline colours.

Goose feathers for BEDS are generally PURIFIED by simply exposing them to
the sun or in a stove until perfectly dry, and then beating them to remove
loose dirt. When carelessly collected and dirty, they are sometimes first
cleansed with lime water, or, better still, with a weak solution of
carbonate of soda, or water to which a little solution of chloride of lime
has been added; after which they are rinsed in clean water, and dried or
stoved as before. Old feathers are cleansed or purified in the same way.

=FEB'RIFUGES.= _Syn._ FEBRIFUGA, L. In pharmacy, substances or agents
which cure or alleviate fever. The term is more particularly applied to
medicines used against the ague, as CINCHONA BARK and ARSENIOUS ACID, and
their preparations. The extreme value of cold water, as a drink in ardent
fever, has been known in all ages. In 1723 Dr Hancocke published a work
entitled--'Febrifugum Magnum, or Common Water the best Cure for Fevers,
and probably for the Plague,' which in a short time ran through several
large editions, but appears to have been overlooked by the hydropaths of
the present day.

=FEC'ULA.= _Syn._ FAECULA, L. The matter which subsides from cold water in
which bruised or rasped vegetable substances have been washed. The fecula
obtained from the seeds of the cereals and leguminosae, and from tuberous
or bulbous roots, consists of nearly pure STARCH. In some cases the starch
is associated with the green colouring matter (CHLOROPHYLL) and the
narcotic principles of the vegetables which yield it. The green fecula
obtained by straining the expressed juices of the leaves and herbaceous
parts of plants is of this character.

The fecula of all the amylaceous roots, rhizomes, and tubers, may be
easily obtained, on the small scale, by rasping them, pressing, and
working the pulp in cold water, and after straining the resulting milky
liquid through a hair sieve, allowing it to settle. The sediment may be
again washed by diffusion through clean cold water, and must be, lastly,
collected, and dried out of the dust, and, without artificial heat.

The fecula of narcotic plants for medicinal purposes is obtained by
allowing the expressed juice to repose for 24 hours, and then decanting
the clear portion, and drying the residue. Sometimes heat is employed. See
ARROW-ROOT, STARCH, &c.

=FEEDING BOTTLES.= We extract from 'The Sanitary Record' the following
valuable paper on 'Feeding Bottles,' by Dr Eustace Smith,
assistant-physician to the City of London Hospital for Diseases of the
Chest, and Physician to the East London Hospital for Children:--"In the
artificial rearing of infants it is of importance that food should be
given to them from a feeding-bottle. By this means the natural method of
taking nourishment is imitated; the muscles of the mouth and cheeks are
brought into play; and the secretion of saliva--a secretion which, very
scanty at birth, becomes gradually more copious and takes so active a part
in digestion--is encouraged and increased.

"Almost all babies will take their food more readily by this method, their
instinct teaching them to suck everything that is put into their mouths.
Even in cases where a deficiency in the hard palate presents so great an
obstacle to sucking, on account of the impossibility of creating the
necessary vacuum in the mouth, the difficulty can be overcome by a simple
mechanical contrivance. Therefore, in every case of hand-feeding, a
suitable bottle is the first thing to be desired.

"To be satisfactory a feeding-bottle must fulfil three indispensable
conditions: it must be simple in construction and easily manageable; it
must be capable of being readily cleaned; and in its use the milk must
flow easily and without great effort on the part of the infant. The
ordinary feeder in use at the present time consists of a flattened glass
flask, closed at the mouth by a cap, which fits over the neck. A
caoutchouc tube passes through the cap, and is connected inside the bottle
with a straight glass pipe. The other end of the elastic tube is attached
to the teat, or mouth-piece, by means of a short hollow cylinder called
the 'union-joint.' The teat is firmly fixed to this by means of the
shield. In the construction of the cap and union-joint, metal,
earthenware, or wood, is employed. The metal used by the best makers is
tin, and this, if cleanliness be properly attended to, is not
objectionable. In cheaper bottles, sold in the shops for sixpence, the
mouth is closed by a perforated cork, through which the flexible tube
passes. Here there is no cap, but in all essential points the construction
is the same as in the more expensive articles.

"In this apparatus it is important that the channel through the tubes
should be perfectly free. The point at which the channel is narrowest is
the union-joint, which connects the mouth-piece with the flexible tube. In
a badly made bottle an impediment may exist at this point from
carelessness in the manufacture, and may present a great obstacle to the
ready passage of the fluid. Care also should be taken that the flexible
tube passes completely through the cap, before it becomes connected with
the glass pipe. This is very important. In the early feeding-bottles
constructed upon this model by O'Connel, the glass pipe passed from within
the bottle through the cap, and was attached outside this to the
caoutchouc tube. It was thus held rigidly in the centre of the bottle, and
as a natural consequence, when the apparatus was in use, unless the bottle
was held upright during the whole meal, long before its contents were
exhausted the milk ceased to flow, as the end of the pipe soon came to be
above the surface of the fluid, which necessarily gravitated to the lowest
part as the bottle lay on its side.

"When, however, the connection between the two tubes is made within
instead of outside the bottle, this disadvantage no longer exists, for the
glass tube being free to move, its end is able to sink to whichever side
of the bottle is undermost, and therefore always remains below the level
of the fluid. The best bottles have a small cylindrical stop, _i.e._ a
thick ring of metal or wood placed within the flexible tube, just above
its junction with the glass pipe. The object of this is to prevent the
latter being drawn through the cap, and thus held rigidly in the centre of
the bottle.

"The method of connection of the cap with the neck of the bottle is not
unimportant. It should not be too tight or air will be prevented from
entering the bottle to supply the place of the milk which is withdrawn. A
common plan is to line the interior of the cap with cork, but this
substance, besides its risk of being broken and detached by careless
handling, has the further disadvantage of absorbing milk, which turns sour
and may afterwards set up fermentation in fresh milk put into the bottle
for a subsequent meal. In the best bottles the cap is constructed to screw
on to the neck, as in the 'Alexandra' Feeding bottle made by the Messrs
Maw; or is united to it by an application of the 'bayonet catch,' as in
the 'Improved' feeding-bottle made by Messrs Lynch and Son. In this very
admirable apparatus three grooves in the inside of the cap pass over
corresponding projections on the neck of the bottle; the cap is then
turned to the right, with a slight screwing motion, and becomes securely
fastened.

"With badly made bottles infants often have very great difficulty in
drawing up the milk, and can only do so by violent efforts, which soon
exhaust their strength or their patience. There are two reasons why milk
in these cases may not flow easily--either the cap fits too tightly, so
that air cannot enter with sufficient facility in proportion as the liquid
contents become diminished, as has just been mentioned; or the caoutchouc
forming the flexible tube is too thin, so that it collapses when suction
is applied. In the first case a small hole should be made through the cap,
so as to allow a free admission of air, or if the bottle be a simpler
one, closed at the mouth by a perforated cork, this may be slightly eased
at the neck of the bottle, so as to fit less closely. In the second case,
stouter caoutchouc should be used in the construction of the tube. In
weakly infants, or those much reduced in strength by acute disease,
special attention should be paid to these points, as such children will
often refuse to take the bottle, if they find any difficulty in drawing up
the milk.

"Infants born with a cleft palate cannot suck from an ordinary bottle, as
the deficiency in the hard palate prevents the necessary vacuum being
formed in the mouth. Such children are, therefore, usually brought up with
a spoon, and often waste and die through insufficient nourishment. An
ingenious contrivance first suggested by Mr Oakley Coles will, however,
entirely remove the difficulty, and enable them to suck with as much ease
as if they suffered from no such congenital difficulty. The plan is a very
simple one, and consists in attaching to the nipple of any ordinary
feeding-bottle a flap of sheet elastic, cut to fit the roof of the mouth.
This flap must be of the shape and about the size of the bowl of a
teaspoon, and is to be sewn to the upper part of the stalk of the teat,
where this projects from the shield. In the mouth of the child the flap
forms an artificial palate, which if the sheet elastic chosen be
sufficiently stout, offers firm resistance to the tongue pressing against
in sucking, and prevents fluid from passing into the nose in the act of
swallowing.

"The closest attention must be paid to the cleaning of feeding-bottles.
Each time after being used the whole apparatus should be well washed out
with water containing a little soda in solution.

"The inside of the cap must be carefully cleaned, and the brush should be
carried several times through the whole length of the tubing. Afterwards
the bottle and tubes should be laid in cold water until again wanted. An
objection to the common brush usually supplied with each feeder is, that
after a few days' use the softened bristles are apt to get detached and be
caught in the joints of the tubing, whence they may afterwards be washed
by the stream of fluid and be swallowed by the child. Accordingly, a new
cleaner has been manufactured by Messrs Maw and Sons, in which bristles
are entirely dispensed with. They are replaced by a thin strip of
caoutchouc, which is wound round in a spiral form, at the end of the
ordinary wire handle. This instrument answers all the purposes of a brush,
without the disadvantages alluded to, and is besides far more durable.

"Excellent feeding-bottles are now made by many different manufacturers,
and are sold at prices which place them within the reach of the poorest.
These cannot all be mentioned, but some of the bottles more commonly met
with, may be shortly referred to. The six-penny feeder made by Messrs Maw,
Son, and Thompson, can be recommended for its simplicity of construction,
and at the same time for its perfect efficiency. In this instrument there
is no cap, instead the mouth of the bottle is closed by a cork, which is
perforated for the passage of the flexible tube. In all other respects the
construction of this apparatus is the same as in the more expensive
instruments. The 'Alexandra' feeding-bottle, price half-a-crown, by the
same makers, is an admirable bottle. The cap screws on to the neck, and is
furnished with a small hole for the admission of air. A 'stop' in the
lower part of the flexible tube prevents the glass pipe being drawn into
the cap, and the instrument is supplied with all the latest improvements.
The bottles made by Messrs Maw are all furnished with the new patent
cleaner just described. The improved feeding-bottle made by Messrs Lynch
and Son, at one shilling and eighteen pence, has been before referred to.
The material used for the cap is boxwood. It is a capital bottle, and will
give the fullest satisfaction to the purchaser. Mr Lang's 'Alma Mater'
feeding-bottle can also be recommended. In this instrument the cap is made
of earthenware and is lined with cork. A good bottle is made by Mr Elam,
of Oxford Street, price two shillings; the cap is formed of britannia
metal, and screws on to the neck. A cheaper bottle, but one which for
elegance of design and accuracy of detail cannot be surpassed, is Mr
Mather's 'Princess' feeding-bottle. A tin cup screws on the neck, and is
pierced by a small hole for the admission of air. The opening is fitted
with a 'cone valve' of simple and ingenious construction, which allows air
to enter freely when suction is applied to the tube, but closes firmly
against any escape through the air-hole of the fluid contents of the
bottle. The bottle itself has a double curve towards the neck to provide
against too sudden bending of the flexible tube against the tap. This is
apt to happen when the curve is single, if the bottle lie with the
convexity downwards, and partial obstruction of the tube may be the
result. The 'Princess' feeding-bottle is sold in the shops for eighteen
pence.

"All bottles bear their name in raised letters upon the glass, but a
report which has obtained currency that these letters are hollow in the
interior, and difficult to cleanse is without any foundation in fact. Any
one may test this for himself by placing a finger within the bottle
underneath the letters, when the internal surface will be found perfectly
plain and uniform. In all cases where cork enters into the construction of
a feeding-bottle, especial care should be taken in cleansing the
apparatus, and the cork should be well soaked in soda and water in order
that any sour milk it may contain may be neutralised at once."

=FEET (The).= To preserve the feet in a proper condition, they should be
frequently soaked, and well washed in warm or tepid water. The nails of
the toes should be pared, to prevent their becoming inconveniently long,
and from growing into the flesh, soaked, and well washed in warm or tepid
water. Many persons suffer severely from TENDER FEET. This generally
arises from the use of thin cotton or silk stockings, and boots or shoes
that are either too tight or stiff, or not sufficiently porous to permit
of the escape of the perspiration. Waterproof boots and shoes which are
also air-tight (as those of gutta percha and India rubber), are common
causes of tender feet, and even of headaches, dyspepsia, and apoplexy. The
best treatment of tender feet is the immediate adoption of worsted
stockings or socks, and light, easy shoes of buckskin, goatskin, or some
other equally soft kind of leather. It is highly necessary for the
preservation of health to preserve the feet DRY; persons who are,
therefore, exposed to the wet, or who are frequently passengers through
the public streets in bad weather, should regard sound and good boots and
shoes as of the first importance. In fact, in a hygienic point of view, a
wet back should be less shunned than wet feet. Many persons frequently
experience EXTREME COLDNESS and NUMBNESS OF THE FEET. The best and most
natural remedy for this is active exercise or friction, the former being
always adopted when possible. In such cases the use of warm woollen
stockings is absolutely necessary, and the debilitated and aged may
advantageously keep them on throughout the night, or at all events until
the feet acquire a comfortable degree of warmth. The DISAGREEABLE ODOUR
which is evolved by the feet of some individuals in hot weather may be
removed by the observance of extreme cleanliness, and by occasionally
soaking the feet in warm water, to which a small quantity of chloride of
lime or sal ammoniac has been added. A good deodoriser for unpleasant
smelling feet is said to be the following, invented by M Paulcke:--A
mixture of equal parts of salicylic acid, soap, talc, and starch, to be
applied in the form of powder.

DISTORTION OF THE FEET is not uncommon in childhood, being sometimes
congenital, but as frequently the result of weakness or bad nursing. "A
child with its feet turned inwards is called VARUS; when they are turned
outwards it is styled VALGUS. The proper use of bandages, early applied,
will generally correct these deformities; but if they be neglected in
infancy they become incurable." ('Med. Lex.') CLUBFOOT, of which there are
several varieties, may also be frequently relieved by a simple surgical
operation. See BOOTS and SHOES, DISTORTIONS.

=FELT'ING.= This is a process by which various species of fur, hair, and
wool, are blended into a compact texture, in many respects resembling
cloth. It depends on the peculiar anatomical construction of these
substances, enabling them to interlace and intertwine with each other, by
which they become permanently matted together. Felt was formerly chiefly
employed for hats. It is now commonly used for mill-bands, filters, &c.;
and when varnished or japanned, or saturated with asphalte or bitumen, is
a durable substitute for japanned leather, and for roofing.

=FENNEL.= _Syn._ F[OE]NICULUM (Ph. L.), L. The fruit (seed) of
_F[oe]niculum dulce_, or sweet fennel; the oil distilled from the fruit
(OIL OF FENNEL; OLEUM F[OE]NICULI, L.) as well as a distilled water
(FENNEL WATER; AQUA F[OE]NICULI, L.), are officinal in the
Pharmacop[oe]ias. They are stimulant and carminative; but are now seldom
employed.

=FEN'UGREEK.= The seeds of _Trigonella F[oe]num Graecum_. Resolvent and
stomachic. The seeds dye yellow; formerly roasted for coffee; now chiefly
employed in veterinary medicine.

=FER'MENT.= _Syn._ FERMENTUM, L. A substance which induces fermentation.
According to one view ferments are compounds whose decomposition proceeds
simultaneously with that of the body undergoing metamorphosis. They all
contain albuminous or azotised principles, which in a moist state putrefy
and suffer decomposition. According to Pasteur, however, fermentation is
excited by living organisms--fungi and infusoria. See FERMENTATION and
YEAST.

=FERMENTA'TION.= _Syn._ FERMENTATIO, L. In _chemistry_, a peculiar
metamorphosis of a complex organic substance, by a transposition of its
elements under the agency of an external disturbing force. Fermentation,
according to the theory proposed by Liebig, is a metamorphosis, by which
the elements of a complex molecule group themselves so as to form more
intimate and stable compounds. It is excited by the contact of all bodies
the elements of which are in a state of active decomposition or
fermentation. "In nitrogenised substances of a very complex constitution,
putrefaction or fermentation is spontaneously established when water is
present, and the temperature sufficiently high, and it continues till the
original compounds are wholly destroyed. Substances destitute of nitrogen,
on the contrary, require, in order to their undergoing this metamorphosis,
the presence of a nitrogenised substance, already in a state of
putrefaction (fermentation)." (Liebig.) The substances which promote this
change are termed FERMENTS, and among these the principal are gliadin,
gluten, vegetable albumen, and all nitrogenous substances in a state of
spontaneous decomposition or fermentation. "It is imagined that when these
substances, in the act of undergoing change, are brought into contact with
neutral ternary compounds of small stability, as sugar, the molecular
disturbance of the body, already in a state of decomposition, may be, as
it were, propagated to the other, and bring about the destruction of the
equilibrium of forces to which it owes its being. The complex body, under
these circumstances, breaks up into simpler products, which possess
greater permanence." (Fownes.) YEAST, the ferment most commonly employed
for inducing the vinous fermentation, is such a substance in an active
state of putrefaction, and whose atoms are in continual motion. Putrefying
animal substances are equally capable of exciting the same action. "If we
add to a solution of pure sugar an albuminous substance, a caseous or
fleshy matter, the development of yeast becomes manifest, and an
additional quantity of it is found at the end of the operation. Thus, with
nourishment, ferment engenders ferment. It is for this reason that a
little fermenting must, added to a body of fresh grape juice, excite
fermentation in the whole mass. These effects are not confined to
alcoholic (vinous) fermentation. The smallest portion of sour milk, of
sour dough, or sour juice of beet-root, of putrefied flesh and blood,
occasions like alterations in fresh milk, dough, juice of beet-root,
flesh, and blood. But further, and which is a very curious circumstance,
if we put into a liquid containing any fermenting substance another in a
sound state, the latter would suffer decomposition under the influence of
the former. If we place urea in the presence of beer-yeast, it experiences
no change; while if we add it to sugar-water in a fermenting state, the
urea is converted into carbonate of ammonia. "We thus possess two modes of
decomposition; the one direct, the other indirect." (Ure.)

A very remarkable circumstance connected with fermentation is that it is
always accompanied by the development of microscopic living
organism--fungi and infusoria. "So constantly, indeed, is this the case,
that many chemists and physiologists regard these organisms as the
existing cause of fermentation and putrefaction; and this view appears to
be corroborated by the fact that each particular kind of fermentation
takes place most readily in contact with certain living organisms."
(Fownes.) Thus the vinous or alcohol-producing fermentation is
accompanied, or caused, by two fungi, called _Torula cerevisiae_ and
_Penicillium glaucum_; the acetous or vinegar-producing fermentation by
_Torula aceti_; the lactous fermentation (souring of milk) by _Penicillium
glaucum_.

The butyric fermentation by an animal--an _infusorium_, which cannot exist
in free oxygen, but flourishes in an atmosphere of hydrogen, &c.

Of late years these latter views as to the cause of fermentation have been
accepted by most of the scientific world, notwithstanding the opposition
they experienced from so powerful an antagonist as Liebig.

From the researches of Pasteur, the distinguished author of the modern
theory of fermentation, as opposed to the chemico-physical theory of
Liebig, it appears that when yeast is placed in a solution of sugar and
water, or in a solution of sugar and water containing albuminous
substances, under proper conditions as to temperature, the fermentation
that ensues is due to the process of growth taking place in the yeast
plant; the new cells of which, in assimilating part of the sugar and
converting it into cellulose and fat, cause, at the same time, the
breaking up of the sugar molecule, and resolve it into the more stable
combinations of alcohol and carbonic acid.

In order that the ferment or fungus should grow it is essential that, in
addition to the cellulose and fat, it should be supplied with ammoniacal
salts and soluble phosphates. These are generally present in the liquid
about to be fermented; but when yeast is added to pure sugar and water "it
lives at the expense of the sugar, and of the nitrogenous and mineral
substances contained within itself."[297]

[Footnote 297: Pasteur.]

Speaking of the influence of oxygen on the development of yeast on
alcoholic fermentation, Pasteur states that ready-formed yeast can
germinate and grow in a liquid containing sugar and albuminous matters,
even when oxygen is completely excluded. The quantity of yeast formed,
however, in this case, is but small, and the fermentation goes on slowly;
nevertheless, a large quantity of sugar disappears (sixty to eighty parts
to one part of yeast). If the air has access to a large surface the
fermentation goes on quickly, and a much larger quantity of yeast is
formed in proportion to the quantity of sugar which disappears.

In this case, also, oxygen is absorbed by the yeast, which grows quickly,
but does not act so decidedly as a ferment, inasmuch as only four to ten
parts of sugar disappear for one part of yeast produced.

When the air is excluded the same yeast again acts as a powerful ferment.
Pasteur, therefore, infers that yeast which acts as a ferment in the
absence of air abstracts oxygen from the sugar, and that upon this
deoxidising power its action as a ferment depends. The violent activity of
the yeast at the commencement of the fermentation is due to oxygen
dissolved in the liquid. In liquids containing albumen (yeast and water,
&c.) yeast likewise grows, though sparingly, even if the solution does not
contain a trace of sugar, provided there is a sufficient access of air.
But if the air is excluded this does not take place, even though the
liquid may contain, besides albumen, a non-fermentable sugar, such as milk
sugar. The yeast formed in a liquid not containing sugar possesses all the
properties of a ferment, and excites fermentation in a solution of sugar
excluded from the air.[298]

[Footnote 298: 'Bull. Soc. Chem.,' 1861, pp. 61, 79.]

Similarly, Pasteur regards putrefaction as a kind of fermentation, set up
and maintained by an animal organism, or ferment belonging to the genus
_Vibrio_. Putrefaction, when taking place in contact with the air, is
always accompanied by decay or EREMACAUSIS. The abandonment of the old
theory as to the nature of eremacausis, viz. that it consisted in the
gradual combustion of decaying organic matters by atmospheric oxygen, has
been necessitated by the experiments of Pasteur, Schroeder, and others,
which have conclusively established the facts that organic substances are
not oxidised by perfectly pure air, and that their decomposition and
subsequent destruction are due to the presence in the air of the sporules
or seeds of certain low organisms. Pasteur cites numerous instances
corroborative of the statement that perfectly pure oxygen fails to affect,
save to a very limited extent, organic substances.

In one case an aqueous infusion of yeast mixed with sugar was enclosed in
a sealed flask with double its volume of air, which had been previously
depurated by being made to pass through a red-hot tube. At the end of
three years the liquid (which had during part of the time been kept at a
temperature of from 25 deg. to 30 deg. Cent.) was found to be perfectly fresh and
transparent, and the air when examined gave 18.1 vols. of oxygen, 80.5
vols. of nitrogen, and 1.4 of carbonic acid. Under the same conditions
urine and milk, whether fresh or previously boiled, showed minute traces
only of oxidation; crystals of uric acid and phosphates formed in the
urine, but the milk was unaltered, having preserved its alkaline reaction,
and showed no disposition to curdle.

Very different, however, was the result when either of the above
substances was enclosed with ordinary air. It was then found that in a few
days the whole of the oxygen was absorbed, carbonic acid being at the same
time simultaneously formed. A certain quantity of moistened oak sawdust
kept in contact with ordinary air for a fortnight was found at the end of
that time to have absorbed 140 cubic centimetres of oxygen; whilst the
same amount of sawdust enclosed with an equal volume of purified air had
removed only a few cubic centimetres of the gas in a month. In the former
experiment a microscopic film of mycelia and spores of Mucidineae formed on
the sawdust.

From numerous experiments of a like nature with the above, and attended
with analogous results, chemists and physiologists now generally regard
eremacausis as effected by agencies similar in character to those which
produce fermentation and putrefaction.

"The observations of Schroeder upon the processes of fermentation and
putrefaction are remarkable. He has shown that any organic liquid may be
prevented from fermenting or putrefying if it be heated under pressure to
about 266 deg. F. (130 deg. C.), then transferred to a flask and boiled, the mouth
of the flask being plugged whilst boiling with a pellet of cotton wool,
which is left in the neck of the flask. In this way he preserved, during a
hot summer, various liquids, including freshly-boiled wort, blood, white
of egg, whey, urine, broth, and milk; but when afterwards the plug of
cotton wool was withdrawn these liquids in a few days began to undergo
decomposition. He explains these results by supposing that the spores of
some organism must find access to the substance in order to set up the
process of decomposition. By a temperature of 260 deg. F. (126.7 deg. C.) any such
spores which the substance itself might contain are destroyed, and as the
air is filtered through the cotton wool before it reaches the interior of
the flask, none of these organic germs can afterwards gain access to the
body under experiment. I have repeated some of these experiments with
complete success.[299]

[Footnote 299: The Editor of this work has also repeated Schroeder's
experiments on milk, and obtained the same results.]

"If air be transmitted with suitable precautions slowly through narrow
ignited platinum tubes, so as to destroy all suspended organic particles,
no fermentation or putrefaction will take place on admitting such air into
contact with putrescible substances previously heated to 260 deg. for an
hour."[300]

[Footnote 300: Miller.]

Pasteur has shown the existence of these floating germs in the air by
drawing a large volume of atmospheric air, by means of an aspirator,
through a narrow tube obstructed by collodion wool. On subsequently
dissolving this wool in a mixture of alcohol and ether various microscopic
sporules were left undissolved.

The entire absence of the exciting causes--warmth, air, and
moisture--leaves even those substances which under ordinary circumstances
are most liable to change, in a state in which they may remain for an
almost indefinite period without perceptible alteration. Thus, animal
substances in a frozen or dry state do not undergo decomposition, nor does
a solution of sugar or the juice of grapes (must) when perfectly excluded
from the air; but on the mere exposure of these substances to warmth,
moisture, or atmospheric air, putrefaction or fermentation immediately
commences. Remove the cork from the bottle of 'capillaire' on the parlour
sideboard, or pierce the skin of one of the grapes on the dessert table
with a needle, and these bodies, which would have otherwise suffered no
change for weeks, or even months, will soon exhibit symptoms of
spontaneous decomposition. The knowledge of this fact has been practically
applied to the preservation of animal and vegetable substances for food.
Even the most putrescible of these may be preserved for an unlimited
period by enclosure in metallic cases, or glass bottles, from which the
air has been completely removed and excluded.

The important duties which fermentation or putrefaction performs in the
economy of our globe, and in several of the arts of life and civilisation,
have long rendered the development of its principles an object of the
highest interest and importance, both in a scientific and practical point
of view. In its most extended sense, this subtile process of nature,
though occasionally productive of injurious effects, may be regarded as
one of the most necessary and beneficial with which we are acquainted.
Like the labours of a scavenger, it speedily removes from the surface of
our globe those matters which would otherwise remain for some time without
undergoing decomposition. It either dissipates in air, or reduces to more
fixed and useful forms of matter, those organic substances which, by their
presence, would prove noxious, or, at all events, useless to the animal
and vegetable kingdoms. It is the giant power that cleans the Augean
stable of nature, at the same time that it provides some of the most
esteemed articles of utility and luxury for the well-being and enjoyment
of man.

Chemists have distinguished fermentation into different varieties, which,
in general, are named after the more important products of its action. Of
late years, the number of these varieties has been greatly increased by
the extension of the term to several operations besides those formerly
included under it. See ACETIFICATION, BREAD, PUTREFACTION, BREWING, &c.

=FERN (Male).= _Syn._ MALE SHIELD FERN, FILIX MAS, RADIX FILICIS, L. The
root (rhizome) of the _Lastraea Filix-mas_, or male fern. It is bitter,
astringent, or vermifuge.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 dr. in powder, or made into a
decoction, repeated for 3 or 4 days, and followed by a purge. It is
chiefly given in tapeworm. In Switzerland it is deemed almost infallible,
but has proved less successful in these countries. See OILS.

=FERRICY'ANIDE.= _Syn._ FERRIDCYANIDE, FERRIDCYANURET. A compound of
ferricyanogen with a metal or other basic radical. The FERRICYANIDE OF
POTASSIUM, or 'RED PRUSSIATE OF POTASH,' as it is often improperly called,
is a well-known example. The ferricyanides of AMMONIUM and the ALKALIES
and ALKALINE EARTHS are soluble; those of most of the METALS, insoluble.
See _below_.

=FERRICYAN'OGEN.= _Syn._ FERRIDCYANOGEN, FERRIC-CYANOGEN. The peculiar
salt-radical which exists in the so-called red prussiate of potash. It is
isomeric with ferrocyanogen, from which it differs in capacity of
saturation (being tribasic), and in the behaviour of its compounds with
solutions of the metals. It has not been isolated. See POTASSIUM
(Ferricyanide).

=FERROCY'ANIDE.= _Syn._ FERROCYANURET, PRUSSIATE; FERROCYANIDUM,
FERROCYANURETUM, L. A compound of ferrocyanogen with a metal or other
basic radical. The principal substance of this kind is the FERROCYANIDE OF
POTASSIUM or 'YELLOW PRUSSIATE OF POTASH,' as it is often called. See the
respective basis--AMMONIUM, POTASSIUM, SODIUM, &c., and _below_.

=FERROCYAN'OGEN.= _Syn._ FERROCYANOGENIUM, L. A bibasic salt radical,
composed of the elements of 3 equivalents of CYANOGEN and 1 equivalent of
the metal IRON. It has never been isolated. It unites with the various
bases to form FERROCYANIDES. See CYANOGEN, HYDROFERROCYANIC ACID, IRON,
&c.

=FERRU'GO.= [=L=.] Rust of iron. See IRON (Sesquioxide).

=FE'VER.= _Syn._ FEBRIS, PYREXIA, L. In pathology a condition
characterised by loss of appetite, thirst, languor, debility,
unwillingness to move, accelerated pulse, increased heat of surface, and
general disturbance of all the functions. A large number of diseases in
which all or some of these symptoms appear are called FEVERS. They have
been divided by nosologists into intermittent (INTERMITTENTES), remittent
(REMITTENTES), and continued fevers (CONTINUAE). The first of these are
generally known as AGUES; the second differ from agues in there being one
or more marked exacerbations and remissions of the symptoms every 24
hours, but without any entire intermission. The terms 'hectic,' 'nervous,'
'bilious,' 'inflammatory,' &c., have also been applied to particular
varieties of fever; and names indicative of certain cutaneous appearances
connected with them have been given to others; as 'scarlet' fever,
'yellow' fever, &c.

The usual symptoms of incipient fever (febrile symptoms) are--chilliness
(varying from a simple shiver to a sensation of cold water running down
the back), a quick pulse, hot and dry skin or flushing, languor, often
evinced by yawning, depression of spirits, alternate fits of shivering and
heat, hurried and uneasy respiration, flying pains in various parts of the
body, as the head, back, and loins; loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting,
dry mouth, furred tongue, costiveness, urine small in quantity, and
usually of a deep colour, &c. When any of these symptoms appear, their
progress may often be arrested by the timely exhibition of an emetic,
followed by a saline purgative, and diaphoretics; at the same time
promoting the action of these remedies by a low diet and drinking
copiously of diluents, and carefully avoiding animal food, spirits,
fermented liquors, or anything at all stimulant. Whenever symptoms of
fever become established, medical advice should be sought and implicitly
followed. In parts where it cannot be obtained the treatment recommended
under AGUE, INFLAMMATION, REMITTENT FEVER, and TYPHUS, may be followed
with advantage.

In visiting or attending persons labouring under fevers, it is advisable
to avoid immediate contact with them or their clothing, or standing near
them in such a position as to inhale their breath, or the effluvia evolved
(in some cases) by their bodies; and when remaining for some time in the
apartment it is preferable to sit or stand near the fireplace, or between
the window and door, as such parts of the room are generally better
ventilated than the other portions. The greatest purifier of the
atmosphere of a sick chamber is a good fire, because it occasions a
continual current of the impure air up the chimney, and a corresponding
influx of fresh air from without. Chloride of lime, or chloride of zinc,
or their solutions, are also good purifiers. The first, however, should
not be used in quantity, as the evolved chlorine might in that case impede
the respiration of the patient. It is also advisable to avoid entering the
room of a patient labouring under contagious diseases of any class when
the stomach is empty or the spirits depressed; and it has been recommended
to clear the mouth of the saliva immediately after quitting the chamber.
See ABLUTION, &c.

=FEVER DROPS (C. Warburg's Vegetable).= Camphor and aloes, 2-1/2; orange
peel, 10; elecampane root, 12; digest with 90 per cent. spirit 240, mixed
with ac. sulphuric dil. 24. To the tincture add quinine sulphate 9; tinct.
opii crocatae, 2-1/2. (Ragsky.)

=FEVER POWDERS (James's, also called James's Powder and Pulvis Jacobi).=
It consists essentially of phosphate and antimoniate of lime with free
antimonic acid.

=FEVERSTONE--Lapis Anti-febrilis--Fieber Stein.= Lead oxide, 54 parts;
arsenic acid, 46 parts; melted together. (Winckler.)

=FI'BRIN.= _Syn._ FIBRINE. An azotised substance, forming the coagulable
portion of fresh-drawn blood, and the principal constituent of the
muscular or fleshy parts of animals. It is eminently nutritious, and
capable of yielding in the animal body albumen, caseine, and the tissues
derived from them. (Liebig.)

_Prep._ Fibrin is easily obtained in a nearly pure state, by agitating or
beating newly drawn blood with a small bundle of twigs, when it attaches
itself to the latter under the form of long reddish filaments, which
become white when worked with the hands in a stream of cold water. It may
also be procured by washing the coagulum of blood, tied up in a cloth, in
cold water, until all the soluble portions are removed. A small quantity
of fat, which it still contains, may be removed by digesting it in ether.

_Prop., &c._ Pure fibrin occurs as long, white, elastic filaments, which
are tasteless, inodorous, and insoluble in both hot and cold water. Wetted
with acetic acid, it forms, after a time, a transparent jelly, which is
slowly soluble in pure water. Very dilute solutions of the caustic
alkalies dissolve it completely, and the new solution greatly resembles
liquid albumen. Dried by a gentle heat it loses about 80% of water.

=FICHTENNADEL-BRUSTZUCKER (Pine-needle Pectoral Sugar).= (L. Morgenthau,
Mannheim.) For irritable cough, hoarseness, tightness of the chest,
asthma, stubborn lung affections, chronic catarrh, &c. Little sticks of
bonbon, containing a very little opium, and wrapped in tinfoil. (Hager.)

=FICHTENNADEL-TABAK (Pine-Needle Tobacco.= (L. Morgenthau.) Is said to be
patented in England. Ordinary tobacco moistened or sprinkled with a weak
spirituous solution of wood wool extract and wood wool oil and dried; made
up in cigars for smoking. (Hager.)

=FIG.= _Syn._ FICUS (B. P., Ph. L. E. & D.), CARICA, CARICAE FRUCTUS, L.
The figs of commerce are the dried fruit of _Ficus Carica_, the common
fig-tree. They are demulcent, emollient, laxative, and pectoral. Roasted
and boiled figs are occasionally employed as poultices to gumboils and
other affections of the mouth.

=FILARIA DRACUNCULUS.= The Guinea worm. The female of this parasite is to
be met with in tropical climates only, infesting the subcutaneous cellular
tissue of man and some animals. In appearance it resembles a piece of
white whip-cord of uniform thickness. According to Mr Ewart it varies in
length from twelve and three quarters to forty inches, and is on an
average twenty-five and a half inches long. It usually contains only one
young worm, although rare instances have occurred in which as many as
fifty of its progeny have been discovered in the same parent. In almost
every case when this creature leaves the body, it does so by the lower
extremities; occasionally, however, it does so by the mouth, the cheeks,
or below the tongue. When the young of the guinea worm are placed in pure
water they survive only four or five days; in foul water they will exist
for three weeks. It appears that immersion in water, of the body of the
person afflicted with the parasite, sometimes has the effect of inducing
the creature to leave his human quarters, since Dr Lorimer states "that
many people belonging to the bazaars in the vicinity of the lines,
affected with the parasite, come, for the express purpose of extracting
the worm, to the same tank where the men of the regiment bathe. The people
so infested swim about in the water, with the worm hanging loose, drawing
the limb quickly backwards and forwards, and from side to side, until the
expulsion is affected." Outside the body the guinea worm is generally
found beneath organic debris in wells, tanks, and other reservoirs for
water, from whence it appears to be now pretty universally admitted it
effects an entrance through the skin during bathing or wading.

=FILARIA SANGUINIS HOMINIS.= In 1872, Dr T. R. Lewis, in examining
microscopically the blood and urine of some of his patients in India,
discovered a worm enveloped in an extremely delicate tube, closed at both
ends, within which it could either elongate or shorten itself. This
parasite (called from its principal habitat the _Filaria Sanguinis
Hominis_) is about 1/75th of an inch in length, and about 1/35000th of an
inch in diameter. When removed from the body with a small quantity of
blood, it is described as being in a state of incessant motion,
unceasingly coiling and uncoiling itself, lashing the blood-corpuscles in
all directions, and insinuating itself between them.

The worms are said, when first taken from the body, to present a
translucent appearance; the larger specimens, however, frequently exhibit
an aggregation of granules towards the junction of the lower and middle
half. Occasionally a bright spot, suggestive of a mouth, is seen at the
thicker extremity. It is stated that they continue active from six to
thirty hours. Mr Lewis does not believe they are able to perforate the
tissues.

"These parasites," says Mr Lewis, "are so persistently ubiquitous, as to
be obtained day after day by simply pricking any portion of the body, even
to the tips of the fingers and toes of both hands and both feet of one and
the same person, with a finely pointed needle. On one occasion six
excellent specimens were obtained in a single drop of blood by merely
pricking the lobule of the ear."

Dr Lewis estimates, from the number of the Filaria found in one drop of
the blood of one patient, that his body must have contained more than
140,000. The presence of these creatures in the blood is believed to be
the cause of chylous urine, which is a very common disease in the East. It
seems probable they gain admission into the body from being present in
drinking water.

=FIL'BERT.= _Syn._ FILBERD. The fruit of the cultivated hazel or nut-tree
(_Corylus Avellana_). Filberts are distinguished from common nuts by their
lengthened figure and larger size. The best are imported from Spain.

=FILES.= The manufactures of these articles do not come within the limits
of this work. It may, however, be useful to mention that FILES, FLOATS,
and RASPS, which "cut dull" from age, dirt, or being much worn, are
greatly improved by being kept wet, immersed in water for some hours, or
even for a day or two.

Mr Ernest Spon recommends the following method for renovating files:--The
file to be first cleansed from all foreign matter, and then dipped in a
solution of one part of nitric acid, three parts of sulphuric acid, and
seven parts of water; the time of immersion will be according to the
extent the file has been worn, and the fineness of the teeth, varying from
five seconds to five minutes. On taking it out of the mixture, wash in
water, then dip in milk of lime, wash off the lime, dry by a gentle heat,
rub over equal parts of olive oil and turpentine, and finally brush over
with powdered coke.

=FIL'TER.= _Syn._ FILTRUM, L. An instrument or apparatus for straining or
filtering liquids.

=FIL'TERING POWDERS.= _Prep._ 1. Fuller's earth washed, dried without
heat, and reduced to coarse powder.

2. Pipe clay or potter's clay, as the last. Both the above are used to
filter and bleach oils.

3. Clay or fuller's earth, 1 part; fine siliceous sand, 2 parts; the two
are separately washed, after which they are drained, and mixed together,
and dried as before. Used for GLUTINOUS OILS.

4. Granulated animal charcoal, sifted and fanned from the dust. Used to
filter and bleach SYRUPS and VEGETABLE SOLUTIONS.

_Obs._ Filtering powders are prepared of several degrees of coarseness,
and should be chosen with reference to the degree of fluidity of the
liquid to be filtered through them. In no case should they be reduced to
fine powder, as not only is the process of filtration thereby rendered
unnecessarily tedious, but in some cases (as when charcoal dust is mixed
with glutinous vegetable solutions and syrups) the filtrate carries off a
portion of the powder, which can afterwards be separated from it only with
considerable difficulty. See CHARCOAL, FILTRATION, OIL, &c.

=FILTRA'TION.= _Syn._ FILTRATIO, L. The separation of liquids from
substances mechanically suspended in them, by passing them through media
having pores sufficiently fine to retain or keep back the solid matter.
Filtration is one of the most common and useful of the chemico-mechanical
operations of the arts, and its successful performance in an economical
and expeditious manner is therefore a matter of the highest importance in
the laboratory, and, indeed, in almost every branch of human skill and
industry, in which liquids are employed. Simple in principle, and
apparently easily performed, it is, nevertheless, one of those operations
which require no less of care than of tact and experience to conduct it
with certainty and success. The losses sustained in the laboratory, by
defective manipulation in this particular, often exceed those arising from
ignorance and accidents in every other department conducted in it.

Filtration is generally resorted to for the purpose of freeing liquids
from feculence, dirt, and other foreign matter, and for obtaining them in
a clear or transparent state; but, in some cases, it has for its object
the collection of the suspended substances, as precipitates, &c., and in
others both these intentions are combined. The word 'filtration' is
absolutely synonymous with 'straining,' but in the language of the
laboratory it is usually applied to the operation of rendering liquids
transparent, or nearly so, by passing them through fine media, as
filtering paper, sand, and the like; whilst the term 'straining' is
employed to designate the mere separation of the grosser portion, by
means of coarse media, flannel, horsehair cloth, &c., through which they
flow with considerable rapidity. Filtration is distinguished from
'clarification' by its mere mechanical action, whereas the latter operates
by depuration, or the subsidence of the suspended substances or faeces,
arising from their gravity being naturally greater than the fluid with
which they are mixed, or being rendered so by the application of heat, or
by the addition of some foreign substance.

The apparatus, vessels, or media, employed for filtration, are called
'FILTERS,' and are technically distinguished from 'STRAINERS' by the
superior fineness of their pores.

Both strainers and filters act on the same principles as the common sieve
on powders; they all, in like manner, retain or hold back the coarser
matter, and permit the liquid or smaller and more attenuated particles to
pass through. The term 'medium' (pleural 'media') is applied to the
substance or substances through the pores of which the liquid percolates.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The form of filters, and the substances of which they are composed, are
various, and depend upon the nature of the liquids for which they are
intended. On the small scale, funnels of tin, zinc, copper, wedgwood-ware,
earthenware, glass, or porcelain, are commonly employed as the containing
vessels. (See _engr._) The filtering medium may be any substance of a
sufficiently spongy or porous nature to allow of the free percolation of
the liquid, and whose pores are, at the same time, sufficiently small to
render it limpid or transparent. Unsized paper, flannel, linen, calico,
cotton wool, felt, sand, coarsely powdered charcoal, porous stone, or
earthenware, and numerous other substances of a similar kind, are employed
for this purpose.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

For many liquids that filter easily, and in which the suspended matter is
of a coarse and porous nature, it is often sufficient merely to place a
little cotton wool or tow, or a small piece of sponge, in neck of the
funnel, as at (_a_, fig. 1) in the above engr.; but such an apparatus,
from the small extent of the filtering surface, acts either slowly or
imperfectly, and soon gets choked up. Filters of unsized paper are well
suited for all liquids that are not of a corrosive or viscid nature, and
are universally employed for filtering small quantities of liquids in the
laboratory. A piece of the paper is taken of a size proportionate to the
quantity of the liquid to be filtered, and is first doubled from corner to
corner into a triangle (see _engr. a_), which is again doubled into a
smaller triangle _b_, and the angular portion of the margin being rounded
off with a pair of scissors _c_, it constitutes a paper cone, which is
placed on a funnel of proportionate capacity, and is then nearly filled
with the liquid. A piece of paper so cut, when laid flat upon the table,
should be nearly circular. Filtering paper is now sold ready cut in
circles of various sizes, which simply require doubling for use. Another
method of forming a paper filter, preferred by some persons, is to double
the paper once, as above, and then to fold it in a similar way to a fan,
observing so to open it and lay it on the funnel that a sufficient
interval be left between the two to permit of the free passage of the
filtered liquid on its descent towards the receiver. The 'plaited filter,'
as thus formed, is exceedingly useful for general purposes; it exposes the
entire surface of the paper to the liquid, and allows filtration to
proceed more rapidly than a 'plain filter' does. (See Fig. 3.)

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

Mr Rother takes objection to the ordinary plain paper filter employed in
the laboratory, because of the superfluous fold which in two thicknesses
lies under one half of the extended surface of the filter. He says the
interposition of these two extra layers compels the liquid to pass through
three thicknesses of paper on the half side of the extended filter, whilst
the other half side presents only a single thickness. It is evident that
the two hidden layers are a very appreciable impediment to the current,
aside from the more important fact that the liquid will traverse this side
less rapidly than the other, and thus occasion an imperfect washing of the
precipitate, or at least prolong the operation beyond reasonable limits.
Recognising these objections to the old filter, Mr Rother has invented a
very simple modification of the plain filter which, whilst saving 50 per
cent. of the paper, he states, removes all the defects of the old form.
This new filter practically presents but a single thickness of paper to
penetrate, at the same time preserving an even surface, equal in all other
advantages to the plain filter.

The filtrations are said to be more rapid than with the usual form, and
the absence of the superfluous half sheet admits of more rapid drying.

To make the new filter:--Cut the circular disk of filtering paper in two
through the line of its diameter, take either half disk, and fold it
across the line of the radius, then turn down the double edge of the cut
side and fold it over several times--finally, run a hard smooth surface
along the seam thus produced, to compress it, and spread the finished
filter into an appropriate funnel, first moistening it with water before
the liquid to be filtered is poured in.

In reference to funnels, it may be remarked that those employed for
filtering rapidly should be deeply ribbed on the inside, or small rods of
wood or glass, or pieces of straw, or quills, should be placed between
them and the paper. The neck or tubular part of the funnel should, in like
manner, be deeply ribbed or fluted on the outside, to permit of the free
passage of the air, when it is placed in a narrow-mouthed bottle or
receiver. When this is not the case, filtration proceeds but slowly, and
the filtered liquid is apt to be driven up the outside of the neck of the
funnel by the confined air, and to be continually hissing and flowing over
the mouth of the vessel. The breadth of a funnel, to filter well, should
be about three fourths its height, reckoning from the throat (_a_). When
deeper, the paper is liable to be continually ruptured, from the pressure
of the superincumbent fluid; and when shallower, filtration proceeds
slowly, and an unnecessarily large surface of the liquid is exposed to the
atmosphere, and is lost by evaporation. To lessen this as much as
possible, the upper edge of the glass is frequently ground perfectly
smooth, and a piece of smooth plate-glass is laid thereon. When paper
filters are of large dimensions, or employed for aqueous fluids that
rapidly soften the texture of the paper, or for collecting heavy powders,
or metallic precipitates, it is usual to support them on linen or calico,
to prevent them breaking. This is best done by folding the cloth up with
the paper, and cutting the filter out of the two, in the same way as would
be done with doubled paper, observing so to place it in the funnel that
the paper and calico may remain close together, especially towards the
bottom.

[Illustration]

The filtration of small quantities of liquid, as in chemical experiments,
may often be conveniently performed by merely placing the paper on the
circular top of a recipient (see _engr._), or on a ring of glass or
earthenware laid on the top of any suitable vessel. A filter of this kind
that will hold one fluid ounce will filter many ounces of some liquids in
an hour.

Good filtering paper should contain no soluble matter, and should not give
more than 1/250 to 1/230 of its weight of ashes. The soluble matter may be
removed by washing it, first, with very dilute hydrochloric acid, and
secondly, with distilled water.

The 'Munktell' Swedish filtering paper[301] is composed of flax fibres
very much crushed and broken, and owes its value to the broken pieces of
the fibres filling up the pores, and thus preventing solids from passing
through the paper. Rhenish filtering paper is also made from flax, but in
consequence of the more perfect condition of its fibres, is more porous
than Munktell's, and therefore inferior to it for filtering purposes.
Another kind of Rhenish paper, also of flax, in which the fibres are much
torn, is manufactured and is said to be a useful article, and to allow the
rapid passage of fluids through it. The white filtering papers of English
make have a small quantity of cotton mixed with the flax; and the fibres
are much torn and crushed; hence they make serviceable filters.

[Footnote 301: Dr F. Mohr says that Swedish filtering paper is now
undeserving its traditional reputation, and that it contains soluble
alumina.]

The grey, circular cut filtering paper of varying sizes, of foreign make,
as well as the grey sheet filtering paper of Dutch and English
manufacture, contains a large quantity of wool, much of which is coloured;
as well as jute and esparto grass, both of these latter in an unbleached
state. The amount of ash in the Munktell paper has of late increased in
quality.[302]

[Footnote 302: Greenish.]

[Illustration]

For filtering a larger quantity of a liquid than can be conveniently
managed with a funnel, and also for substances that are either too viscid
or too much loaded with feculence to allow them to pass freely through
paper, conical bags made of flannel, felt, tweeled cotton cloth or Canton
flannel, linen or calico, and suspended to iron-hooks by rings or tapes,
are commonly employed. The first two of the above substances are
preferable for saccharine, mucilaginous, and acidulous liquors; the third
for oily ones; and the remainder for tinctures, weak alkaline lyes, and
similar solutions. These bags have the disadvantage of sucking up a
considerable quantity of the fluid poured into them, and are therefore
objectionable, except for large quantities, or when they are to be
continued in actual use as filters for some time. On the large scale, a
number of them are usually worked together, and are generally enclosed in
cases to prevent evaporation, and to exclude dirt from the filtered liquor
that trickles down their sides. These arrangements will be noticed further
on.

[Illustration]

A simple mode of filtering aqueous fluids, which are not injured by
exposure to the air, is to draw them off from one vessel to another, by
means of a number of threads of loosely twisted cotton or worsted,
arranged in the form of a syphon. (See _engr._) The little cotton rope at
once performs the operations of decantation and filtration. This method is
often convenient for sucking off the water from a small quantity of a
precipitate.

For fuller information on the subject of laboratory filtration, the reader
is referred to the following papers (which are too long for quotation
here) in 'The Chemical News':--

"On a New Mode of Filtration," by J. B. Cooke, May 30th, 1873; "Filtering
Apparatus," by John F. Kerr, February 6th, 1874; "Implements for
Filtration," by P. Casamajor, July 23rd, 1875, and 30th, 1875; Ibid, by W.
Jago, February 4th, 1876; "On Rapid Filtration," by E. C. H. Hildebrand,
August 11th, 1876; also to 'Journal of the Chemical Society,' for papers
on:--"Simple Suction arrangement for Rapid Filtering," by C. Holthof, vol.
xxxii, part 2, p. 508; "Employment of Compressed Air on Filtering
Solutions," by W. Leuebe, vol. xxxii, part 1, p. 270.

When solid substances, as porous stone or earthenware, are used as the
media for filtrations, vessels of metal, wood, or stone-ware, are employed
to contain them and the supernatant liquid. In these cases the filtering
medium is usually arranged as a shelf or diaphragm, and divides the vessel
into two compartments; the upper one being intended to contain the dirty
liquid, and the under one to receive the same when filtered. Such an
apparatus is set in operation by merely filling the upper chamber, and may
at any time be readily cleared out by reversing it, and passing clean
water through it in an opposite direction. Small arrangements of this
kind, intended to be screwed on to the water supply-pipe by either end,
and which answer the purpose intended in the most satisfactory manner,
have been manufactured and vended under the name of 'REVERSIBLE' or
'SELF-CLEANING FILTERS,' When pulverulent substances, as sand, coarsely
powdered charcoal, &c., are employed, a similar arrangement is followed;
but in this case the shelf or diaphragm must consist of any convenient
substance pierced with numerous holes, over which must be placed, first a
stratum of coarse pebbles, next some of a finer description, and on this a
proper quantity of the sand, charcoal, or other medium. Over the whole
should be placed another layer of pebbles, or a board or plate of metal or
earthenware, pierced with a number of holes, to allow the liquid to be
poured into the filter without disturbing its arrangement. Apparatus of
this kind, of a permanent description, and arranged for filtering large
quantities of liquids, are properly denominated 'FILTERING MACHINES,'

Among the liquids usually submitted to filtration, the following may be
mentioned as the principal--water, oils, syrups, tinctures, vegetable
juices, infusions, and decoctions.

The filtration of water may now be considered. The water of our wells is
presented by nature ready filtered to the hand of man, and often exhibits
an admirable degree of transparency and purity. It acquires this state by
percolating through the mineral strata of the earth, which deprives it of
the organic matter it derives from the soil and subsoil, but, at the same
time, it dissolves a portion of the saline and earthy media through which
it passes, and hence acquires that peculiar 'hardness' which is constantly
found in spring water. On the large scale, this natural system of
filtration has been imitated by some of the commercial companies that
supply our cities and towns with water. Extensive beds of sand and gravel
have been employed, with variable success, as the filtering media; and
were it not that filters gradually lose their porosity by the accumulation
of the retained matter in their pores, such a method would be excellent.
But the great expense of such filters precludes the possibility of
frequently cleaning or renewing them, by which means they can alone be
kept in an efficient state.

A filter which possesses the advantages of being easily and cheaply
cleaned when dirty, and which frees water from mechanical impurities with
immense rapidity, may be formed by placing a stratum of sponge between two
perforated metallic plates, united by a central screw, and arranged in
such a manner as to permit of the sponge being compressed to any required
degree. Water, under gentle pressure, flows with such rapidity through the
pores of compressed sponge, that it is said that a few square feet of this
substance will perfectly filter several millions of gallons of water
daily. This method of filtration has been made the subject of a patent,
and has been favorably noticed by the legislature.

A few barrels or hogsheads of water may be easily filtered daily, by the
arrangement represented in the engraving.

[Illustration:

  _A._ A common water-pipe or cock.
  _b._ A false bottom fitting in perfectly water-tight.
  _c._ A perforated wooden or metallic vessel or box covered with a
      bag of felt or other filtering substance (not shown in the
      engraving). _d._ A small tube, fitting water-tight into the
      false bottom and uniting the _interior_ of the filter with the
      lower portion of the cask.]

It is evident that when water is poured into the upper portion _B_ of a
vessel, so arranged, it will sink through the filter _c_, and pipe _d_,
into the lower chamber _C_, and this filtration will go on as long as the
supply continues, and water is drawn from the cock _e_. By uniting the
cock _e_ with a tank or casks, and by keeping the upper portion _B_ always
full by means of a ball-cock, a considerable quantity of water may be thus
filtered. The advantage of this plan is, that the filter _c_ can be always
readily got at, and easily cleaned or renewed.

For filtering water on the small scale, and for domestic use,
'alcarazzas,' diaphragms of porous earthenware and filtering-stone and
layers of sand and charcoal, &c., already referred to, are commonly
employed as filtering media. The filtering power of porous stone or
earthenware may be greatly increased by adopting the arrangement
represented in the margin, which consists in making the diaphragm of the
shape of a disc (_d_), supporting plates of the same material, the whole
forming but one piece. The 'PLATYLITHIC WATER-FILTERS,' which are formed
of porous stone cut on this plan, present 200 to 300 square inches of
filtering surface. A cheap, useful form of portable filter, is the
following, given in the 'Proceedings of the British Association,' "Take
any common vessel, perforated below, such as a flower-pot, fill the lower
portion with coarse pebbles, over which place a layer of finer ones, and
on these a layer of clean coarse sand. On the top of this a piece of burnt
clay, perforated with small holes, should be put, and on this again a
stratum of three or four inches thick, of well burnt pounded animal
charcoal. A filter thus formed will last a considerable time, and will be
found particularly useful in removing noxious and putrescent substances
held in solution by water."[303] The 'PORTABLE-FILTERS,' set up in
stone-ware, that are commonly sold in the shops, contain a stratum of
sand, or coarsely-powdered charcoal;[304] before, however, having access
to this, the water has to pass through a sponge, to remove the coarser
portion of the impurities. Among the many new kinds of portable filters
now offered for sale, which claim special notice, are the following,
viz.--

[Footnote 303: A very similar filter to this was invented by the late Mr
George Robins, the celebrated auctioneer. Mr Robins' filter differed from
the above in having a lid with a hole in the centre in which a sponge was
placed; an arrangement which by keeping back the suspended matter
contained in the water, prevented the filter from being clogged up.]

[Footnote 304: Frankland and Byrne have shown that animal is greatly
superior to vegetable charcoal when employed for water-filters.]

[Illustration]

=1.= The MOULDED CARBON FILTER, consisting of a spherical or cylindrical
vessel formed of compressed carbon.

=2.= The SILICATED CARBON FILTER, in which the medium is a compact
substance, formed of animal charcoal and the ashes of Boghead coal.

Of the many forms of this filter, we may mention the 'Syphon Filter for
Travellers,' by means of which wholesome water may be drunk from any pond
or stream by simply immersing the filter therein and drawing the water
through the tube by suction. Of the 'Silicated Carbon Filter,' Professor
Wanklyn says that it will render river water containing a considerable
amount of free and albuminoid ammonia as pure as deep spring water.

=3.= BISCHOFF'S PATENT SPONGY-IRON FILTER.--This differs from one invented
many years ago by Dr Medlock, in bringing the water into contact with
spongy iron instead of thin iron rods, and thus effecting filtration much
more rapidly. Medlock believed that the iron rods brought about the
oxidation of the nitrogenous organic matter and its consequent conversion
into nitrites and nitrates. Bischoff states that he has experimentally
investigated the properties of spongy iron, and finds that it--

_a._ Decomposes even distilled water, which has been previously boiled.

_b._ That it reduces nitric acid to ammonia.

_c._ That the amounts of organic nitrogen and albuminoid ammonia are
always much reduced after filtration through spongy iron.

_d._ That a minute quantity of iron is dissolved by the carbonic acid
contained in the water, ferrous bicarbonate being formed. The latter being
soon oxidised and precipitated is easily removed by filtration.

_e._ That the action of spongy iron on impure water is two fold, viz.
chemical and mechanical. "The chemical action is clearly indicated by the
decomposition of water. The readiest explanation for the decomposition of
water, is, the intimate contact between the electro-positive and
electro-negative bodies, such as metallic iron and carbon, or even
metallic iron and any ferric oxide, which has escaped reduction, or which
has been reoxidised by exposure to air or water; and it may well be
supposed that, consequent to the galvanic current thus produced, the
atmospheric oxygen dissolved in water is ozonised, and caused to act as a
powerful oxidising agent in organic matter."

We extract the tables on the next page from the Sixth Report of the Royal
Commission on Rivers' Pollution. The Commissioners, we may here state,
speak in high terms of this filter.

=4.= The so-called MAGNETIC CARBIDE OF IRON FILTER. In this, the filtering
material is said to be prepared by heating haematite with sawdust. This
filter has a good repute.

[asterism] The Royal Commission "on Rivers Pollution" strongly recommend
filters of animal charcoal to be recharged every three to six months,
"since they found that myriads of minute worms were developed in the
animal charcoal, and passed out with the water when these filters were
used for Thames water, and when the charcoal was not renewed at
sufficiently short intervals."

_Cleansing of Filters._--Every two or three months (according to the kind
of water) air should be blown through, and if the charcoal be in the block
form it should be brushed. Then four to six ounces of the pharmacop[oe]ial
solution of potassium permanganate, or twenty to thirty grains of the
solid permanganate in a quart of distilled water, and ten drops of strong
sulphuric acid, should be poured through, and subsequently a quarter to
half an ounce of pure hydrochloric acid in two to four gallons of
distilled water. This plan would be useful on foreign stations where the
filter cannot be sent home, or taken to pieces; if it can be taken to
pieces, the charcoal should be spread out in a thin layer, and exposed for
some time to air or sun, or heated in an oven.

        _The Average Composition of Thames Water, before and
        after Filtration through Spongy Iron._

  ------------------+----------------------------------------------------------
                    |                     Dissolved Matters.
                    |---------+-------+---------+--------+-----------+---------
     Description.   |  Total  |Organic| Organic |Ammonia.| Nitrogen, |  Total
                    |  solid  |carbon.|nitrogen.|        |as nitrates|combined
                    |impurity.|       |         |        |    and    |nitrogen.
                    |         |       |         |        | nitrites. |
  ------------------+---------+-------+---------+--------+-----------+---------
  As delivered from |         |       |         |        |           |
   Chelsea          |         |       |         |        |           |
   Waterworks       |  28.04  | .198  |  .042   | .0009  |   .117    |  .220
  The same water    |         |       |         |        |           |
   filtered through |         |       |         |        |           |
   spongy iron      |  16.8   | .069  |  .018   |  .019  |   .018    |  .049
  ------------------+---------+-------+---------+--------+-----------+---------
  The mean of the   |         |       |         |        |           |
   14th and 15th    |         |       |         |        |           |
   taken after the  |         |       |         |        |           |
   spongy iron      |         |       |         |        |           |
   filter had been  |         |       |         |        |           |
   in operation in  |         |       |         |        |           |
   the Rivers       |         |       |         |        |           |
   Commission       |         |       |         |        |           |
   Laboratory for   |         |       |         |        |           |
   upwards of eight |         |       |         |        |           |
   months.[305] As  |         |       |         |        |           |
   supplied from    |         |       |         |        |           |
   Waterworks       |  24.47  | .170  |  .055   |  .001  |   .098    |  .154
   After filtration |         |       |         |        |           |
    through spongy  |         |       |         |        |           |
    iron            |  14.26  | .083  |  .016   |   0    |     0     |  .016
  ------------------+---------+-------+---------+--------+-----------+---------

  ---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------
                 |                      Dissolved Matters.
                 +---------+---------+-------------------------------+---------
                 |         |         |           Hardness.           |
                 |         |         +----------+----------+---------+
   Description.  |Previous |Chlorine.|Temporary.|Permanent.| Total.  | No. of
                 | Sewage  |         |          |          |         | samples
                 |or Animal|         |          |          |         |analysed.
                 |contamin-|         |          |          |         |
                 | ation.  |         |          |          |         |
  ---------------+---------+---------+----------+----------+---------+---------
  As delivered   |         |         |          |          |         |
   from Chelsea  |         |         |          |          |         |
   Waterworks    |  1.464  |  2.01   |   15.5   |   6.2    |  21.7   |   15
  The same       |         |         |          |          |         |
   filtered      |         |         |          |          |         |
   through       |         |         |          |          |         |
   spongy iron   |   .177  |  2.00   |   6.8    |   4.9    |  11.7   |   15
  ---------------+---------+---------+----------+----------+---------+---------
  The mean of the|         |         |          |          |Analysis |
   14th and 15th |         |         |          |          | of the  |
   samples taken |         |         |          |          |  15th   |
   after the     |         |         |          |          | sample. |
   spongy iron   |         |         |          |          |         |
   filters had   |         |         |          |          |         |
   been in       |         |         |          |          |         |
   operation in  |         |         |          |          |         |
   the Rivers    |         |         |          |          |         |
   Commission    |         |         |          |          |         |
   Laboratory for|         |         |          |          |         |
   upwards of    |         |         |          |          |         |
   eight         |         |         |          |          |         |
   months.[305] As         |         |          |          |         |
   supplied from |         |         |          |          |         |
   Waterworks    |  .675   |  1.95   |   ---    |   ---    |  19.1   |   ---
  After          |         |         |          |          |         |
   filtration    |         |         |          |          |         |
   through spongy|         |         |          |          |         |
   iron          |    0    |  1.95   |   ---    |   ---    |   9.6   |   ---
  ---------------+---------+---------+----------+----------+---------+---------

[Footnote 305: The figures demonstrate that the purifying action of spongy
iron, if at all altered, has been _increased_, as regards the most
important impurities of water, viz., nitrogenous matters and hardness.]

If sponges are at all used, they should be removed from time to time, and
thoroughly washed in hot water.[306]

[Footnote 306: Parkes 'Practical Hygiene.']

Oils are filtered, on the small scale, through cotton-wool, or unsized
paper, arranged in a funnel; and on the large scale, through long bags,
made of tweeled cotton-cloth (Canton flannel). These bags are usually made
about 12 or 15 inches in diameter, and from 4 to 8 feet long (see
_engr._), and are inclosed in bottomless casings, or bags of coarse
canvas, about 5 to 6 or 8 inches in diameter, for the purpose of
condensing a great extent of filtering surface into the smallest possible
space. A number of these double bags (from 1 to 50 or 60) are connected
with corresponding holes in the bottom of a block-tin or tinned-copper
cistern, into which the oil to be filtered is poured. The mode in which
these bags are fastened to the cistern is of the utmost importance, as on
the joint being close and secure depends the integrity of the apparatus.
Three methods of doing this are figured in the engraving, which, with the
references, will explain themselves, the same letters referring to the
same parts of each.

[Illustration: Filtering-bag of cotton-cloth.

Cotton filtering-bag, '_creased_,' or enclosed in its canvas envelope,
ready for fixing.]

The second of the above arrangements is the least expensive, and certainly
the most convenient in practice; and when the cylinder _l_ fits the hole
closely (allowing for the bag), is as safe, or safer, than an ordinary
screw.

[Illustration:

  _a._ Bottom of cistern.
  _b._ Filtering-bag.
  _c._ Screw of the conical nozzle fitting into the cistern.
  _d._ Binding cord connecting bag and nozzle.
  _e._ Binding cord connecting bag and lower nozzle.
  _f._ Bayonet-catch, connecting the lower portion of the nozzle
      fastened to the bag with the upper and fixed part, _g_.
  _i._ The thick hem at the top of the bag (purposely made large by
      enclosing a piece of thick cord therein), resting on the
      shoulders, _k_.
  _l._ A metallic cylinder, loosely fitting the hole in the cistern,
      and over which the top of the bag is drawn, before being put
      into its place; when fitted, as in the engraving, it retains
      the hem _i_ securely in its place above the shoulder _k_.]

The bags are surrounded by a wooden screen fitted up with doors for the
purpose of keeping off the dust; and the bottom of the apartment is
furnished with large steam-pipes, by which a proper temperature may be
kept up in cold weather. The use of heat should, however, never be had
recourse to when it can be avoided, as although it vastly increases the
rate of filtration, the oil so filtered is more apt to become opaque in
cold weather than when the process is conducted at the natural temperature
of the atmosphere. This is particularly the case with castor oil and sperm
oil. In the United States of America, where the latter is consumed in
enormous quantities for illumination, the best is always 'winter
strained,' as it is popularly called. In practice, it is more convenient
to have a number of small cisterns at work (say 50 or 100 galls. each),
than one or two larger ones, as any accident that may occur is more easily
remedied, and that without stopping the whole operation.

When cotton-cloth bags are employed without being 'creased,' or enclosed
in others of canvas, they should not be longer than about 3 or 4 feet, and
not wider than about 5 or 6 inches when filled. When larger they are
dangerous.

[Illustration]

A convenient method of filtering a single cask of oil is, to insert the
pipe of a two-way patent filter into the cork-hole, by which means the
whole will be filtered as drawn off, without any trouble on the part of
the operator. This filter consists of a porous bag stretched over a
perforated metallic vessel, nearly the shape and size of the exterior
casing, and its edge is tightly screwed between the sides and bottom of
the latter, so as to be quite water-tight. The cock communicates with the
interior of the perforated plate and filter, and the supply-pipe with the
exterior. By this means the interior chamber, which occupies 5/6ths of the
vessel, rapidly fills with filtered oil, and continues full as long as any
liquor remains in the cask. This arrangement is also well adapted to the
filtration of wines, beer, cordials, porter, and various other liquors. It
is unequalled in simplicity and usefulness. The same filter may be removed
from cask to cask, with the facility of a common cock.

The filtration of SYRUPS is now generally effected on the large scale by
passing them through the 'CREASED BAG FILTER' just described. On the small
scale, as employed by confectioners and druggists, they are usually passed
through CONICAL FLANNEL BAGS. (See page 726.) The filtration of thick
syrups is, however, attended with some difficulty, and it is therefore a
good plan to filter them in a somewhat dilute state, and afterwards to
reduce them to a proper consistence by evaporation in clean vessels of
tinned copper, by steam heat. Syrups, when filtered in a heated state, run
well for a time, but the pores of the fabric rapidly get choked, from the
thickening of the syrup and partial crystallization of the sugar,
occasioned by the evaporation of the aqueous portion from the surface of
the bag. This may be partially prevented by enclosing the bag in a
metallic casing. On the whole clarification is preferable for syrups to
filtration on the small scale. They need only be well beaten up while cold
with a little white of egg, and then heated; a scum rises, which must be
removed as soon as it becomes consistent, and the skimming continued until
the liquid becomes clear. Any floating portions of scum that may have
escaped notice are easily removed by running the syrup through a coarse
flannel strainer, whilst hot. The most extensive application of the
process of filtration in the arts is in the refining of sugars.

TINCTURES AND DILUTE SPIRITS are usually filtered, on the small scale,
through BIBULOUS or UNSIZED PAPER placed on a funnel; and on the large
scale, through thin and fine COTTON BAGS. In general, however, tinctures
clarify themselves by the subsidence of the suspended matter, when allowed
to repose for a few days. Hence it is the bottoms alone that require
filtering; the supernatant clear portion need only be run through a small
hair sieve, a piece of tow or cotton placed in the throat of a funnel, or
some other coarse medium, to remove any floating substances, as pieces of
straw, &c. Spirits which are largely loaded with essential oil, as those
of ANISEED, &c., run rapidly through paper or calico, but usually require
the addition of a spoonful or two of magnesia before they will flow quite
clear. When possible, tinctures, spirits, and all similar volatile fluids,
are better and more economically cleared by subsidence or clarification
than by filtration, as, in the latter way, a portion is lost by
evaporation, and the strength of the liquid is thereby altered.

Vegetable juices should be allowed to deposit their feculous portion
before filtration. The supernatant liquid will then be often found quite
clear. It is only when this is not the case that filtration should be had
recourse to. A small quantity may be filtered through coarse or woollen
filtering paper, supported on a piece of coarse calico placed on a funnel;
when the quantity is large, one of the CONICAL BAGS before described
should be employed. The bottoms from which the clear portion has been
decanted should be placed on a separate filter, or else not added until
the whole of the other portion has drained through. Vegetable juices are
often rendered clear by simply heating them to about 180 deg. or 200 deg. Fahr.,
by which their albumen is coagulated; they are also frequently clarified
by the addition of a little white of egg and heat, in the same way as
syrups. Many of them (as those of hemlock, henbane, aconite, &c.) are
greatly injured by heat, and must consequently be filtered, or only simply
decanted after repose. In all cases they should be exposed to the air as
little as possible, as they rapidly suffer decomposition.

Vegetable infusions and decoctions may be cleared by defecation followed
by filtration. The conical bags of flannel before described are usually
employed for this purpose. When the liquid is to be evaporated to an
extract, they are commonly suspended by a hook over the evaporating pan. A
convenient method of straining these fluids, practised in the laboratory,
is to stretch a square of flannel on a frame or 'horse,' securing it at
the corners by pieces of string. (See _engr._) Such a frame, laid across
the mouth of a pan, is more easily fed with fresh liquid than a bag, whose
mouth is 40 or 50 inches higher. The same purpose, for small quantities of
liquid, is effected by laying the flannel across the mouth of a coarse
hair sieve. The concentrated infusions and decoctions being usually weak
tinctures, may be filtered in the same way as the latter. (See _above_.)
Many vegetable solutions, that from the viscidity of the suspended matter
can scarcely be filtered, may be readily clarified with white of egg in
the cold, or pass the filter rapidly if a very small quantity of acetic,
tartaric, sulphuric, or other strong acid, is previously added.

[Illustration]

Corrosive liquids, as the STRONG ACIDS, are filtered through powdered
glass, or SILICEOUS SAND, supported on pebbles in the throat of a glass
funnel, or through asbestos or gun-cotton placed in the same manner.
Charcoal has also been employed for the same purpose, but is not fit for
some acids. Strong caustic alkaline lyes are also filtered through
powdered glass or sand. Weak alkaline lyes may be filtered through fine
calico, stretched across the mouth of a funnel. Many corrosive liquids, as
solution of potassa, &c., require to be excluded from the air during
filtration. The simplest apparatus that can be employed for this purpose
is that figured in the margin:--(_a_) is a globular bottle fitted with the
ground stopper (_d_), and having a perforated neck (_f_) ground to the
bottle (_b_); (_c_) is a small tube, wrapped round with as much asbestos,
linen, or calico, as is required to make it fit the under neck of the
bottle through which it passes. The tube (_c_) may also be fixed by
placing pebbles and powdered glass or sand round it, as before mentioned.
For use, the solution to be filtered is poured into the bottle (_a_)
nearly as high as the top of the tube (_c_), and the stopper is replaced.
The liquid then descends into (_b_), and a similar quantity of air passes
up the tube into (_a_). LIQUOR POTASSAE may be always obtained fine by
depuration in close vessels, when the sediment of lime only need be
filtered, which may be effected with calico fixed across the mouth of a
funnel.

[Illustration]

When a precipitate, or the suspended matter in a liquid, is the object of
the filtration, the filter should be of such a nature that the powder may
be easily separated from it, when dry, and that with the least loss
possible. Linen filters are for this reason preferable for large
quantities, and those of smooth bibulous paper for small ones. The powder
should be washed down the sides of the filter, and collected, by means of
a small stream of water, in one spot at the bottom, assisting the
operation with a camel-hair pencil; and, when the whole is dry, it should
be swept off the paper or cloth with a similar pencil or brush, and not
removed by a knife, as is commonly done, when it can be possibly avoided.

The 'first runnings' of liquid from a filter are commonly foul, and are
pumped back or returned until the fluid runs perfectly limpid and
transparent, when it is 'turned into' the 'filtered liquor cistern,' or
proper receiver. In many cases the liquid does not readily become
transparent by simply passing through the filter; hence has arisen the use
of FILTERING POWDERS, or substances which rapidly choke up the pores of
the media in a sufficient degree to make the fluid pass clear. In the
employment of these powders care should be taken that they are not in too
fine a state of division, nor used in larger quantities than are
absolutely necessary, as they are apt to choke up the filter, and to
absorb a large quantity of the liquid. The less filtering powder used, the
more rapid will be the progress of the filtration, and the longer will be
the period during which the apparatus will continue in effective action.
For some liquids these substances are employed for the double purpose of
decolouring or whitening, as well as rendering them transparent. In such
cases it is preferable first to pass the fluid through a layer of the
substance in coarse powder, from which it will 'run' but slightly
contaminated into the filter; or, if the powder is mixed with the whole
body of the liquid, as in bleaching almond oil, &c., to pass the mixture
through some coarser medium to remove the cruder portion before allowing
it to run into the filter. Another plan is, after long agitation and
subsequent repose, to decant the clearer portion from the grosser
sediment, and to employ separate filters for the two. Granulated animal
charcoal is used according to the first method, to decolour syrups, oils,
&c.; and filtering powder by the second and third, to remove a portion of
the colour, and to clarify castor and other oils. The common plan of
mixing large quantities of filtering powder with castor oil, and throwing
the whole into the filter, as adopted by the druggists, is injudicious.
When simple filtration is required, it is better to use little or no
powder, and to continue returning the oil that 'runs' through, until, by
the swelling of the fibres of the filter bags, it flows quite clear. By
this plan the same filters may be used for a long period of time (for many
years), and will continue to work well; whilst, by the usual method, they
rapidly decline in power, and soon deliver their contents slowly, and
after a short time scarcely at all.

It is often of great advantage to render a filter 'self-acting,' or to
construct it in such a way that it may 'feed itself,' so that it may
continue full and at work without the constant attention of the operator.
On the small scale, this may be readily effected on the principle of the
common fountain lamp (see _engr._); and on the large scale, by placing the
vessel containing the unfiltered liquid on a higher level than the filter,
and by having the end of the supply-pipe fitted with a ball-cock, to keep
the liquid in the filter constantly at the same height.

[Illustration]

The rapidity of filtration depends upon--the porosity of the filtering
medium--the extent of the filtering surface--the relative viscidity or
mobility of the filtering liquid--the pressure or force by which the
liquid is impelled through the pores of the filter, and--the porosity and
fineness of the substances it holds in suspension. The most efficient
filter is produced when the first two or the first three are so graduated
to the others that liquid filters rapidly, and is at the same time
rendered perfectly transparent.

In the common method of filtration no pressure is exerted beyond that of
the weight of the column of the liquid resting on the filtering medium,
but in some cases additional pressure is employed. This is had recourse to
for the purpose of producing a more rapid filtration, and more especially
for filtering liquids that, from their viscidity, will scarcely pass
through the pores of substances sufficiently fine to remove their
impurities in the ordinary way.

[Illustration]

One of the easiest means of employing pressure in filtration is to
increase the height of the column of the filtering liquid. From the
peculiar properties of fluids, by which they transmit pressure in an equal
degree in all directions, this column need not be of equal diameter
throughout, but may be conveniently contracted to the size of a small
pipe, as in the accompanying engraving, which represents a small filter on
this construction at work. (_a_) Is the funnel or reservoir of foul
liquid; (_b_) a small pipe conveying the liquid to the filter; (_c c_) a
chamber, of which the upper portion (_d_) is filled with the descending
liquid, and the lower portion (_e_) with the filtering media; (_i i_) are
screws by which the bottom plate is fastened on, which plate is removed to
clean out or renew the filter. For use, the cocks (_k_) and (_l_) are
closed, and the liquid poured into the funnel (_a_); the cock (_k_) is
next opened, and, in a few minutes after, the cock (_l_), when an
uninterrupted flow of filtered liquor will be obtained as long as any
fluid remains in the funnel (_a_) and the tube (_b_). The length of the
tube determines the degree of pressure. Care must be taken first to pass
the foul liquid through a hair sieve, or some other strainer, to remove
any substance that might choke up the pipe (_b_).

Another method of employing pressure in filtration is the withdrawal of
the air from the receiving vessel, as in the vacuum filter, by which a
pressure of about 14-1/2 lbs. to the square inch becomes exerted on the
surface of the liquid by the atmosphere. The vacuum in the receiving
vessel may be produced by the air-pump, by steam, or by the Bunsen or
Sprengel pump.

A commoner method of applying pressure than either of those already
mentioned is to condense the air over the surface of the liquid by means
of a forcing-pump, or by steam.

On the small scale, pressure may be applied to filtration by means of a
syphon, whose shorter leg has its mouth blown into the shape of a bell or
funnel, over which filtering paper or fine calico may be stretched.

The application of pressure to filtration is not always advantageous, and
beyond a certain limit is generally attended with inconvenience, if not
with absolute disadvantage. It is found in practice that fluids under
pressure take a longer period to run clear than without pressure, and that
ruptures of the media more frequently take place in the former case, or
with pressure, than in the latter. Great pressure is in no case
advantageous.

The filters already noticed are those that act by the fluid descending
through the media; but in some cases the reverse method is employed, and
the liquid filters upwards, instead of downwards. These are called
ascending filters, and are often preferable to those on the descending
principle, because the suspended matters that require removal by
filtration usually sink, and thus a portion escapes being forced into the
pores of the filter. They are also more convenient when pressure is
employed. The construction depends upon the same principles as the common
filter, and merely requires that the feeding vessel should be higher than
the upper surface of the filtering media. OILS are conveniently filtered
in this way, because of their little specific gravity. By fixing a small
filter on this principle into the head of a cask, and pouring in water
through a funnel, whose neck reaches nearly to the bottom of the cask, the
oil will float up and pass the filter, leaving the sediment behind. In
cold weather hot water may be employed.

[Illustration:

  _a._ Cask of oil.
  _b._ Stand.
  _c._ Funnel for water.
  _d._ Filter.]

In some cases the upward and downward systems of filtration are united in
the same apparatus, and this plan is advantageous where the space for
operating is limited. For this purpose it is merely necessary to connect
the bottom of an ascending filter with the top of a descending one, or the
reverse; the proper pressure being in either case applied.

=Filtration, the Laws of.= The 'Revue Universelle des Mines,' 1874, pp.
469, 551 contains a paper by M. Paul Havre recording his investigations on
the rapidity of the filtration of water through sand, wool, &c., which
resulted in ascertaining and measuring the influences which may modify the
flow of water. In all cases of filtration, the influences which are
exerted are:--the pressure and temperature of the water, the thickness of
the filtering medium, compression in the case of fibrous filters, the size
of the grains and their mixture in the case of a filtering medium
analogous to sand. The influence of obstruction, due to the dirtiness of
the filter, depends on circumstances too variable to be taken into
account. The delivery of a filter per square metre per 24 hours is equal
to two cubic metres multiplied by the pressure of water in metres, divided
by the thickness of the filtering medium in metres. An application of this
formula is made to existing filter beds, including those at Southwark and
at the Chelsea waterworks.

The first experiments for ascertaining the influence of a head of water on
the delivery led to the following results:--The delivery increases in a
higher ratio than the square root of the pressure, due to the height
(TORRECELLI'S LAW); the delivery increases in direct ratio to the height
of the column of water above the filter, admitting a previous initial
delivery, due solely to the pressure of water above the filter; the
co-efficient of the increase of delivery is constant, and in this case of
a filtering substance 8.662 inches (22 centimetres) thick, is equal to
0.106 pint (6 centilitres) for sand to 0.528 pint (30 centilitres) for
compressed wool, and to 0.792 pints (45 centilitres) for wool only
slightly compressed.

The subsequent experiments were made with graduated transparent cylinders,
3.28 feet (1 metre) high, with the ends perfectly level, the filtering
substances being kept in place by a thick double cloth tied tightly under
the bottom of the tube. This apparatus presented no other obstacle to the
running of the water than the layer of filtering substance; it permitted
experiments to be made at all temperatures, and the thickness of the
filtering medium to be measured exactly.

In these experiments sand is 'taken as the type of pulverulent
substances,' but an unexpected difficulty was encountered in the settling
or partial agglomeration of the large and small grains of the unsifted
sand, thus diminishing the delivery of water to one half, one third, and
ultimately to one fifth of its previous volume. This led to the adoption
of sand--the grains of which were uniform in size, and to the discovery
of the fact that, other tissues being equal, the resistance of filtration
is constant when the sand is coarse, when the grains of fine sand are of
nearly equal size, and when there is but little fine sand mixed with the
coarse. From experiments in filtering through a layer of coarse sand
approximately 4 inches (10 centimetres) thick, it was found that the
higher the temperature the more rapid was the delivery, and by filtering
through a layer of coarser sand 11.8 inches (30 centimetres) thick, the
conclusion was arrived at that the temperature exerts an influence in
proportion to the thickness of the layer.

See AIR-PUMP, BUNSEN'S WATER-AIR PUMP; CLARIFICATION; DEFECATION; FININGS,
&c.

=FI'NINGS.= Substances used by publicans, brewers, wine merchants, &c., to
clarify their liquors.

_Prep._ 1. (BREWER'S FININGS; COOPER'S F.) Isinglass (finely shredded), 1
lb., and sour beer or cider or vinegar, 3 or 4 pints, are macerated
together, and more of the sour liquor added as the isinglass swells, until
about a gallon has been used, agitation with a whisk or a small bundle of
twigs being occasionally had recourse to, for the purpose of promoting the
solution. As soon as the whole of the isinglass is dissolved, the mixture
is reduced to the consistence of thin syrup, with weak mild beer, or
cider, or any other liquid that the finings are intended for. The whole is
next strained through a tammy cloth or a hair sieve, and at once reduced
to a proper state of dilution, by the addition of more liquor. _Product_,
6-1/2 to 7 galls. "A pound of good isinglass will make about 12 galls. of
finings." (Ure.) Used to clarify fermented liquors, especially beer. 1 to
1-1/2 pint is the usual dose for a barrel of ale or porter; and a quart
for a hogshead of cider or wine.

2. (SPIRIT FININGS.)--_a._ Alum (ord. cryst.), 1 lb.; powder, and divide
it into 12 equal portions, which are to be separately wrapped in blue
paper, and marked No. 1. Next take of carbonate of soda (sesquicarbonate
of the shops), 6 oz.; divide this as the last, wrap it in white paper, and
mark each parcel No. 2. Keeps dry anywhere.

_b._ From alum, 1 lb.; salt of tartar (dry), 1/4 lb.; proceed as before.
The white papers containing the salt of tartar must be kept in a dry,
well-corked, wide-mouthed bottle or jar. Both of the last two are used to
clarify gin and cordials. The contents of one of the blue papers are
dissolved in about a pint of hot water, and the resulting solution is well
'rummaged up' with the liquor. A solution of the contents of one of the
white papers, in about 1/2 pint of hot water, is then added, and the
agitation continued for some minutes longer; after which the cask is
'bunged' close and the whole allowed to repose until the next day. This is
sufficient for a barrel (say 30 to 36 galls.), but many persons use double
the quantity. The effect is not only to clarify, but also to 'blanch' the
liquor.

_Obs._ Good liquors, either fermented or spirituous, need no artificial
'fining,' as they always clarify themselves by repose. With those,
however, which are out of 'condition,' or of inferior quality, it is often
necessary, as, without such a proceeding, they remain unsaleable. This is
particularly the case with malt liquor. "Attempts to clarify it in the
cask seldom fail to do harm. The only thing that can be used with
advantage for fining foul or muddy beer is isinglass." (Ure.) The
disadvantages resulting from the artificial clarification of fermented
liquors are--that they do not afterwards 'stand well on draught,' that
much of the conservative astringent matter which they contain is
precipitated with the 'finings,' that their piquancy and flavour is more
or less diminished, and that they are more than usually liable to become
flat and vapid, whether in cask or bottle. The larger the proportion of
'finings' used, the more marked are their injurious effects, and the
shorter the interval which elapses before the accession of the several
symptoms referred to. We have seen the most disastrous consequences follow
the injudicious use of 'finings,' more especially in respect to those
liquors in which a certain amount of piquancy, astringency, and briskness,
is an essential condition. In one instance which came under our notice
upwards of 30 barrels of 'underground' (a very strong old ale) was thus
reduced in value to less than 1-3rd its original cost; and in another, a
large bottled stock of the 'finest old Burton' was found to be utterly
unsaleable. In both cases the 'spoiled liquor' was got rid of by mixing it
in and selling it with 3d. and 4d. beer.

Liquors which 'refuse to fine' or become clear, when treated with
'finings' in the usual manner, are called 'stubborn' by coopers and
cellarmen. See BREWING, GIN, MALT, LIQUORS, WINES, &c.

=FIRE.= The calamities resulting from this destructive agent are of such
frequent occurrence, as to justly claim a notice of the subject here. The
causes of fires are numerous, and of a varied character, and, in most
instances, difficult to determine, because it is the interest of those
concerned to suppress all evidence connected with the matter. Accident,
that convenient word given to the imaginary hack to which so many fires
are referred, if truthfully interpreted, will, in general, be found to be
equivalent to carelessness, recklessness, or guilt. We believe that there
are few fires which have happened that might not have been prevented by
the exercise of common prudence, and that a vast number have been caused
by direct negligence, arising from sheer laziness and indifference, to use
no harsher terms. As familiar instances, may be mentioned--allowing
sparks to fall on the ground and remain there without extinguishing them;
carrying a naked candle into rooms containing inflammable substances;
smoking carelessly and in dangerous places, as workshops, warehouses, on
shipboard, &c.; keeping instantaneous light matches in improper places,
and neglecting to pick up those that may happen to fall on the ground, &c.
&c. The list might easily be extended, but we believe every reflecting
reader can do so for himself. The great increase in the number of fires
since the introduction of lucifer matches, and the almost general use of
tobacco, cannot fail to have attracted the attention of every one. The
danger of matches falling about might be avoided by the use of those which
can only be ignited by rubbing them on the prepared surface of the box.
These 'safety matches' are coming into general use, and must eventually
supersede all the more dangerous kinds.

The late Mr Braidwood classes the causes of fires under the following
heads:--1. Inattention in the use of fires and lights. 2. Improper
construction of buildings, &c. 3. Furnaces or close fires, for heating
buildings, or for mechanical purposes. 4. Spontaneous ignition. 5.
Incendiarism.

Amongst many other causes of fire, too numerous to specify, may be
noticed--incautiously approaching window- and bed-curtains with a candle
or lamp, airing linen before the fire, allowing children to play with
fire, women's dresses taking fire, and taking off the burning coals from a
fire and laying them on the hearth. Another very common cause of fire is
covering up a fire-place when not in use with wood, or paper and canvas,
&c. The soot falls either from the flue itself or an adjoining one into
the grate; a neighbouring chimney takes fire, a spark from this falls down
the blocked-up flue, ignites the soot in the grate, which smoulders until
the covering is burnt through, and thus sets the building on fire.

Another cause of fire, and one which cannot be too strongly condemned, is
the dangerous practice of reading in bed by candle-light. A very serious
annual loss of property is also caused by want of proper care in hanging
up or removing the goods in linendrapers' shop windows when the gas is
burning. Another frequent cause of fire is the employment of young
children in lighting fires, from their propensity to play with flame.

The employment of close fires with brick flues is also a frequent source
of danger. Frequently, from various causes, the furnace almost always
cracks, thus giving egress to smoke and flame. When this occurs no time
should be lost in thoroughly repairing the defect, or building a new
furnace; merely plastering over the surface will be found an ineffective
and dangerous remedy.

To guard against the dangers arising from the ignition of wearing apparel
many methods have been suggested for rendering fabrics flame proof, all of
them consisting in soaking the dress in a weak solution of a
non-inflammable substance, such as chloride of zinc, alum, tungstate of
sodium, sulphate of ammonia, &c. Of these alum has the advantage of
greatly improving the appearance of the fabrics, especially if they be
coloured.

Fire-guards, particularly where there are children, ought to be adopted
much more generally than they appear to be.

_Prev._ This consists of the exercise of those ordinary precautions which
the good sense of every careful and trustworthy man, be he taskmaster or
servant, cannot fail to suggest. It would be useless to enumerate them.

Immediately on the fire being discovered, secure an alarm being given to
the nearest of the fire escape stations, not delaying an instant; do not
wait "to see if it is wanted." Life is more valuable than property, and
events have often proved how fatal even a moment's hesitation is in
sending for the fire-escape.[307]

[Footnote 307: 'Handbook for Emergencies,' Cassell.]

The late Mr Braidwood's advice was, "that if the fire appears at all
serious, and there are fire-engines within a reasonable distance, that it
is best to wait until they arrive; many buildings have been destroyed from
opening doors, and trying to extinguish fires with insufficient means. If
no engines are within reach it is advisable to keep a hand-pump. If that
is not to be had, the next best thing is to collect as many buckets
outside the room on fire as can be obtained, keeping the door shut; then
to creep into the room on hands and knees (if the heat and smoke are
considerable), and throw the water as nearly in the direction of the fire
as possible, keeping the door shut while more water is being collected.

"The police of the metropolis understand shutting up fires so well, that
they have in many instances kept fires two or three miles distant from the
engine-stations, shut up till the fireman arrived in time to extinguish
them."

Fires might often be readily extinguished when first discovered by the
timely application of a few buckets of water. When an apartment is found
to be on fire, the door, chimney, and windows should be immediately
closed, if possible, and only opened for the purpose of projecting water
on the flames. By this means the supply of air will be cut off, and rapid
combustion prevented. The same applies to the lower doors and windows of a
house (especially the shop window), which are often injudiciously kept
open or removed, under the pretence of rendering assistance. The neglect
of this precaution has often caused a mere smouldering fire, that might
have been easily put out, to burst into an unextinguishable mass of flame.

It has been proposed at various times to make certain additions to the
water used for the purpose of extinguishing fires, in order to render its
action more certain and effective. It is found that sal ammoniac (5 oz.
to the gall.) exerts this property in a remarkable degree. Several other
articles, as common salt, pearlash, and kitchen soda, act in the same way,
though less effectively. A few buckets of such water will speedily arrest
the progress of a fire before it has much extended itself. Such a plan is
easily applied, by adding the saline matter to the buckets of water, which
are either used by hand, or to feed the engine for the first few minutes
of its working. When, however, a fire has made much progress, the action
of such substances becomes scarcely perceptible.

Chimneys on fire are readily extinguished in several ways, without having
recourse to throwing water down them from the top, by which much damage is
frequently done to the furniture in the rooms. One of the simplest methods
is, to cautiously scatter a handful of flowers of sulphur over the dullest
part of the burning coals; the sulphurous vapours, being incapable of
supporting combustion, rapidly extinguish the flames. Another method is,
to shut the doors and windows, and to stop up the bottom of the chimney
with a piece of wet carpet or blanket, throwing a little water or flowers
of sulphur, or even common salt, on the fire immediately before doing so.
By this means the draught is stopped, and the burning soot extinguished
for want of air. In many of the first-class houses recently erected,
'fire-place shutters' are provided, which, when partly drawn down, act as
powerful bellows or 'blowers' and which, when wholly drawn down, so as to
touch the hearth-stone, entirely close up the fireplace, and instantly
extinguish the combustion of the fuel in the grate, or that of the soot in
the chimney. This simple arrangement, the advantages of which were pointed
out in an early edition of this work, renders fires in chimneys of little
moment, as it is only necessary to draw down the shutter to put them out.
If a chimney is stopped at top, instead of at the bottom, the whole of the
smoke must, of necessity, be driven into the apartment.

In France, M. Marateuh has successfully applied the principle of Davy's
safety lamp for the prevention of fires in chimneys. He places fire-frames
of iron work near the base of the chimney, one above the other, about one
foot apart; no flame passes through them, whilst the draught in the
chimney is not interfered with, the result being that no fire can happen
in the chimney.

Escape from apartments on fire may be best effected by creeping on the
hands and knees. In this way the window or door may be reached. It is
found that the atmosphere of a room so full of smoke as to produce
suffocation to a person standing upright, may generally be safely breathed
on nearly a level with the floor. A damp cloth, or handkerchief, tied over
the mouth and nostrils, or, still better, over the whole face and head,
will enable a person to effect a passage through the densest smoke, and,
in many cases, to escape from buildings on fire, when otherwise it would
be impracticable. Should descent by the staircase be found impossible,
then the window should be immediately sought, and a ladder or fire-escape
waited for. In the absence of either, if the danger is imminent, a rope
should be made by tying the sheets and blankets of the bed together, one
end of which should be firmly secured to a chair or table, or preferably
to one of the bed-posts, and with this apparatus descent should be
cautiously attempted. Jumping out of the window should be avoided, as
persons who have not been brought up as clowns, or harlequins, run just as
much danger in performing such an exploit as they do by remaining in the
burning building. When it is impossible to escape from a burning building
by the stairs or windows, retreat may be sometimes secured by a trap door
opening on to the roof, or by a skylight, when, unless it be an isolated
house, the roof of one of the adjoining buildings may probably be gained
with safety.

Fire-escapes of various kinds have been employed of late years in the
metropolis, and have proved of the greatest value in rescuing persons from
burning buildings.

It is said that there is no instance on record of a person being burnt to
death in a dwelling-house in Edinburgh, where the houses are usually high;
yet in London, where fire-engines and fire-escapes are provided in greater
numbers, deaths are very frequent from this cause. The reason of this
difference is, that in the former city the stairs are all made of stone,
by which means a road of escape is secured.

The clothes of females and children, when on fire, may be most readily
extinguished by rolling the sufferer in the carpet, hearth-rug,
table-cover, a great-coat, cloak, or any other woollen article at hand. If
this be expertly done, the flames may be rapidly put out, unless the
skirts of the dress be distended by hoops or crinoline, when there is
great difficulty in staying the progress of the flames. Should assistance
not be at hand, the person whose clothes are on fire should throw herself
on the ground, and roll the carpet round her, as before described; or if
such a thing is not in the room, she should endeavour to extinguish the
flames with her hands, and by rapidly rolling over and over on the floor.
In this way the fire will be stifled, or at least the combustion will
proceed so slowly that less personal injury will be experienced before
assistance arrives. The advantage of assuming the horizontal position is
manifest from the fact that nine times out of ten it is the lower parts of
the dresses of females that first catch fire.[308]

[Footnote 308: For the mode of rendering muslin and other inflammable
articles of ladies' apparel fire-proof, see INCOMBUSTIBLE FABRICS.]

The extinction of fires on board ships by means of carbonic-acid gas was
some years since suggested to the Admiralty by Mr J. R. Hancorn. He
proposes that a simple and economical apparatus should be attached to
every decked vessel capable of supplying this gas, which is a well-known
non-supporter of combustion, and will extinguish fire at the very instant
of coming in contact with the burning matter. Chalk with sulphuric acid
diluted with water (vinegar with any other acid will do) yields 44% of the
gas; hence, a ton of chalk, and a fourth part of that quantity of
sulphuric acid, will be found sufficient to extinguish any fire on board a
ship. Mr Hancorn also proposed this as a method of destroying vermin in
ships, such as rats and cockroaches, for which purpose it is more easily
applied and more effectual than that usually adopted. This plan was
rejected by the Admiralty, from a fear that the destructive action of the
gas might extend to the crew as well as the fire. But "it surely is
possible by mechanical means to expel the gas before again entering the
ship's hold. At any rate, the grand point would be obtained of
extinguishing the fire, though the crew might have only the deck to stand
on."

_Precautions to be taken against a Fire amongst Farming Stock._--The
following are the suggestions of Mr Beaumont, the secretary of the County
Fire Office:--

"Forbid your men to use lucifer matches, to smoke or light pipes or
cigars, destroy wasp nests, or fire off guns in or near the rickyard, or
to throw hot cinders into or against any wooden out-building on the farm,
on pain of instant dismissal.

"Place your ricks in a single line, and as far distant from each other as
you conveniently can. Place hayricks and cornstacks alternately; the
hayrick will check the progress of the fire. Keep the rickyard, and
especially the spaces between the stacks and ricks, clear of all loose
straw, and in all respects in a neat and clean state. The loose straw is
more frequently the means of firing than the stack itself. Have a pond
close to the rickyard, although there may be a bad supply of water. When a
steam thrashing machine is to be used, place it on the lee-side of the
stack or barn, so that the wind may blow the sparks away from the stacks.
Let the engine be placed as far from the machine as the length of the
strap will allow. Have the loose straw continually cleared away from the
engine; see that two or three pails of water are kept close to the ashpan,
and that the pan itself is kept constantly full of water."

It is often difficult to get horses out of buildings on fire, but it is
said that they will readily come out if, after being blindfolded, the
saddle and bridle, or the harness, &c., to which they are accustomed, are
thrown over them as usual.

We learn from the last report issued by Captain Shaw that the actual
number of fires in the year 1877 in London was 1533. Of these fires 1374,
or 90 per cent., were slight, no persons being endangered, and no
considerable destruction of property taking place. The number of really
serious conflagrations was 150; in 88 of these life was endangered, and in
24 cases there was loss of life. The actual number of persons whose lives
were in danger was 165; but of these 136 were saved, and the lives
eventually lost amounted only to 29. The smallness of the loss is due in
great degree to the courage of the members of the Brigade, seven of whom
have been commended for special efforts for saving life during the year.
Even of the twenty-nine persons who perished fourteen were taken alive out
of the burning buildings, and died in hospital of their wounds. It is very
satisfactory in view of the vast height of buildings used in business, and
the flimsy character of so many London houses, that the risk of death from
fire should be so small. It is one of the very slightest risks to which we
are exposed in modern London. The fire-escapes must of course be credited
with much of this security. There are now 108 stations of these useful
machines; and instances of their utility in rescuing the inmates of
burning houses are constantly occurring.

The various tables which Captain Shaw appends to his report give some very
curious details as to the character of London fires. The hours at which
they most commonly break out are by no means those which are popularly
supposed to be the most dangerous. No considerable proportion occur after
people have gone to bed. From seven o'clock in the evening till eleven
o'clock there are more alarms of fire than in an equal portion of the
twenty-four hours. Not a third of the number which occur in these evening
hours take place in the small hours of the morning, which are in fact less
destructive than the same period in the afternoon. There are, moreover, in
the detailed list of fires some curious statistics, illustrating the
comparative security of private houses over places of business. A very
large part of the half million houses in London must come under the
description of private dwellings, yet the alarms of fire in this class of
buildings were only 316 in the year, and only in five of those were there
serious conflagrations. In the lists of business premises nearly every
trade in the metropolis is mentioned; and next to houses let out in
lodgings, public-houses seem to suffer most. The causes of fires tell the
old story of carelessness. They were instances of the almost inconceivable
folly of seeking for an escape of gas with a lighted candle. The throwing
down of lights is responsible for a considerable number of fires. Ordinary
cases of chimneys on fire are not included in Captain Shaw's summary; but
they give the brigade a good deal of work. The number of calls of this
kind was 3744, of which 1256 proved to be false alarms. The number of
these false alarms will probably be reduced when the stations at which men
with hose are situated are more numerous.

=Fire Anni'hilator (Phillips's).= This is essentially a gaseous fire
engine, which at any moment can be made to discharge a stream of mixed
gases and vapours having the power of checking combustion. When first
introduced it was generally regarded as a most important invention, but it
has not proved an effective substitute for the common water engine. For
extinguishing fires on board ship and in close apartments it is
undoubtedly well adapted, but as a street engine it is comparatively
useless, owing to the unmanageable nature of its fire-annihilating
vapours.

The composition with which the 'Fire Annihilator' is charged is a mixture
of dried ferrocyanide of potassium, sugar, and chlorate of potassa. It is
set in action by a blow on a glass vessel containing oil of vitriol,
which, being fractured, permits the acid to flow over the 'charge,' when
the anti-combustion gas is liberated, and rushes forth with great
impetuosity.

=Fire-damp.= See HYDROGEN (Light Carburetted).

=Fire-engine.= The common fire-engine is a compound forcing-pump,
consisting of two 'forcing-pumps' placed on opposite sides of an
'air-vessel,' with which both communicate. The 'fulcrum' of the 'lever' by
which both pumps are worked is placed midway between them; consequently
they act alternately in charging the air-vessel. In order to obtain a very
forcible jet it is necessary to prevent the escape of any portion of the
contents of the air-vessel until the confined air is considerably
compressed. The lever is connected with handrails on each side of the
engine, and these are alternately raised and depressed by the workers.
Engines worked by steam power are now common in London and most of our
large towns.

=Fire-Extinguishing Powder (Feuerloschpulver)=, Bucher Leipzig. Nitre, 59
parts; sulphur, 36 parts; coal, 4 parts; iron oxide, 1 part. (Wittstein.)

=Fire, how to light a.= In a close stove the first thing is to empty the
fireplace. Take out the larger cinders and half-burnt coal with your
fingers, and lay them on one side for lighting the fire; then rake out all
the ashes (this can be done with the lids on, then it will not make so
much dust). Next take off all the lids, and sweep all the soot carefully
out; once or twice a week the flue pipe must be taken off and cleared out,
also the flues under the oven. The soot should be carried away at once, as
it blows about. Then blacklead the stove; put in a few cinders, lay on
them a piece of paper and a few sticks crossing each other; on these lay
very lightly some pieces of half-burnt coal and a few cinders, leaving
space for the draught.

Do not fill the grate full; put the lids on, draw out the damper, light
the fire, and shut the front door. An open fire is lighted in much the
same way. There are no flues to clean out; but the chimney, as high as one
can reach and behind the register door, should be cleared from soot
daily.[309]

[Footnote 309: 'Household Management, &c.,' by W. T. Tegetmeier.]

=Fire-proofing.= See INCOMBUSTIBILITY, &c.

=Fireworks.= See PYROTECHNY, and _below_.

=FIRES.= (In pyrotechny.) Coloured fires may be termed, not inaptly, the
_chefs-d'[oe]uvre_ of the pyrotechnist's art, since on their excellence
the attractions of most other varieties of fireworks depend. The following
forms, under judicious management, yield fires of remarkable beauty.

=Blue Fire.= _Prep._ 1. From metallic antimony, 1 part; sulphur, 2 parts;
nitre, 5 parts.

2. From realgar, 2 parts; charcoal, 3 parts; chlorate of potassa, 5 parts;
sulphur, 13 parts; nitrate of baryta, 77 parts.

3. (Mr A. Bird.) Charcoal and orpiment, of each 1 part; black sulphuret of
antimony, 16 parts; nitre, 48 parts; sulphur, 64 parts.

4. (Fownes.) Tersulphuret of antimony, a part; sulphur, 2 parts; dry
nitre, 6 parts. This is the composition used for the Bengal or blue signal
light employed at sea.

5. (Prof. Marchand.) Sulphur, sulphate of potassa, and ammonio-sulphate of
copper, of each 15 parts; nitre, 27 parts; chlorate of potassa, 28 parts.
For theatrical illuminations. This may be rendered either lighter or
darker coloured by lessening or increasing the quantities of the sulphate
of potassa and ammonio-sulphate of copper.

6. (LIGHT BLUE--Marchand.) Sulphur, 16 parts; calcined alum, 23 parts;
chlorate of potassa, 61 parts.

7. (DARK BLUE--Marchand.) Calcined alum and carbonate of copper, of each
12 parts; sulphur, 16 parts; chlorate of potassa, 60 parts.

8. (Marsh.) Sulphate of copper, 7 parts; sulphur, 24 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 69 parts.

9. (Ruggieri.) Nitre, 2 parts; sulphur and zinc, of each 3 parts;
gunpowder, 4 parts.

10. From sulphur, 1 part; dried verdigris, 2 parts; chlorate of potassa, 9
parts.

=Fire, Crimson.= _Prep._ 1. (Marsh.) Chlorate of potassa, 4-1/4 parts;
charcoal (alder or willow), 5-3/4 parts; sulphur, 22-1/2 parts; nitrate of
strontia, 67-1/2 parts. For pots.

2. (Marsh.) Charcoal, 4-1/4 parts; sulphuret of antimony, 5-1/2 parts;
chlorate of potassa, 17-1/4 parts; sulphur, 18 parts; nitrate of strontia,
55 parts. For boxes and stars.

3. (Marchand.) Sulphur, 16 parts; chalk (dry), 23 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 61 parts. Turns on the purple. See RED FIRE (_below_).

=Fire, Green.= _Prep._ 1. Nitrate of baryta, 77 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 8 parts; fine charcoal, 3 parts; sulphur, 13 parts.

2. From metallic arsenic, 2 parts; charcoal, 3 parts; chlorate of potassa,
5 parts; sulphur, 13 parts; nitrate of baryta, 77 parts. Very beautiful,
particularly when burnt before a reflector.

3. (Mr A. Bird.) Charcoal and black sulphuret of antimony, of each 2
parts; chlorate of potassa, 5 parts; sulphur, 6 parts; nitrate of baryta,
80 parts.

4. (Fownes.) Lampblack, 1 part; chlorate of potassa, 4 parts; sulphur, 6
parts; dry nitrate of baryta, 18 parts.

5. (Marchand.) Boracic acid, 10 parts; sulphur, 17 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 73 parts. Very beautiful.

6. (Marchand.) Chlorate of potassa, 18 parts; sulphur, 22 parts; nitrate
of baryta, 60 parts. For theatrical illuminations.

7. (LIGHT GREEN--Marchand.) Sulphur, 16 parts; carbonate of baryta, 24
parts; chlorate of potassa, 60 parts. Extremely delicate.

8. (Marsh.) Charcoal and sulphuret of arsenic, of each 1-3/4 parts;
sulphur, 10-1/2 parts; chlorate of potassa, 23-1/4 parts; nitrate of
baryta, 62-1/2 parts. For pots or stars.

=Fire, Lilac.= _Prep._ 1. (Marsh.) Black oxide of copper, 6 parts; dry
chalk, 20 parts; sulphur, 25 parts; chlorate of potassa, 49 parts. For
pans.

2. (Marsh.) From black oxide of copper, 3 parts; dried chalk, 22 parts;
sulphur, 25 parts; chlorate of potassa, 50 parts. For stars.

=Fire, Orange.= See RED FIRE, No. 8 (_below_).

=Fire, Pink.= _Prep._ (Marchand.) Charcoal, 1 part; chalk and sulphur, of
each 20 parts; chlorate of potassa, 27 parts; nitre, 32 parts. For
theatrical illuminations. See RED FIRE, No. 10 (_below_).

=Fire, Purple.= _Prep._ 1. From lampblack, realgar, and nitre, of each 1
part; sulphur, 2 parts; chlorate of potassa, 5 parts; fused nitrate of
strontia, 16 parts.

2. (Marsh.) Sulphuret of antimony, 2-3/4 parts; black oxide of copper, 10
parts; sulphur and nitrate of potassa, of each 22-3/4 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 42 parts. For pans.

3. (Marsh.) Sulphate of copper, 9-3/4 parts; sulphur, 13 parts; chlorate
of potassa, 77-1/4 parts. For stars.

4. From sulphur, 12 parts; black oxide of copper, 12 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 30 parts. See CRIMSON FIRE, No. 3 (_above_), and RED FIRE, No. 9
(_below_).

=Fire, Red.= _Prep._ 1. From sulphur, sulphuret of antimony, and nitre, of
each 1 part; dried nitrate of strontia, 5 parts.

2. (Mr A. Bird.) Charcoal, 1 part; black sulphuret of antimony, 4 parts;
chlorate of potassa, 5 parts; sulphur, 13 parts; dried nitrate of
strontia, 40 parts.

3. (Fownes.) Lampblack, 2 parts; chlorate of potassa, 8 parts; sulphur, 9
parts; dried nitrate of strontia, 32 parts.

4. (Marchand.) Sulphur, 16 parts; carbonate of strontia, 23 parts;
chlorate of potassa, 61 parts.

5. (Marchand.) Chlorate of potassa, 20 parts; sulphur, 24 parts; nitrate
of strontia, 56 parts. For theatrical illuminations.

6. (Marsh.) Coaldust, 2 parts; gunpowder, 6 parts; sulphur, 20 parts;
dried nitrate of strontia, 72 parts.

7. (Ruggieri.) Sulphuret of antimony, 4 parts; chlorate of potassa, 5
parts; sulphur, 13 parts; fused nitrate of strontia, 40 parts. A little
charcoal or lampblack makes it burn quicker.

8. (ORANGE RED--Marchand.) Sulphur, 14 parts; chalk, 34 parts; chlorate of
potassa, 52 parts.

9. (PURPLE RED--Marchand.) Sulphur, 16 parts; chalk, 23 parts; chloride of
potassa, 61 parts.

10. (ROSE-RED--Marchand.) Sulphur, 16 parts; dried chloride of calcium, 23
parts; chlorate of potassa, 61 parts. See PINK FIRE.

11. From charcoal, 2 parts; chlorate of potassa, 6 parts; sulphur, 13
parts; dried nitrate of strontia, 40 parts.

=Fire, Violet.= _Prep._ 1. From charcoal, 8 parts; sulphur, 10 parts;
metallic copper, 15 parts; chlorate of potassa, 30 parts.

2. (DARK VIOLET--Marchand.) Alum and carbonate of potassa, of each 12
parts; sulphur, 16 parts; chlorate of potassa, 60 parts.

3. (PALE VIOLET--Marchand.) Sulphur, 14 parts; alum and carbonate of
potassa, 16 parts; chlorate of potassa, 54 parts.

=Fire, White.= _Prep._ 1. From nitre, 60 parts; sulphur, 20 parts; black
antimony, 10 parts; meal powder, 6 parts; powdered camphor, 4 parts. For
either pans or stars.

2. (Mr A. Bird.) White arsenic, 1 part; charcoal, 2 parts; black antimony,
16 parts; nitre, 48 parts; sulphur, 64 parts.

3. (Marchand.) Charcoal, 2 parts; sulphur, 22 parts; nitre, 76 parts. For
theatrical illuminations.

4. (Marchand.) Gunpowder, 15 parts; sulphur, 21 parts; nitre, 64 parts. As
the last.

5. (Marsh.) Gunpowder, 12-1/2 parts; zinc filings, 18 parts; sulphur, 23
parts; nitre, 46-1/2 parts. For pans.

6. (Marsh.) Zinc dust or filings, 15 parts; sulphur, 28 parts; nitre, 57
parts. For stars.

7. (Ruggieri.) Sulphur, 13-1/4 parts; sulphuret of antimony, 17-1/4 parts;
nitre, 48 parts.

8. (Ruggieri.) From realgar, 2 parts; sulphur, 7 parts; nitre, 24 parts.

9. (Ruggieri.) Charcoal, 1 part; sulphur, 24 parts; nitre, 75 parts.

10. (Ruggieri.) Iron or zinc borings, 25 parts; gunpowder, 100 parts.

=Fire, Yellow.= _Prep._ 1. From sulphur, 16 parts; dried carbonate of
soda, 23 parts; chlorate of potassa, 61 parts.

2. (Marchand.) Gunpowder, 14 parts; sulphur, 16 parts; dried soda, 20
parts; nitre, 50 parts.

3. (Marchand.) Charcoal, 1-1/2 parts; sulphur, 17-1/2 parts; dried soda,
20 parts; nitre, 61 parts.

        _Green-coloured Fires._[310]

  ------+----------------------+-----------------+--------------------
   No.  | Potassium Chlorate,  | Barium Nitrate, | Sulphur, per cent.
        |     per cent.        |    per cent.    |
  ------+----------------------+-----------------+--------------------
    1   |        36            |      40         |        24
    2   |        29            |      48         |        23
    3   |        24            |      53         |        23
    4   |        21            |      57         |        22
    5   |        18            |      60         |        22
    6   |        16            |      62         |        22
    7   |        14            |      64         |        22
    8   |        13            |      66         |        21
    9   |        12            |      67         |        21
   10   |        11            |      68         |        21
   11   |        10            |      69         |        21
   12   |         9.5          |      69.5       |        21
   13   |         9            |      70         |        21
   14   |         8.5          |      70.5       |        21
   15   |         8            |      71         |        21
  ------+----------------------+-----------------+--------------------

[Footnote 310: Kern ('Chemical News,' September 29th, 1876).]

        _Red-coloured Fires._

  ----+-------------------+------------------+---------+--------------
   No.|Potassium Chlorate,|Strontium Nitrate,|Sulphur, |Carbon Powder,
      |    per cent.      |   per cent.      |per cent.|   per cent.
  ----+-------------------+------------------+---------+--------------
    1 |        40         |       39         |    18   |      3
    2 |        32         |       46         |    19   |      2
    3 |        27         |       51         |    20   |      2
    4 |        23         |       55         |    20   |      2
    5 |        20         |       58         |    20.5 |      1.5
    6 |        18         |       60         |    21   |      1
    7 |        16         |       61.6       |    21.2 |      1.2
    8 |        15         |       63         |    21   |      1
    9 |        13         |       64         |    22   |      1
   10 |        12         |       65         |    22   |      1
   11 |        11         |       66         |    22   |      1
   12 |        10         |       67         |    22   |      1
   13 |        10         |       67.25      |    22   |      0.75
   14 |         9.25      |       68         |    22   |      0.75
   15 |         9         |       68.35      |    22   |      0.65
  ----+-------------------+------------------+---------+--------------

        _Violet-coloured Fires._

  ----+-------------------+------------------+-------------------+---------
   No.|Potassium Chlorate,|Calcium Carbonate,|Malachite powdered,|Sulphur,
      |   per cent.       |   per cent.      |     per cent.     |per cent.
  ----+-------------------+------------------+-------------------+---------
    1 |       52          |       29         |        4          |    15
    2 |       52          |       28         |        5          |    15
    3 |       52          |       26         |        7          |    15
    4 |       52          |       24         |        9          |    15
    5 |       52          |       23         |       10          |    15
    6 |       52          |       21         |       13          |    15
    7 |       51          |       20         |       14          |    15
    8 |       51          |       18         |       16          |    15
    9 |       51          |       16         |       18          |    15
   10 |       51          |       15         |       19          |    15
   11 |       51          |       13         |       21          |    15
   12 |       51          |       11         |       23          |    15
   13 |       51          |       10         |       24          |    15
   14 |       51          |        8         |       26          |    15
   15 |       51          |        6         |       28          |    15
  ----+-------------------+------------------+-------------------+---------

4. (Marsh.) Charcoal, 6 parts; sulphur, 19-1/2 parts. For pans. Very
beautiful.

In preparing coloured fires for fireworks according to the usual formulae
given in manuals of pyrotechny, it is often important to know the speed at
which they burn; as in some cases, such as decorations and lances, they
should burn slowly; whereas in others, such as wheels, stars for rockets,
and Roman candles, they ought to burn quicker. The foregoing tables are so
arranged that every formula with a higher number yields a slower burning
mixture than one with a lower number. Thus No. 5 burns quicker than No. 6,
and slower than No. 4.

_Obs._ The ingredients in the above compounds are to be separately reduced
to powder and sifted through lawn, after which they should be kept in
well-corked wide-mouthed bottles until the time of mixing them for use.
The chlorate of potassa, more especially, must be separately treated and
cautiously handled, in order to prevent the possibility of explosion from
friction whilst it is in contact with combustible matter. The requisite
quantity of each of the ingredients being weighed out and placed on a
clean sheet of white paper, the whole is to be thoroughly but carefully
mixed together with a light hand, by means of a bone or wooden knife. The
compound is next lightly packed into small cups or pans for illuminations,
or into small pill-boxes for stars and trains, a little priming and
quick-match being lastly attached to each. To ensure success the several
ingredients must be dry and commercially pure; and though reduced to the
state of a uniform powder, care must be taken that they are not absolutely
'dusty,' or too finely pulverised. The nitrate of strontia, alum,
saltpetre, carbonate of soda, &c., before being weighed, require to be
gently heated in an iron pot or pan until they fall to powder, and lose
their hygrometric moisture, or water of crystallisation. To ensure the
perfect admixture of the ingredients, the whole, after they have been
stirred together on paper, as before directed, may be passed through a
hair or perforated zinc or brass sieve. Further, as coloured fires rapidly
deteriorate by keeping, and even sometimes inflame spontaneously, to
prevent disappointment and accidents they should not be prepared long
before they will be required for use, and should be stored in some
situation in which their spontaneous combustion would be productive of no
disastrous consequences.

Of the above formulae, those bearing the name of the late Mr Marsh, of
Woolwich, more especially deserve the attention of the pyrotechnist. To
guard against the danger sometimes arising from the spontaneous combustion
of coloured fires containing sulphur and chlorate of potash, Mr Saunders
recommends intimately mixing 120 grains of bicarbonate of potash with each
pound of sulphur before using it in the manufacture of any composition
into which chlorates enter. See FLAME, PYROTECHNY, &c.

=FISH.= _Syn._ PISCES, L. Fishes form the _fourth class_ of vertebrate
animals (VERTEBRATA) in the Cuvierian arrangement of the animal kingdom,
and in the variety of their genera and species are second only to the
INSECTA, whilst in prolificness and number they probably exceed all other
animated beings that reach a size equal to that of even the smallest
member of their prodigious race. Besides their value to man as food, they
furnish him with oil, isinglass, and various other articles of utility and
luxury, and provide, either directly or indirectly, an inexhaustible
supply of manure for the fertilisation of his fields. As food fish are
undoubtedly wholesome and nutritious, although less so than the flesh of
animals or the grains of the cereals. Of all the various substances used
as aliments by man, fish are, however, the most liable to run into a state
of putrefaction, and should therefore be only eaten when perfectly fresh
or, if not recently taken, then only when their perfect preservation has
been ensured by any of the ordinary methods employed for the purpose.
Those that are the whitest and most flaky when cooked, as cod, flounders,
haddock, hake, soles, turbot, whiting, &c., are the most easily digested;
and those abounding in oily matter, as eels, herrings, mackerel, salmon,
&c., are most nutritious, though the most likely to offend the stomach.
Salt-water fish have been said to be more wholesome than river fish, but
without sufficient reason. Salted fish are hard of digestion, unless when
carefully cooked and well masticated. Skin diseases are said to be more
common among those who live continually on fish than among those who
abstain from it; but this probably arises from their use being
unaccompanied by a proper quantity of fresh vegetables or fruit, both of
which are scarcer on the sea-coast than further inland. As one of the
components of a mixed diet, the value of fish is indisputable. Acid sauces
and pickles are the proper additions to fish, from their power of
retarding the progress of putrefaction, and of correcting the relaxing
tendency of large quantities of oil and butter.

_Artificial Propagation._ The fecundity of fish is positively marvellous.
According to the recent observations of Mr Frank T. Buckland, salmon yield
about 1000 ova or eggs to every lb. of their weight; a trout weighing 1
lb. produced upwards of 1000; a mackerel (1 lb.), 86,120; a herring (1/2
lb.), 19,840; a sole (1 lb.), 134,466; a turbot (8 lbs.), 385,200; and a
cod (20 lbs.), 4,872,000. The ova here spoken of form what is commonly
called the 'hard roe' of the female fish; the 'soft roe' is 'the milt' of
the male fish. To protect the spawn, and the fry, when hatched, is the
object of the art of fish culture, which has made great progress during
late years. When the spawn is not artificially protected, the greater
portion is always wasted, being swept away by the stream, and devoured by
fish, birds, and insects. The natural enemies of the newly hatched fish
are, again, so numerous, that it is really surprising that any should
escape destruction. According to given data and accurate calculations of
the returns of fisheries made by Messrs Ashworth and Buist, only one
salmon egg out of every thousand deposited ever becomes a fish fit for
human food. Other fish, both fresh and salt water, suffer in proportion.
The hatching of fish by artificial means has been carried out on a large
scale in France, and has been commenced in Scotland and Ireland, and on a
small scale in England. The spawning fish, having been caught by a net, is
made to deposit her eggs by gently pressing on the abdomen; these are
impregnated by 'milt' expressed from the male fish in a similar manner,
and mixed with them in a shallow tub or other vessel prepared for the
purpose. The impregnated eggs are placed in long shallow boxes, bottomed
with gravel and pebbles, and so arranged that a small stream of water from
a reservoir may flow from one to another. The time of hatching depends
entirely upon the temperature of the water; from 40 deg. to 45 deg. Fahr. seems to
be the healthiest temperature. After about 50 days (in the case of
salmon), when all goes well, the young fish makes its appearance as a
misshapen creature about an inch long, with a bag containing the yolk of
the egg attached to its abdomen. At 3 days old the fry is about 2 gr. in
weight; at 16 months it has increased to 2 oz. To preserve the young fish
in health, the boxes must be covered with shades of slate or zinc. The
French fish-breeders generally feed the young fry with boiled frogs
powdered fine. The Scotch give boiled liver. Mr Buckland prescribes a diet
of roe of sole, or plaice, or whiting. As to the age at which it is
advisable to turn the young fish out of the nursery, there is much
difference of opinion. Some breeders recommend turning them out as soon as
the 'umbilical bag' is absorbed; others think they should be taken care of
till they are older and stronger, and better able to defend themselves or
escape from attack. For full details respecting the artificial propagation
of fish, the reader is referred to Mr Buckland's recent work, entitled
'Fish-Hatching.'

_Nutritive Value of Fish._--The white varieties of fish, such as
_whiting_, _cod_, _haddock_, _sole_, _plaice_, _flounder_, and _turbot_,
according to Letheby, contain only about twenty-two per cent. of solid
matter, of which eighteen is nitrogenous. To increase their nutritive
value, therefore, these fish should be eaten with butter.

According to the same authority _mackerel_, _eels_, and _salmon_ are
richer in fat than the above kinds; mackerel containing about seven per
cent., and salmon about six, whilst the oily matter of eels amount to
nearly fourteen per cent. The same is the case with the _sprat_, the
_herring_, and the _pilchard_, as well as with most of our fresh-water
fish.

As regards _shell-fish_, all the different varieties of them afford about
the same amount of nutrition. They contain about thirteen per cent. of
solid matter, which in composition is similar to that of white fish.
Shell-fish vary in digestibility; _mussels_, _limpets_, and _whelks_ being
rather difficult of digestion, whilst _scallops_, _cockles_,
_periwinkles_, _lobsters_, and _crabs_ are a trifle more easy of
digestion, and _oysters_ still more so. All shell-fish are unsuited for
delicate stomachs; although they are largely eaten by the poorer dwellers
on the coast.

On the Continent, _vineyard snails_, and in China, _slugs_, are eaten, and
are said to possess a delicate flavour and nutritive properties.[311]

[Footnote 311: Letheby.]

_Choice, &c._ "The flesh of any fish is always in the highest perfection,
or in season, as it is called, during the period of the ripening of the
milt and roe. After the fish has deposited the spawn, the flesh becomes
soft, and loses a great deal of its peculiar flavour. This is owing to the
disappearance of the oil or fat from the flesh, it having been expended in
the function of reproduction." (Fleming's 'Phil. Zoology.') Fish should be
dressed as soon after being caught as possible, as much of their peculiar
delicacy and flavour is lost by keeping, even for a few hours. Turbot and
salmon are said by the fishmongers to be improved in flavour when 2 or 3
days old, but this is surely a mistake, as the former, when dressed
immediately after being caught, possesses a fine creamy taste, which it
afterwards loses; whilst the latter, by the loss of a single tide, loses a
portion of the fine white curd which is previously found between the
flakes, and by longer keeping, this curd, with the larger flakes,
disappear altogether. In the eyes of some epicures the richness, is
however, increased by this change. Mackerel, and some other fish suffer so
much from keeping only a few hours, that they become quite unwholesome.
Herrings offer a remarkable example of the advantage of dressing fish as
fresh as possible. When cooked soon after being caught, they possess
considerable delicacy and flavour, but after being kept for only a few
hours, the oil separates from the flesh, and they become soft, greasy, and
strong-flavoured.

In the choice of every kind of fish, stiffness, brightness of the eyes,
and redness of the gills, may be regarded as invariable signs of
freshness. A peculiar elasticity will also be perceived in fish recently
caught, little or no permanent impression being made by the ordinary
pressure of the fingers, from the flesh immediately rising when the
pressure is withdrawn. Fresh fish also lie in a partly curled position,
and never quite straight, as in the case when they have been kept for some
time. Thickness and fleshiness are deemed marks of the good condition of
all fish.

_Cleaning, dressing, &c._ On the proper cleaning of fish preparatory to
dressing it, depends much of its delicacy and flavour. Ordinary cooks
seldom do this well, from not slitting the fish sufficiently open to
permit the inside to be thoroughly washed, and seldom using sufficient
water. The superior flavour of fish cleaned by the fishmongers arises from
their performing the operation more completely, and from the large
quantity of water they employ about them. The flavour of all fish is
improved by adding a little salt or vinegar to the last water in which
they are washed. The sound, milt, and roe, should be carefully cleaned and
preserved.

Fish is preferably 'dressed' by simple boiling, broiling, or frying; in
fact, the finer kinds of fish are often injured by the excessive
interference of the cook. When boiled, "all large fish, with the skin
whole, must be placed on the fire in cold water; if crimped, or cut into
slices or pieces, in boiling water; if whole, it must not be covered with
more than two or three inches of water, or the skin will crack, and not
only spoil the appearance of the fish, but will diminish the gelatine and
gluten it contains, and instead of eating firm and full of flavour, it
will be soft and woolly, especially if over-boiled." (Soyer.) As soon as a
scum rises from boiling, it should be removed by the skimmer. The addition
of a little salt or vinegar to the water improves the flavour of most
fish, and renders the flesh firmer. The proportions should be "two
teaspoonfuls of salt to every quart of water." "If the fish be whole, as
soon as it begins to boil remove the cover on one side, and let it simmer
gently until done. (Soyer.) A fish is known to be sufficiently dressed by
the flesh in the thicker parts separating easily from the bone. "If a
large fish I generally try it by gently pushing a wooden skewer through
the thickest part; if it goes in easily it is done." (Soyer.) When this is
the case it should be removed from the kettle, as by soaking in the water
fish loses its firmness, and becomes soddened. Sole, skate, and mackerel,
are usually put into boiling water, whether whole or sliced. Fish for
broiling should be well washed in strong vinegar, wiped dry with a towel,
and floured before placing them on the gridiron; and the bars of the
latter should be hot, and well buttered. (Rundell.) Fish for frying should
be prepared as for broiling, and the butter, oil, or lard should be
allowed to boil for a minute or two before putting them into the
frying-pan. The latter should be perfectly smooth and bright, and the
butter or oil in abundance, to prevent the fish sticking to it and
burning. As the fish are cooked solely by the heat of the melted fat, to
fry them in the highest perfection there should be enough of it to cover
them. Butter or oil is the best for the purpose. To avoid loss, the
contents of the frying-pan, after the fish is removed, should be poured
into a clean jelly-jar or basin, and reserved for another occasion. The
fish being removed from the pan, the superfluous fat should be drained
from them preparatory to 'serving' them. When fish is divided into fillets
or cutlets before being cooked, it is usual to take out the bones, and to
dress it with force-meat, &c.

In serving fish of the finer kinds, no other additions are required than
melted butter and the ordinary fish sauces and pickles. The dishes are
commonly garnished with raw parsley, for the sake of appearance, but
boiled parsley, chopped small, should accompany it. All kinds of fish
should be served on a napkin.

_Caution._ It sometimes happens that a fishbone accidentally swallowed
remains in the [oe]sophagus, and occasions serious inconvenience; in fact,
instances have been known where so much irritation has arisen that death
has followed. In such cases it is advisable, as soon as possible, to take
of tartar emetic, 4 gr., dissolved in warm water, 1/2 pint; and
immediately afterwards the whites of six eggs. The coagulated mass will
not remain in the stomach more than two or three minutes, and the remedy
has been known to "remove no less than 24 pins at once."

=FISH GLUE.= See GLUE and ISINGLASS.

=FISH POISONING.= See ACCIDENTS.

=FISH SKIN.= _Syn._ SHARK SKIN. The skin of the spotted dog-fish or rough
hound (_chien de mer_, Fr.), stretched and dried. Used for polishing wood
and ivory. Several other varieties of fish skin are employed in the arts.
The dressed skin of the 'rousette' (_peau de rousette_, F.), is
transparent, and very beautiful. Cemented on green paper, and rubbed down
and polished, it is used as veneer for fancy boxes. The skins of several
varieties of Squalus are also used for both the above purposes. See
SHAGREEN.

=FIVE HERBS.= See SPECIES.

=FIX'ATURE= _Syn._ BANDOLINE, CLYSPHITIQUE, EAU COLLANTE, FIXATEUR, Fr.
This consists of any of the simple vegetable mucilages, combined with a
little spirit, to preserve it, and with a little perfume, to render it
more agreeable.

_Prep._ 1. From carrageen, Irish, or pearl moss, soaked in cold water for
an hour or two, and after being drained, and pressed dry in a clean
napkin, dissolved by boiling in soft water, q. s. The decoction is
strained through cambric, and when nearly cold is mixed with about 1/3rd
or 1/4th of its volume of eau de Cologne or other scented spirit, with the
further addition of a few drops (5 or 6) of oil of cloves. Sometimes a
little brandy is added to the mucilage, and when it is intended for
present use, as is common with home manufactures, the spirit is frequently
omitted altogether. 1/4 oz. of the prepared moss is fully enough for 3/4
pint of strained decoction, if rightly managed.

2. From quince seed boiled in water, as the last. 1/4 oz. yields nearly
3/4 pint of strained decoction.

3. Pale gum arabic (picked), 1-1/2 oz.; rose water, 2 fl. oz.; pure water,
3 fl. oz.; dissolve.

4. Gum arabic, 3-1/4 oz.; water, 1/2 pint; dissolve, and drop in eau de
Cologne, gradually, until the cloudiness at first occasioned ceases to be
removed by agitation; the next day decant the clear portion. All of the
above are very superior, and keep well.

5. (Redwood.) Gum tragacanth, 1-1/2 dr.; water, 7 oz.; proof spirit, 3
oz.; otto of roses, 10 drops; macerate 24 hours, and strain.

6. Malt, 7 oz.; hot water (that will barely permit the finger to be held
in it without pain), 1/2 pint; infuse in a covered jug or basin, gently
press out the liquid, and as soon as cold add of proof spirit (or brandy
or Cologne water), 2-1/2 fl. oz. and strain.

_Obs._ Bandoline is used by ladies and by hairdressers for stiffening the
hair, and to make it curl firmly and remain in place. It is applied either
by moistening the fingers and passing the hair through them, or by means
of a small sponge. See POMMADE.

=FIXED AIR.= See CARBONIC ACID.

=FIXED OILS.= See FAT and OILS.

=FLAKE WHITE.= See WHITE PIGMENTS.

=FLAME.= Gas or vapour in an incandescent state. The light emitted from
pure flame is exceedingly feeble; illuminating power being almost entirely
dependent upon the presence of solid matter. See ILLUMINATION, and
_below_.

=Flame Colours.= The vapours of metallic compounds communicate colours to
flames. The characteristic colours of some metals are very beautiful, and
their exhibition forms a favorite experiment of chemical lecturers. The
coloured flames are generally produced by the combustion of alcohol or
rectified spirit upon certain salts in fine powder. In this way a GREEN
colour is communicated by boracic acid or chloride of copper; a RED one by
the nitrates of iron, lime, or strontia; a VIOLET, by potassa and its
salts; and a YELLOW, by nitrate of soda. Messrs Church and Crookes have
recently described a mode of exhibiting the characteristic flames of the
metals which is admirably adapted for the lecture-table.[312] 'Gun-paper,'
made in the same way as 'gun-cotton,' is to be soaked in solutions of the
chlorates of the different metals, dried with care, and kept dry. A good
'gun-paper' for the purpose is prepared by soaking strips of Swedish
filtering-paper for ten minutes in a mixture of 4 parts oil of vitriol
with 5 parts strong nitric acid, both by measure. The strips, when taken
out of the acid, should be washed first with cold, and then with hot rain
or distilled water, till the washings are no longer sour to the taste. The
solutions of the metallic salts need not be very strong; but if they are
warm, the strips of 'gun-paper' will be more easily and completely
saturated with them. Since some of the chlorates attract moisture from the
air, it is better to dry the papers prepared with them before the fire
previous to lighting them. They are shown to best advantage when a strip
is loosely crumpled up into a pellet, lighted quickly at one corner, and
thrown up into the air against a dark back ground. They leave after
burning, if properly prepared, no ash whatever. Paper prepared with the
salt of potassa gives a flash of VIOLET flame, that prepared with the soda
salt the characteristic YELLOW flame, and that with chlorate of baryta a
very beautiful GREEN light. The chlorates of strontium, lithium, and
calcium, when thus ignited, give intense colours. The VIOLET-BLUE flame of
copper is well seen, even with the chloride of that metal, while paper
soaked in nitrate of potassa shows the potassium flame better than if the
chlorate be used. 'Gun-paper' prepared with a very weak solution of
chloride or chlorate of thallium shows the characteristic SPRIG-GREEN
flame of that metal with great distinctness. Chlorate of barium, being an
article of commerce, may be employed for the preparation of the other
chlorates, it being merely necessary to add to this salt in solution an
exactly equivalent quantity of the sulphate or carbonate of the metal
whose chlorate is desired. For instance, in order to make 'chlorate of
copper,' 15.1 gr. of chlorate of barium being dissolved in hot distilled
water, a boiling solution containing 12.5 gr. of pure crystallised
sulphate of copper is to be added to it. Insoluble white 'sulphate of
baryta' falls, while the solution, filtered and evaporated, yields the new
chlorate in crystals. See FIRES, PYROTECHNY, &c.

[Footnote 312: See 'Intellectual Observer,' April, 1863.]

=FLAN'NEL.= It has been shown by the experiments of Count Rumford that the
conducting power of the different materials employed for clothing varies
considerably. A thermometer surrounded with cotton wool, and heated by
immersion in boiling water, took 1046 seconds to lose 135 deg. Fahr., when
plunged into a bath of melting ice; but, under the same circumstances,
when sheep's wool was employed, 1118 seconds elapsed before a like sinking
of the thermometer took place ('Phil. Trans.,' 1792); thus showing the
greater conducting power of the former, and consequently the superiority
of the latter substance for the manufacture of warm clothing. But the
chief advantage of wool, as an article of underclothing, depends less upon
its actual power of conducting heat than its peculiar texture. Flannel
acts as a gentle stimulus on the skin, and exercises the most beneficial
action, by keeping the pores clean, and in a state most favorable to
perspiration. This action is a species of friction similar in character,
although inferior in degree, to that of the common flesh-brush or
horse-hair glove, so long employed as a skin stimulant. Flannel has also
the advantage of absorbing the perspiration as soon as emitted, and
allowing its watery portion to pass off into the atmosphere almost as soon
as formed, but this is not the case with cotton and linen fabrics. The
different effects of flannel and linen are particularly susceptible during
brisk exercise. When the body is covered with the former, though
perspiration be necessarily increased, the perspired matter freely passes
off through the flannel, and the skin remains dry and warm. If the same
exercise be taken in linen shirts, perspiration, as in the former case, is
indeed also increased, but the perspired matter, instead of being
dispersed into the atmosphere, remains upon the linen, and not only clogs
the pores of the skin, but gives a disagreeable sensation. From this
property of flannel, persons who wear it next the skin seldom catch cold
from changes of temperature, even though perspiring profusely; but in
similar cases, when linen or calico shirts are worn, chilliness
immediately comes on, followed by sniffling, sneezing, and cough, and all
the other symptoms of severe catarrh.

The common objections raised against the use of flannel are founded on
vulgar prejudices, ignorance, obstinacy, or bravado, and are undeserving
of the notice of sensible people. In a fickle and moist climate like that
of England, every person should wear a robe of flannel next the skin, or
at all events a waistcoat of flannel reaching below the loins; and this
should not be discarded as soon as the cold weather has passed, but its
use should be continued all the year round; for in reality flannel is, if
possible, even more required in summer than in winter, because persons
perspire more freely in hot than in cold weather, and are consequently
more susceptible of cold, while at that period of the year their clothing
is less capable of protecting them from the effects of sudden changes of
temperature and draughts of cold air, moisture, &c. Females, children,
persons of delicate constitutions, and all others who from their habits of
body or life perspire freely, or are much exposed, should wear flannel.

In washing flannels it is recommended that they should only be put into
warm water, by which method their colour will be preserved, and they will
be prevented from shrinking.

=FLASH.= _Prep._ From burnt-sugar colouring, 1 gall.; fluid extract of
capsicum or essence of Cayenne, 3/4 pint, or enough to give a strong fiery
taste. Used to colour spirits, and to give them a false strength. It is
made by the brewers' druggists, and labelled 'ISINGLASS AND BURNT SUGAR,'

=FLASKS.= The late lamented and ingenious Mr Fownes suggested the
employment of Florence oil-flasks as cheap substitutes for retorts,
receivers, digesters, and some other vessels used for chemical purposes.
His plan was to cut the neck smoothly round with a hot iron, and softening
it in the flame of a good argand gas-lamp, to turn over the edge so as to
form a lip, or border. The neck will then bear a tight-fitting cork
without splitting.

=FLATULENCE.= _Syn._ FLATULENCY, WIND. In _pathology_, a morbid collection
of gas in the stomach and bowels. Its most common cause is indigestion.
When the natural fluids of the stomach are secreted in a healthy state,
they exercise an antiseptic and digestive action on the food, by which it
is speedily reduced to a magma that is little liable to spontaneous change
whilst in the body; but when the reverse is the case, fermentation soon
commences, and the stomach and associated viscera become distended with
gas, and all the well-known symptoms of flatulency are developed in rapid
succession. The quantity of gas thus accumulated in the 'primae viae' is
often enormous. An ordinary apple during fermentation yields about 600
times its bulk of gas, and many vegetables yield much more. (Dr Hales.) It
is, therefore, not at all surprising that so much inconvenience should be
felt when the food, instead of being digested and assimilated, runs into
the state of active fermentation.

The treatment of flatulency consists mainly in the selection of proper
articles of food. Oleraceous vegetables, peas, beans, under-dressed
potatoes, and indigestible fruits should be especially avoided, as well as
the use of large quantities of weak or warm liquids. The diet should
consist principally of animal food, carefully but not over-cooked, with a
sufficient quantity of good mealy potatoes (mashed, not whole), and good
wheaten meal-bread, moderately seasoned with common salt and spices. The
most suitable beverages are toast-and-water, and a little good brandy
largely diluted with water. The healthy tone of the stomach may be
re-established by the proper use of tonics, bitters, and mild aperients.

To relieve the fit of flatulency, carminatives and aromatics, as black
pepper, mustard, peppermint, ginger, cinnamon, lavender, and most spices,
may be had recourse to. A glass of peppermint cordial, or of brandy
strongly flavoured with peppermint or ginger, is a popular and efficient
remedy. A few drops (15 to 30) of ether, with a little tincture of
capsicum or spirit of sal volatile, seldom fail to give relief. See
DYSPEPSIA.

=FLAVOURING SUBSTANCES.= See ESSENCE, OIL (Volatile), SPICE, WINE, &c.

=FLAX.= See LINEN, LINSEED, and OIL.

=FLEA.= This troublesome little animal is the _Pulex irritans_ of Linnaeus,
and belongs to the _Suctoria_, or fourth order of the _Insecta_. Its
favorite haunts are our warm underclothing, and its most productive
breeding-places are in the 'flue' which careless servants allow to
accumulate underneath our beds. Cold, light, perfumes, and ventilation,
are inimical to its propagation.

=FLECHTENKAPSELN (Tetter Capsules, or Dr Berkeley's Antiherpetic Capsules
for Skin Diseases, Tetter, &c.)= Capsules filled with tar. (Hager.)

=FLECHTENMITTEL--Tetter Cure.= (Paris). 1. A Washing Fluid.--Common water,
containing 1-1/2 per cent. sulphuric acid. 2. A Salve. A mixture of lard
and spermaceti, with 1/24 of their weight of calomel. (X. Schmidt.)

=FLECHTENPULVER--Tetter Powder= (St Lube's, France). Nitre, 100; antimony
chloride, 10; antimony oxide, 200, 1.5 grammes for a dose. (Wittstein.)

=FLECHTENSALBE--Tetter Salve= (Fontaine, Paris). For all skin diseases.
Olive oil and white wax, with 1/16 of white precipitate. (Wittstein.)

=Flechtensalbe= (Bruno Reichel, Apolda). A mixture of wax and lard
coloured green. (Schaedler.)

=Flechtensalbe= (F. Schwarzlose, Berlin, and S. G. Schwartz, Breslau). For
salt-flux, tetters, and similar skin diseases. Peru balsam, 1; carbolic
acid, 2; yellow wax, 10; lard, 30. (Schaedler.)

=Flechtensalbe= (Surbi, Paris). For all kinds of skin diseases. A mixture
of beef tallow, 30; olive oil, 10; zinc oxide, 2; steatite, 2.
(Wittstein.)

=FLECHTENSEIFE, Tetter Soap= (Dr Berkeley). Ordinary tar soap. (Hager.)

=FLECHTENWASSER.= The wonderful wholesome mineral vegetable tetter-water
(Dr A. von S.). Corrosive sublimate, .25 grammes; water, 180 grammes;
benzoin tincture, 6 grammes. (Weber.)

=FLECKENWASSER= (Bronner). Cleansing fluid (literally spot or stain water)
for the removal of grease and dirt spots. Benzine only.

=Fleckenwasser, Englisches= (English cleansing fluid for removing acid,
resin, wax, tar, and grease spots.) A mixture of 95 per cent. alcohol, 100
grammes; liq. ammon., sp. gr. .875, 30 grammes; benzine, 4 grammes.
(Artus.)

=FLEISCH-EXTRACT-LIQUEUR (Eau de Vie Alimenteuse--Extract of Meat
Liqueur--Aqua Vitae Incarnativa)= (A. Hensel, Berlin). A beautiful red
spicy liquor, leaving, when distilled, 32 per cent. of solid matter. This
residue contains in 100 parts (besides anilin-red), resin and extractive
(partly from ginger and partly from cinnamon), 3-1/4; sugar, 27-1/2;
extract of meat, 1-1/4. (Hager.)

=Fleisch-Extract-Syrup (Syrup of Extract of Meat)= (Meyer, Berk).
Blood-serum made into a syrup with sugar. (Hager.)

=FLEISCHFASER-ZWIEBACK FUeR HUNDE--Fibrin Dog Biscuits= (New York). Said to
be made of pure meal, fibrin, dates, and other ingredients, and
recommended as an excellent food for dogs. According to the prospectus its
use makes all other foods unnecessary, as it gives the animals peculiar
endurance, strong muscles, and sound bones. The directions for use say
that it is most advantageously given in its unprepared form, as dry,
heavy, hard cakes, and only in case it is refused should it be softened
for a short time in cold water. According to the analysis performed in the
laboratory of the Poppelsdorf Agricultural Academy the proportion of
nitrogenous to non-nitrogenous ingredients is 1 to 3.70. Microscopic
analysis detects the presence of dried fibrin, and also a considerable
admixture of structureless hyaline cartilaginous matter. From this it
follows that the nitrogen revealed by analysis does not all represent
protein or fibrin, and that the proportion which arises from indigestible
gelatinous matter will be of smaller value. (Dr E. Kern.)

=FLESH.= _Syn._ CARO, L. The muscular substances of animals; the softer,
solid portions of the body, as distinguished from the bones and fluids.
See FIBRIN, FOOD, &c.

=Flesh-brush.= This simple instrument is used for exciting the cutaneous
circulation. Those which have the bristles set on a leather back are
esteemed the best. The flesh-glove or hair flesh-rubber is a useful
modification of the common flesh-brush. Those manufactured by Messrs
Savory and Moore, in imitation of the Indian kheesah or mitten, are
superior to all others. In the absence of both flesh-brush and glove, a
rough towel wound round the hand is no bad substitute. See FRICTION.

=FLIEGENPAPIER, GIFTFREIES--Non-Poisonous Fly Papers= (Bergmann & Co.,
Rochlitz). Contains abundance of arsenious acid. (Hager.)

=FLIEGENPULVER--Fly Powder= (Baumann, now Markel, Austria). 93 to 94 per
cent. of dry sandy ferruginous clay (ordinary loam) saturated with a
decoction of some bitter substance, as quassia or gentian. (Hager.)

=FLIES.= See FLY.

=FLIP.= See EGG FLIP.

=FLOeHEMITTEL--Flea Powder= (Leipsic). Powdered soap. (Fischer.)

=FLOeHEWASSER--Flea Water= (Koch, veterinary surgeon, Vienna). 7 brandy, 1
benzine, 1 black soap. (Hager.)

=FLORILINE--Vegetable Tooth Paste= made by John Yates (Albin Mueller,
Bruenn). It is contained in a quadrangular china pot, and is a red, dry,
rather hard mass made from prepared chalk, 20 grammes; starch powder, 10
grammes; glycerin, 8 grammes; pellitory tincture, 3 grammes; peppermint
oil, 10 drops; and water q. s., coloured with Florentine lac. (Hager.)

=FLOUN'DER.= A flat fish, very like the plaice, but smaller, and of more
obscure colour. It is very common about the British coast, and is found in
the Northern, Baltic, and Mediterranean seas. Its flesh is very wholesome.

=FLOUR.= _Syn._ FARINA, L. The finely ground and 'dressed' meal of bread
corn, and of the seeds of some of the leguminosae. That known specifically
as 'flour' in this country is obtained from spring varieties of _Triticum
vulgare_ (the common wheat).

_Var., &c._ Of varieties of flour there are several, depending chiefly on
the amount of bran which they contain, and the relative fineness of the
sieves through which they are passed:--

FINE WHEAT FLOUR, PASTRY FLOUR; FARINA, F. TRITICI, F. SEMINIS TRITICI.
The finest flour, obtained from the meal produced in the first grinding of
wheat between sharp stones, by means of a sieve of 64 wires to the inch.
Used for pastry.

MIDDLINGS. The remainder of the flour of the first grinding, obtained by
means of a slightly coarser sieve. Used for making household bread, but is
mostly reground for the next variety.

SECONDS. The finest part of the flour, obtained by regrinding 'middlings'
between blunt stones. Used by the bakers for their finest wheaten bread.

POLLARD. The coarse flour, from which the seconds has been sifted. Used
for making sea biscuits and gingerbread, and to fatten poultry and hogs.

COUNTRY HOUSEHOLD FLOUR. This is usually ground only once, and sifted to
4/5ths of the weight of the wheat.

AMMUNITION FLOUR is ground and sifted to nearly 5/6ths the weight of the
wheat.

According to Mr Accum, thirty-two pecks of wheat in the London mills
yield, of flour 38-1/2 parts; pollard, 8 parts; and bran (_furfur
tritici_), 12 parts; the bulk of the wheat being doubled by grinding.

According to Mr Hard, miller, of Dartford, quoted by Dr Pereira, the wheat
having been ground in the usual way, is allowed to remain in the state of
meal for some time before 'dressing,' which removes the heat caused by the
process, and enables the miller to obtain more flour, and the baker a
better quality, than if 'dressed' immediately it is ground.

"The process of dressing is by a wire cylinder containing a certain number
of sheets of different texture or fineness, which cylinder contains eight
hair brushes attached to a spindle passing through the centre of the
cylinder, and laid out so as to gently touch the wire. This cylinder is
fed by a 'shoe' with the meal; then the 'flour' and 'offal,' after passing
through the wire in this way, are divided by wooden partitions fixed close
to the outside of the cylinder." "The produce of the wheat-meal dressed
through the wire machine consists of--1, Flour;--2, White Stuff, or
Boxings, or Sharps;--3, Fine Pollard;--4, Coarse Pollard, or Horse
Pollard;--5, Bran. The 2nd product (_i. e._ the white stuff) is then
submitted to another 'dressing' through a fine cloth machine, and
produces--1, Fine Middlings, for biscuits;--2, Toppings, or Specks;--3,
Dustings;--4, Best Pollard, Turkey Middlings, or Coarse Middlings.

        TABLE _of the Produce of One Quarter of Wheat_ (= 504
        lbs.) By MR HARD.

  Flour                           392 lbs.
  Biscuit or fine middlings        10  "
  Toppings or specks                8  "
  Best pollard, Turkey p., or
    twenty-penny                   15  "
  Fine pollard                     18  "
  Bran and coarse pollard          50  "
  Loss by evaporation and waste    11  "

                                  504  "


                                _Analysis of Flour._

  |                                | PELIGOT. |          |         |  WANKLYN.  |
  |                                |Mean of 14| LETHEBY. |  PAYEN. |Fine Wheaten|
  |                                | Analyses.|          |         |   Flour.   |
  |--------------------------------+----------+----------+---------+------------|
  |                                |Per cent. | Per cent.|Per cent.|  Per cent. |
  |Water                           |  14.0    |   15.0   |  14.22  |    16.5    |
  |Fat                             |   1.2    |    2.0   |   1.25  |     1.2    |
  |Nitrogenous matters, gluten, &c.|  12.8    |   10.8   |  14.45  |    12.0    |
  |Ditto, soluble in water         |   1.8    |    --    |   --    |     --     |
  |Non-nitrogenised substances,    |          |          |         |            |
  |  dextrin, sugar, &c.           |   7.2    |}         |         |            |
  |Starch                          |  59.7    |} 70.5    |  68.48  |    69.6    |
  |Cellulose                       |   1.7    |}         |         |            |
  |Salts (ash)                     |   1.6    |    1.7   |   1.6   |     0.74   |


According to Vauquelin, French wheat flour contains about 10% of water,
11% of gluten, 71% of starch, 5% of sugar, and 3% of gum; and the water of
the dough amounts to about 50%. The quantity of the bran in wheat ranges
under 2%.

_Pur._ This article of food is very frequently adulterated both by the
miller and the baker, as has been before alluded to in the article on
bread. The principal physical characteristics of wheat flour of good
quality are the following--it has a dull white colour, somewhat inclining
to yellow;--it exhibits no trace of bran, even when pressed smooth with
the hand, or with a polished surface;--its cohesiveness is so great that,
on being squeezed in the hand, the lump is some time before it loses its
shape;--it has a homogeneous appearance, and does not lose more than from
6% to 12% by being carefully dried in a stove. The smaller the loss in
this way the finer is the quality, other matters being equal, and the more
economical in use.[313] (See _below_.)

[Footnote 313: See also BREAD, _Adult_, and _Exam_.]

_Tests._ 1. Solution of ammonia turns pure wheat flour yellow; but if any
other corn has been ground with it, pale brown; or if peas or beans have
been ground with it, a still darker brown.

2. Solution of potassa, containing about 12% of caustic alkali, dissolves
pure wheat-flour almost completely; but when it is adulterated with the
flour of the leguminous seeds (beans, peas, &c.), the cellulosae of these
substances remains undissolved, and its hexagonal tissue is readily
identified under the microscope. Mineral substances (chalk, plaster of
Paris, bone dust, &c.) are also insoluble in this test, and appear as a
heavy white sediment.

3. Boiling water poured on the sample causes the evolution of the peculiar
odour of pea or bean flour when these substances are present. Bread made
with such flour evolves a like odour on being toasted.

4. Pure hydrochloric acid poured on potato flour, or on wheat flour
adulterated with it, develops a smell of rushes; it also dissolves starch,
but changes the colour of pure wheat-flour to a deep violet.

5. Nitric acid turns wheat flour of an orange-yellow colour, but forms a
stiff and tenacious jelly with potato fecula, the colour of which it does
not alter.

6. A portion of the suspected sample submitted to dry distillation in a
stoneware retort, and the distillate collected in a receiver containing a
little water, the latter is found to remain perfectly neutral if the wheat
flour is pure, but acquires a distinctly alkaline reaction when beans,
pulse, or pea meal is present. (Rodrigues.)

7. Triturate 300 gr. of the sample with an equal weight of clean siliceous
sand, and after five minutes form a homogeneous paste with water;
afterwards further adding more water, until about 2 fl. oz. have been
used. The filtered liquid, treated with an equal quantity of a strong and
pure aqueous solution of iodine, develops a pink colour, which gradually
disappears when the specimen examined consists of pure wheat flour; but
assumes a deep-purple colour, which disappears much more slowly, if the
flour is adulterated with even 10% of fecula or potato flour. This test
succeeds, not only with flour and meal, but also with macaroni,
vermicelli, &c. (M. Chevallier.)

8. The milky liquid holding the starch in suspension (see Anal., page 749)
is poured into a small conical glass, and left at rest for some time; the
clear liquid is then decanted, and any remaining water carefully sucked up
with a pipette, and the whole left for some time, in order that the
deposit may harden. The upper gray layer is next removed with a teaspoon,
and the harder and stiffer second layer left undisturbed until it becomes
quite solid by drying. When in this state, it may be upset in the form of
a cone, upon a lump of dry plaster. The fecula or potato starch (if any is
present), being heavier than that of wheat, forms the apex of the cone,
and its quantity may be estimated in the following manner:--The operator
cuts from the apex of the little cone above mentioned a slice, which he
triturates only for a short time in an agate mortar (one of glass, or
porcelain, or wedgwood-ware, will not do), and he tests that with aqueous
solution of iodine. If it turns blue, it is fecula. Another slice is
treated in the same manner, until the operator comes to the wheat starch,
which, in the present instance, is not affected by the aqueous solution of
iodine. This difference of behaviour of the two species of starch with
iodine is due to the friction of the pestle and mortar, which is
sufficient to divide or tear the envelopes of the particles of the potato
starch, which then become blue when treated by solution of iodine. The
particles of wheat starch, on the contrary, are not disaggregated by that
treatment, and being therefore protected by their envelope, are not acted
upon by the solution of iodine, or, at most, assume only a brown tinge.
(M. Robine.)

9. Wheat flour adulterated with plaster of Paris, ground bones, chalk, and
potato flour, has a higher specific gravity than a sample of the pure
flour. This may be readily ascertained by any person by filling a small
vessel with some pure flour, and then with the given sample. "A vessel
which will contain 1 lb. of wheat flour will contain 1-1/2 lb. of fecula"
(potato flour), and hence "the proportion of this adulteration may be
easily estimated." (Ure.)

10. If to a sample of wheat flour is added a solution of potassa,
containing about 1-3/4% of the pure alkali, the granules of potato farina,
or of bean meal, or pea meal, present (if any), will acquire 4 or 5 times
their original volume, while those of the pure wheat starch will be
scarcely affected by it. This change is very perceptible under a
microscope of small power. 2 parts of liquor of potassa (Ph. L.) and 5
parts of distilled water form a mixture that answers for the above
purpose.

11. By means of the microscope the admixture of the cheaper feculas and
meals with wheat flour is readily detected by the characteristic
appearance of the starch grains; and when the adulteration exceeds 9% or
10%, its extent may be readily estimated with considerable accuracy. As
the range of adulteration is generally from 12% to 27%, this method is
applicable in the greater number of cases.

_Analysis._ The value of wheat flour as an aliment depends upon the
quantity of gluten, sugar, starch, and phosphate of lime, which it
contains; and its superiority over the flour of the grains of the other
cereals is referred to its containing a larger proportion of the first and
last of these substances than they do. The quantitative analysis of flour
is very simple, and may be easily made by persons unacquainted with
chemistry, by attending to the instructions below:--

_a._ Make 1000 gr. of the sample into a dough with a little water, let it
rest an hour and then gently knead it in successive water, until the
starchy particles are perfectly removed. Collect the portion (GLUTEN) left
in the hand, drain off the water, place it on a piece of filtering or
blotting paper, several times doubled, and set it aside.

_b._ Mix the several waters employed in the preceding process, and set
them aside in a tall vessel, to deposit the suspended portion (STARCH).
After a sufficient time pour off the clear liquid, and throw the whole of
the sediment on a weighed paper filter, placed in a funnel, observing to
remove the portion adhering to the bottom of the vessel by means of a
little clean water, that none may be lost.

_c._ Evaporate the decanted liquid, as well as what runs from the filter,
until it becomes curdy, then filter it through a piece of weighed blotting
paper, and preserve the sediment (ALBUMEN); next evaporate the residuum to
the consistence of a syrup, agitate it with 10 times its weight of
alcohol, and filter, observing to wash the paper filter clean with a
little alcohol after the solution has passed through it. The substance on
the paper is PHOSPHATE OF LIME and GUM, and must be set aside. By
subsequent digestion in water, filtration, and evaporation, the two may be
obtained separately.

_d._ Evaporate or distil off the spirit from the solution and washings, as
above; the residuum is SUGAR.

_e._ Dry the substances educed as above, by a gentle heat, and weigh them.
The weight of the albumen may be taken with that of the gluten, as it
possesses about the same nutritive value, and also because it has been
asserted by some persons that the former substance is in reality gluten,
and not albumen. By dividing the given weights by 10, the per-centage
value of the sample is obtained. The pieces of filtering paper employed
should be carefully dried and weighed before using them, and the same
degree of heat should be employed for this purpose as that to which they
will be afterwards exposed in the drying of the substances resulting from
the operations.

_Obs._ The above method of ascertaining the actual value of any sample of
flour as an article of food, though not strictly accurate, approximates
sufficiently to the truth for all practical purposes, and is well adapted
to the wants of the baker and large purchaser. In many cases it will only
be necessary to perform the first part of the process (_a_), which will
give the per-centage of the most important constituent of the flour; the
rest being of minor consequence.

In addition to what has been already stated in the article on BREAD, it
may be useful to mention that a pound of the best flour, from thoroughly
dried wheat, will take 10 fl. oz. of water to form it into ordinary dough,
or 9 fl. oz. to form it into bread dough. Under the old parliamentary
acts, a sack of flour (280 lbs.) was presumed to produce 80 loaves
(quartern or quarter-peck), the weight of which, within 48 hours after
being baked, was to be 4 lbs. 5-1/2 oz. each. At the present time fully 92
loaves, weighing 4 lbs. each, are produced by the London bakers from one
sack of flour, when honest weight is given; but as the latter is rarely
the case, and the bread is frequently 'slack' or 'under-baked,' and thus
contains more water than good bread ought to do, a much larger product is
commonly obtained. The dough loses about 1/7th of its weight in baking, if
in batches; but fully 1/6th, if baked in small loaves, and placed in the
oven separately. The best bread contains about 1/4-1/6th of its weight of
added water; and common bread, often much more than 1/4th. The proportion
of water in the London bread has greatly increased during the last few
years, owing to the introduction of the fraudulent plan of making the
dough with rice jelly or moss jelly. This is the reason why the bread of
some bakers suffers such a loss of weight in a few hours after being taken
from the oven. A 4 lbs. loaf of bread purchased from a baker at Lambeth,
after remaining on the sideboard of a sitting-room for 24 hours, was found
to have lost no less than 6-1/2 oz. by evaporation, and in two days longer
its interior cells were covered with green mould, and the whole was unfit
for food. The bakers, aware of these facts, are particularly careful not
to bake more bread than they can dispose of whilst 'new,' and are in the
habit of refusing to weigh their bread before selling it, when it is more
than 10 or 12 hours old, although they are liable to be 'fined' for such a
refusal. See BREAD, CAKES, FARINA, &c., also _below_.

=Flour, Baked.= _Syn._ FARINA TOSTA, F. TRITICI TOSTA, L. _Prep._ From
wheat flour, carefully baked in a 'slack' oven, until it acquires a
pale-buff hue. Astringent; used to make food for infants troubled with
diarrh[oe]a. See FARINA.

=Flour, Barley (Prepared).= _Syn._ FARINA HORDEI PREPARATA, L. _Prep._
(Ph. Bor.) From barley flour, compressed into a tin cylinder until the
vessel is 2-3rds full, which is then suspended at the upper part of a
still 2-3rds filled with water, and after the 'head' is fitted on, the
water is kept boiling for 30 hours (2 days of 15 hours each). Lastly, the
upper layer being removed, the rest is reduced to powder, and kept in a
dry place.

=Flour, Boiled.= _Syn._ TRITICINA, FARINA PREPARATA, L. _Prep._ From fine
flour, tied up in a linen cloth as tight as possible, and after it has
been frequently dipped into cold water, the outside of the cloth is
dredged over with flour, until a crust is formed round it, to prevent the
water soaking into it whilst boiling; it is then boiled for a long time,
and when cold, it is divided into small oblong pieces. For use, it is
reduced to powder, either by grinding or grating it, and is then prepared
like arrow-root. It forms a good diet for children, in diarrh[oe]a, &c.;
and as it may be easily prepared at home, it has the advantage of being
free from adulteration.

=Flour, Jones's Patent.= _Prep._ From kiln-dried flour, 1 cwt.; tartaric
acid, 10-1/2 oz.; mix thoroughly; after 2 or 3 days, add, of bicarbonate
of soda, 12 oz.; lump sugar, 1/2 lb.; common salt, 1-1/2 lb.; mix, and
pass the compound through the 'dressing-machine.' It is necessary that the
whole of the ingredients should be perfectly dry, and separately reduced
to fine powder before adding them to the flour. By simply mixing it with
cold water, and at once baking it, it produces light, porous bread.

_Obs._ We have already had occasion to pay a passing tribute to the
excellence and usefulness of Jones's Patent Flour.[314] It is, indeed,
invaluable to every household, as furnishing the means of producing, with
great economy, and extemporaneously, not merely cakes, puddings, pastry,
and fancy bread, but the 'staff of life' itself, household bread, of a
purity, flavour, and lightness, seldom, if ever, met with in that
purchased of the bakers.

=Flour, Sewell's Patent.= _a._ (No. 1.) Flour, 1 sack (280 lbs.);
hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.14), 45 oz.; mix, by adding the acid in a
'spray,'--_b._ (No. 2.) To the last, add (expertly) bicarbonate of soda,
39 oz.; mix thoroughly, and pass the whole through a sieve or 'dressing
machine.'

_Obs._ This flour is used as the last, to which, however, it is inferior
in quality. No. 1 will keep 5 weeks. No. 2 will keep a month. Jones's
flour will keep good in a dry place for years. If No. 1 is alone employed
for the dough, to each pound of the flour, 65 gr. of bicarbonate of soda,
with salt q. s., must be added. The patentee claims for his invention the
merit of the soda and acid being converted into culinary salt in the
process of making up the flour and baking the dough.[314]

[Footnote 314: See UNFERMENTED BREAD.]

=FLOWER DEW= (F. J. Weber, successor of Rau, Bamberg). A flat bottle with
the name of Rau moulded on it; its gross weight is more than 80 grammes,
but it contains scarcely 22 grammes of a nearly colourless but slightly
yellow fluid, consisting of a pleasant aromatic solution of oils of
bergamot, lemon, orange flowers, and rose in strong spirit.

=FLOWERS.= _Syn._ FLORES, L. These beautiful and fragrant ornaments of our
gardens and our dwellings are too highly esteemed by all classes of the
community to require anything in favour of their cultivation to be said
here. Our remarks will, therefore, chiefly refer to their collection,
improvement, and preservation.

'Full' or 'double flowers,' or those in which the internal organs become
petals, are so much more beautiful than the 'single flowers' of the
corresponding species and varieties, that their production, with tolerable
ease and certainty, has long been a desideratum with both the professional
and amateur florist. Various plans have been proposed having this object
in view, among which are the following:--1. The use of the best seed only,
but not before it is at least 3 or 4 years old. 2. The selection of the
outer row of seed only, and its careful preservation intact for at least 2
seasons before sowing it. We are assured that this method is particularly
successful with dahlias. 3. The removal of the plants to a shady situation
as soon as the flower-buds begin to develop themselves, and stinting them
with water and nourishment for a few weeks. In this method a few only of
the buds are permitted to mature; the rest being snipped off with a pair
of scissors as early as possible. 4. The use of small pots and a scanty
supply of water until the flowers are partly developed, when water is
supplied in abundance, with or without the addition of a little liquid
manure.

To hasten the blooming of flowers, it is a common practice with some
gardeners to grow them in as small pots as is consistent with their
healthy existence, and carefully to avoid transplanting them to larger
pots, for several weeks before their usual time of blossoming. A plant on
the point of flowering, if transferred to a larger pot and a richer soil,
immediately commences making roots and leaves, whilst the embryo flowers
either wholly decay, or their development is checked until the usual
season of their production has passed over.

The following liquid has been used with great advantage to promote the
vigorous growth and the early flowering of plants:--Sulphate or nitrate of
ammonia, 4 oz.; nitrate of potassa, 2 oz.; sugar, 1 oz.; hot water, 1
pint; dissolve and keep it in a well-corked bottle. For use, put 8 or 10
drops of this liquid into the water of a hyacinth glass or jar, for
bulbous-rooted plants, changing the water every 10 or 12 days. For
flowering plants in pots, a few drops must be added to the water employed
for them. The preference should be given to rain water for this purpose.
The fluid sold under the name of liquid guano may be used in the same
manner.

Flowers may be preserved in a fresh state for a considerable time, by
keeping them in a moist atmosphere. When growing on the parent stem, the
large amount of evaporation from the surface of their leaves is
compensated for by an equivalent proportion of moisture supplied by the
roots; but when they are plucked, the evaporation from the surface
continues, while the supply of moisture is cut off. To supply, in part,
this loss of moisture by evaporation, has arisen the almost universal
practice of placing flowers in water; but their mutilated stems possess a
far inferior power of sucking up fluids to that of the roots, and thus
their decay is only deferred for a time. To preserve them more
effectually, or at least to render their existence less ephemeral, we may
surround them with a moist atmosphere, by which the loss of water from the
surface of their leaves will be reduced to the smallest possible amount.
"It is now eighteen years ago since we first saw, in the drawing-room of a
gentleman, in the hot dry weather of the dog-days, flowers preserved day
after day in all their freshness by the following simple contrivance--A
flat dish of porcelain had water poured into it. In the water a vase of
flowers was set; over the whole a bell-glass was placed, with its rim in
the water. This was a 'Ward's case' in principle, although different in
its construction. The air that surrounded the flowers being confined
beneath the bell-glass, was kept constantly moist with the water that rose
into it in the form of vapour. As fast as the water was condensed it ran
down the sides of the bell glass back into the dish; and if means had been
taken to inclose the water on the outside of the bell-glass, so as to
prevent its evaporating into the air of the sitting-room, the atmosphere
around the flowers would have remained continually damp. We recommend
those who love to see plenty of fresh flowers in their sitting-rooms in
dry weather to adopt this method. The experiment can be tried by inverting
a tumbler over a rose-bud in a saucer of water." ('Gardener's Chron.')

Another method by which some flowers may be preserved for many months is
to carefully dip them, as soon as gathered, in perfectly limpid gum water,
and after allowing them to drain for 2 or 3 minutes, to set them upright,
or arrange them in the usual manner in an empty vase. The gum gradually
forms a transparent coating on the surface of the petals and stems, and
preserves their figure and colour long after they have become dry and
crisp.

Yet another method (given in the 'Pharmaceutical Journal') is as
follows:--"A vessel with a movable cover is provided, and having removed
the cover from it, a piece of metallic gauze of moderate fineness is fixed
over it, and the cover replaced. A quantity of sand is then taken
sufficient to fill the vessel, and passed through a sieve into an iron
pot, where it is heated with the addition of a small quantity of stearin,
carefully stirred so as to thoroughly mix the ingredients.

"The quantity of stearin to be added is at the rate of half a part to 100
parts of sand. Care must be taken not to add too much, as it would sink to
the bottom and injure the flowers. The vessel with its cover on and the
gauze beneath it is then turned upside down, and the bottom being removed,
the flowers to be operated upon are carefully placed on the gauze and the
sand gently poured in, so as to cover the flowers entirely, the leaves
being thus prevented from touching each other. The vessel is then put in a
hot place, such, for instance, as the top of a baker's oven, where it is
left for 48 hours. The flowers thus become dried, and they retain their
natural colours. The vessel still remaining bottom upwards, the lid is
taken off, and the sand runs away through the gauze, leaving the flowers
uninjured.

Faded flowers may be generally more or less restored by immersing them
half-way up their stems in very hot water, and allowing them to remain in
it until it cools, or they have recovered. The coddled portion of the
stems must then be cut off, and the flowers placed in clean cold water. In
this way a great number of faded flowers may be restored, but there are
some of the more fugacious kinds on which it proves useless.

Flowers may be produced in winter by taking up the plants, trees, or
shrubs in the spring, at the time when they are about to bud, with some of
their own soil carefully preserved around the roots, and placing them
upright in a cellar till Michaelmas; when, with the addition of fresh
earth, they are to be put into proper tubs or vessels, and placed in a
stove or hot-house, when they must be treated in the usual manner. By this
method, in the month of February, fruits or roses will appear. Flowers
sown in pots about Michaelmas may thus be made to bloom at Christmas.

The apparently instantaneous flowering of plants, exhibited a few years
ago by M. Herbert to an astonished audience, was, we believe, effected by
the heat generated by fragments of quicklime concealed in the mould close
to, but not in immediate contact with, the roots. The plants selected by
M. Herbert--a group of geraniums and a rose tree--were planted in two
rather deep boxes of garden mould, and were covered with glass shades. The
operator commenced by pouring over the roots, from a small watering-pot, a
liquid which, uniting to the ingredients already in the earth, caused a
great heat, as was shown by an intense steam or vapour, which was evolved
within the shades, and allowed, to some extent, to escape through a small
hole in the top, which at first was kept closed. The effect upon the
geraniums was certainly almost instantaneous; the buds beginning to burst
in about five or six minutes, and the plants being in full bloom within
ten minutes, when the blossoms were gathered by M. Herbert, and
distributed amongst the ladies present. With the rose tree the exhibitor
was less fortunate. The invention may prove useful where ladies require to
decorate their drawing-rooms or boudoirs with the beauties of the floral
world somewhat earlier in the season than they can otherwise be obtained.
It must not, however, be forgotten that the plants are, as it were,
parboiled during the process, and die after a few days.

As regards the sanitary value of flowers, Mantegazza, of Pavia, states
that ozone is generated in larger quantities by certain plants possessing
spicy aromatic odours, than by the action of electricity upon the air. He
says that in some plants this ozone is developed by the direct rays of the
sun, whilst in others the action, once begun in solar light, is continued
in darkness; and that cherry-laurel, clove, lavender, mint, lemon, fennel,
narcissus, heliotrope, hyacinth, mignonette, &c., all produce ozone
largely on exposure to the rays of the sun.[315] He also finds that whilst
the ozonigenic properties of flowers reside mainly in their perfumes, the
most odoriferous yielding the largest amount of ozone, certain others
possessing no particular perfume, have extraordinary ozonigenic power; as,
for instance, the sunflower, broad belts of which were planted by the late
Commodore Maury around the grounds of the national observatory at
Washington, to the effect of which he attributed the after immunity of his
family from intermittent fevers.[316]

[Footnote 315: The experiments of Mr Kingzetti on the limited oxidation of
essential oils, lead to the inference that instead of ozone, peroxide of
hydrogen is the body evolved.--ED.]

[Footnote 316: Recent researches seem to have shown that the hygienic
properties of the sun-flower, like those of the Eucalyptus, are chiefly,
if not wholly due to the power the plant possesses of abstracting enormous
quantities of moisture from the soil, and thus removing from certain
localities an active element in the production of malaria.--ED.]

The collection and preservation of flowers for medicinal purposes and
distillation, will be found noticed under VEGETABLES.

=Flowers, Artificial.= The beauty and value of these pleasing articles of
personal decoration mainly depend upon the taste and ingenuity of the
maker. The delicate fingers of woman, and her ready powers of imitation
and invention, combined with her natural affection for the chaste and
beautiful, have enabled her the more especially to excel in this
manufacture. The productions of the female artificial florists of the
French capital are justly admired everywhere.

The French employ velvet, kid, and fine cambric for the petals, and
taffeta for the leaves. Very recently thin plates of bleached whalebone
have been used with great success for some portions of artificial flowers.

As colours and stains, the following are employed in Paris:--

BLUE. Indigo dissolved in oil of vitriol, and the acid partly neutralised
with salt of tartar or whiting.

GREEN. A solution of distilled verdigris.

LILAC. Liquid archil.

RED. Carmine dissolved in a solution of salt of tartar, or in spirits of
hartshorn.

VIOLET. Liquid archil, mixed with a little salt of tartar.

YELLOW. Tincture of turmeric.

The above colours are usually applied to the petals with the fingers.

=Flowers.= _Syn._ FLORES, L. Among chemists, this term is applied to
various pulverulent substances obtained by sublimation, as flowers of
antimony, benzoin, zinc, sulphur, &c. The term has been discarded from
modern chemical nomenclature, but is still commonly employed in familiar
language and trade.

=FLUID CAM'PHOR.= _Prep._ (Sir J. Murray.) From camphor (in powder), 1
dr.; freshly precipitated carbonate of magnesia, 2 dr.; cold distilled
water, 1 pint; the solution is effected by forcing in carbonic acid gas
under pressure. Each fl. oz. contains 3 gr. of camphor, and 6 gr. of
carbonate of magnesia. See ESSENCE OF CAMPHOR.

=FLUID MAGNE'SIA.= _Syn._ LIQUOR MAGNESIAE CARBONATIS, L. M. BICARBONATIS,
L. The preparations sold under this name are mere solutions of freshly
precipitated carbonate of magnesia in water, formed by means of carbonic
acid gas, under powerful pressure, and long agitation. Those best known
are Sir J. Murray's and Mr Dinneford's, each fl. oz. of which is said to
contain about 17-1/2 gr. of the carbonate, but their actual richness in
the latter seldom exceeds 10 or 12 gr., and by the time they reach the
consumer is often as low as 5 or 6 gr. Recently precipitated carbonate of
magnesia placed in a bottle or other suitable vessel, which is then filled
by means of a soda-water apparatus with water fully charged with carbonic
acid gas, readily dissolves on slight and cautious agitation, and the
aerated water becomes saturated with magnesia. A scruple of carbonate of
magnesia put into a soda-water bottle, and thus treated, is all taken up
in from 20 minutes to half an hour, and the beverage continues beautifully
clear.

=FLUID-OZON= (J. Krohn, Munich, with a certificate from Justus von
Liebig). A mouth wash and toilet water. An aqueous solution of
permanganate of soda, 1 in 9, contaminated with traces of sodium sulphate
and chloride. (Wittstein.)

=FLUM'MERY.= A species of thick hasty-pudding made with oatmeal or rice,
flavoured with milk, cream, almonds, orange flowers, lemons, &c.,
according to fancy.

_Prep._ 1. (DUTCH FLUMMERY.) From blancmange and eggs, flavoured with
lemon peel and sweetened with sugar.

2. (FRENCH FLUMMERY.) From equal parts of blancmange and cream, sweetened,
and flavoured. The above are poured into forms, and served cold, to eat
with wine, spirit, cider, &c.

3. (A. T. Thomson.) Take oatmeal or groats, 1 quart; rub it for a
considerable time with hot water, 2 quarts; and let the mixture stand
until it becomes sour; then add another quart of hot water, and strain
through a hair sieve. Let stand till a white sediment is deposited,
decant the fluid portion, and wash the sediment with cold water. This is
now to be boiled with fresh water, until it forms a mucilage, stirring the
whole time. A light and nutritious food, during early convalescence.

=FLUOBORIC ACID.= _Syn._ BOROFLUORIC ACID. This may be easily prepared by
saturating hydrofluoric acid with boracic acid, keeping the mixture cool,
and then concentrating it in platinum vessels till dense fumes arise.

=FLUOHYDRIC ACID.= See FLUORIDE OF HYDROGEN.

=FLU'ORIDE OF HYDROGEN.= HF. _Syn._ FLUOHYDRIC ACID; HYDROFLUORIC ACID; A.
HYDROFLUORICUM, L. An acid composed of hydrogen and fluorine. It was
discovered by Scheele, but was first obtained in a pure state by
Gay-Lussac and Thenard, in 1810.

_Prep._ Pour concentrated sulphuric acid on half its weight of fluor spar,
carefully separated from siliceous earth, and reduced to fine powder. The
mixture must be made in a capacious leaden retort, and a gentle heat only
applied, and the evolved gas must be collected in a leaden receiver,
surrounded by ice.

_Prop., &c._ A colourless fluid below 59 deg. Fahr., which speedily evaporates
in dense white fumes when exposed to the air. Its affinity for water
exceeds that of sulphuric acid, and its combination with that fluid is
accompanied with a hissing noise, and a considerable increase of its sp.
gr. up to a certain point. It attacks glass and silica, for which reason
it cannot be preserved in glass vessels. Bottles of lead, silver,
platinum, or pure gutta percha, are used to keep it in. It is highly
corrosive, instantaneously destroying the skin on contact, and producing
deep and serious ulcerations; its vapour is pungent, irritating,
irrespirable, and poisonous. With the bases it unites to form FLUORIDES.

In the arts, hydrofluoric acid is used for etching on glass.

=FLU'ORIDES.= Compounds of fluorine with metals and other basic radicals.
The fluorides of the metals are, with the exception of those of the
alkaline metals, insoluble in water, while the fluorides of hydrogen,
boron, and silicon, are gaseous, condensing at a low temperature to
volatile liquids.

=FLU'ORINE.= F. _Syn._ FLUORINIUM, L. An element that has not yet been
isolated, owing to its attacking and combining with every element or
compound that at present has been exposed to it, except oxygen. It is
presumably gaseous, and of a pale greenish-yellow colour.

=FLU'OSILICIC ACID.= _Syn._ FLUORIDE OF SILICON AND HYDROGEN;
HYDROFLUOSILIC ACID. _Prep._ From powdered fluor spar, and siliceous sand
or powdered glass, of each 1 part; concentrated sulphuric acid, 2 parts:
mix in a glass retort, apply a gentle heat, and pass the evolved gas into
water through a layer of mercury. Decomposition ensues, silica being
deposited in a gelatinous state, and hydrofluosilicic acid or fluosilic
acid remains in solution. The acid liquor is used as a test for potassium
and barium, with whose salts it yields nearly insoluble precipitates.

=FLUX.= _Syn._ FLUXUS, FLUOR, L. In _medicine_, a term formerly applied to
several diseases attended with a copious discharge, as diarrh[oe]a (FLUX),
dysentery (BLOODY FLUX), English cholera (BILIOUS FLUX), fluor albus
(WHITE FLUX), &c. These terms are still current among the vulgar.

=Flux.= In metallurgy, &c., a term applied to various substances of easy
fusibility, which are added to others which are more refractory, to
promote their fusion.

_Prep._ 1. (BLACK FLUX.) Nitre, 1 part; crude tartar or cream of tartar, 2
parts; mix, and deflagrate, by small quantities at a time, in a crucible,
heated to dull redness. The product consists of carbonate of potassa,
mixed with charcoal in a finely divided state. Used for smelting metallic
ores. It exercises a reducing action, as well as promotes the fusion. It
must be kept in a dry corked bottle.

2. (CHRISTISON'S FLUX.) Carbonate of soda (cryst.), 8 parts; charcoal (in
fine powder), 1 part; heat the mixture gradually to redness. For reducing
arsenic.

3. (CORNISH REDUCING FLUX.) Crude tartar, 10 parts; nitre, 4 parts; borax,
3 parts; triturate together.

4. (CORNISH REFINING FLUX, WHITE FLUX.) Crude tartar and nitre, equal
parts, deflagrated together. See BLACK FLUX.

5. (CRUDE FLUX.) Same as BLACK FLUX, omitting the deflagration. Reducing.

6. (FRESENIUS'S FLUX.) Carbonate of potassa (dry), 3 parts; cyanide of
potassium, 1 part. For the arsenical compounds.

7. (LIEBIG'S FLUX.) Carbonate of soda (dry) and cyanide of potassium,
equal parts. As the last. See ARSENIOUS ACID.

8. (MORVEAU'S REDUCING FLUX.) Powdered glass (free from lead), 8 parts;
calcined borax and charcoal, of each, 1 part; all in fine powder, and
triturated well together. Used as BLACK FLUX.

9. (WHITE FLUX.) See _above_.

10. (FLUXES FOR ENAMELS.) See ENAMELS.

11. (Various.) Borax, tartar, nitre, sal-ammoniac, common salt, limestone,
glass, fluor spar, and several other substances, are used as fluxes in
_metallurgy_.

_Obs._ On the large scale, crude tartar is employed in the preparation of
fluxes; on the small scale, commercial cream of tartar or bitartrate of
potassa.

=FLY.= The common house-fly (_Musca domestica_) causes considerable
annoyance to the person in hot weather, as well as damage to handsome
furniture, especially to picture frames, gilding, and the like. The best
way to exterminate them is to expose on a plate one or other of the
mixtures given under FLY POISON (_below_). The blow-fly (_Musca
vomitoria_), and other insects, may be kept from attacking meat by dusting
it over with black pepper, powdered ginger, or any other spice, or by
skewering a piece of paper to it on which a drop or two of creasote has
been poured. The spices may be readily washed off with water before
dressing the meat.

It is a fact not generally known, that flies will not pass through a
netting made of fine silk, thread, or wire, even though the meshes may be
an inch apart, unless there is a window or light behind it. This affords
us a ready means of excluding these insects from all our apartments which
have windows only on one side of them, without keeping the latter closed.
It is merely necessary to have an ornamental netting stretched across the
opening, when, although flies may abound on the outside, none will venture
into the room so protected. If, however, there is a window on the other
side of the room, they will fly through the netting immediately. See
_below_.

=Fly-blow in Sheep.= Oil of turpentine, 3 oz.; oil of amber, 1 oz.;
corrosive sublimate, 1 dr. The sublimate must be first dissolved in a pint
of whey, and then mixed with the oils.

=Fly Papers.= Those papers which, a few years ago, were sold about the
streets of London by harsh-voiced cries of "Catch 'em alive-oh!" and which
might be seen in many shop-windows covered with dead and dying flies, were
prepared by rubbing factitious birdlime over sheets of paper. It would be
difficult to conceive a more cruel or more offensive mode of catching
flies than that of glueing their living bodies to an adhesive surface. A
preferable kind of fly-paper is that called 'PAPIER MOURE,' which contains
a large quantity of arsenic in its substance.[317] This paper is kept wet
when in use, and the flies, by sipping the moisture, are poisoned.

[Footnote 317: Mr Plowman, in a letter to the 'Pharm. Journ.,' June 22nd,
1878, says that in a specimen of "Papier Moure" examined by him he failed
to detect the least trace of arsenic.]

=Fly Poison.= _Prep._ 1. A strong solution of white arsenic (say 1 dr. to
the pint), sweetened with moist sugar, treacle, or honey. Sold under the
name of 'FLY WATER,'

2. Treacle, honey, or moist sugar, mixed with about 1/12th their weight of
King's yellow or orpiment.

_Obs._ Both the above are dangerous preparations, and should never be
employed where there are children.

3. (Redwood.) Quassia chips (small), 1/4 oz.; water, 1 pint; boil 10
minutes, strain, and add of treacle, 4 oz. "Flies will drink this with
avidity, and are soon destroyed by it."

4. Black pepper, 1 teaspoonful; brown sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls; cream, 4
teaspoonfuls. See _below_.

=Fly Powder.= The dark grey-coloured powder (so-called 'sub-oxide')
obtained by the free exposure of metallic arsenic to the air. Mixed with
sweets, it is used to kill flies.

=Fly Water.= See FLY POISON (_above_).

=FOG.= The influence of very intense foggy weather upon the death-rate is
well illustrated by a reference to the Registrar-General's returns for
1873. From the 8th to the 12th of December of that year an unprecedently
thick fog prevailed in London. The mortality in the metropolis for the
week ending December 6th was twenty-three persons per thousand; in the
week following, during which the fog occurred, the death-rate rose to
twenty-seven; and in the week after that, when the full effects of the fog
could be estimated, the deaths were found to be thirty-eight in the
thousand. In the same periods the deaths from phthisis and diseases of the
respiratory organs were respectively 520, 764, and 1112. That this
increased death-rate was not the result of the inclement weather by which
the fog was accompanied is evidenced by the circumstance that in large
provincial towns, where the weather was equally severe, but in which no
fog occurred, the increase in the mortality, when compared to London, was
slight.

The mean of the deaths registered in London, in the two weeks ending
December 20th, showed an increase of 41 per cent. upon the number returned
in the first week of the month; whilst during the same date the deaths in
seventeen large English towns were only 8 per cent. This fatal fog
occurred during the London cattle-show week, and killed a great number of
the animals sent for exhibition.

In a specimen of the air of Manchester, obtained during the visitation of
that city by a very dense fog, Dr Angus Smith discovered it contained a
diminished amount of oxygen when compared with a favorable sample of air.

=FOILS.= These are thin leaves of polished metal, placed under precious
stones and pastes, to heighten their brilliancy, or to vary the effect.
Foils were formerly made of copper, tinned copper, tin, and silvered
copper, but the last is the one wholly used for superior work at the
present day.

Foils are of two descriptions:--white, for diamonds and mock diamonds,
and--coloured, for the coloured gems. The latter are prepared by
varnishing or lacquering the former. By their judicious use the colour of
a stone may often be modified and improved. Thus, by placing a yellow foil
under a green stone that turns too much on the blue, or a red one under a
stone turning too much on the crimson, the hues will be brightened and
enriched in proportion.

_Prep._ 1. (CRYSTAL, DIAMOND, or WHITE FOIL.)--_a._ This is made by
coating a plate of copper with a layer of silver, and then rolling it into
sheets in the flatting mill. The foil is then highly polished, or covered
with crystal varnish.

_b._ The inside of the socket in which the stone or paste is to be set is
covered with tin foil, by means of a little stiff gum or size; when dry,
the surface is polished and the socket heated, and whilst it is warm,
filled with quicksilver; after repose for two or three minutes the fluid
metal is poured out, and the stone gently fitted in its place; lastly, the
work is well fitted round the stone, to prevent the alloy being shaken
out.

_c._ The bottom of the stone is coated with a film of real silver, by
precipitating it from a solution of the nitrate in spirit of ammonia, by
means of the oils of cassia and cloves.[318] This method vastly increases
the brilliancy both of real and factitious gems, and the work is very
permanent.

[Footnote 318: See SILVERING.]

2. (COLOURED FOILS.) The following formulae produce beautiful coloured
effects, when judiciously employed:--

_a._ (Amethyst.) Lake and Prussian blue, finely ground in pale drying oil.

_b._ (Blue.) Prussian blue (preferably Turnbull's), ground with pale,
quick-drying oil. Used to deepen the colour of sapphires.

_c._ (Eagle marine.) Verdigris tempered in shell-lac varnish (alcoholic),
with a little Prussian blue.

_d._ (Garnet.) Dragon's blood dissolved in rectified spirit of wine.

_e._ (Vinegar garnet.) Orange lake finely tempered with shell-lac varnish.

_f._ (Green.)--[Greek: a]. From pale shell-lac, dissolved in alcohol
(lacquer), and tinged green by dissolving verdigris or acetate of copper
in it.

[Greek: b]. From sesquiferrocyanide of iron and bichromate of potassa, of
each 1/2 oz.; ground to an impalpable powder, first alone, and then with
gum mastic (clean and also in fine powder), 2 oz.; a little pyroxilic
spirit is next added, gradually, and the whole again ground until the mass
becomes homogeneous and of a fine transparent green. The beauty increases
with the length of the grinding. The predominance of the bichromate turns
it on the yellowish green; that of the salt of iron on the bluish green.
For use it is to be thinned with pyroxilic spirit. ('Chem.,' iii, 231.)
Used for emeralds.

_g._ (Red.) Carmine, dissolved in spirit of hartshorn, or in a weak
solution of salt of tartar, and a little gum (dissolved) added.

_h._ (Ruby.)--[Greek: a]. From lake or carmine, ground in isinglass.

[Greek: b]. Lake ground in shell-lac varnish. Both are used when the
colour turns on the purple.

[Greek: g]. From bright lake ground in oil. Used when the colour turns on
the scarlet or orange.

_i._ (Yellow.)--[Greek: a]. Various shades of yellow may be produced by
tinging a weak alcoholic solution of shell-lac or mastic, by digesting
turmeric, annotta, saffron, or socotrine aloes in it. The former is the
brightest, and is used for topazes.

[Greek: b]. From hay saffron digested in 5 or 6 times its weight of
boiling water until the latter becomes sufficiently coloured, and a little
solution of gum or isinglass added to the filtered liquor. When dry, a
coating of spirit varnish is applied.

_Obs._ By the skilful use of the above varnishes, good imitations of the
gems may be cheaply made from transparent white glass or paste; and by
applying them to foils set under coloured pastes (FACTITIOUS GEMS), a
superior effect may be produced. The pigments employed must be reduced to
the finest state possible by patient grinding, as without this precaution
transparent and beautiful shades cannot be formed. The palest and cleanest
mastic and lac, dissolved in alcohol, and also the palest and quickest
drying oil should alone be used when these substances are ordered. In
every case the colour must be laid on the foil with a broad soft brush;
and the operation should be performed, if possible, at once, as no part
should be crossed, or twice gone over, whilst wet. If the colour turns out
too pale, a second coat may be given when the first one has become quite
dry, but this practice should be avoided if possible.

=FOMENTA'TION.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO, FOMENTUM, FOTUS, L. A liquid, either
simple or medicated, used for local bathing. Fomentations are
distinguished from lotions chiefly in being applied in a heated state, and
in larger quantities, and for a longer period at a time.

Fomentations are chiefly employed to allay pain or irritation, or to
promote suppuration or the healthy action of the parts. As the intention
is to convey heat, combined with moisture, to the part fomented, the
utmost care must be taken to manage the application so as to promote the
object in view as much as possible. Flannel cloths wrung out of the hot or
boiling liquid, by means of two sticks, turned in opposite directions,
form the best vehicles for fomentations. If they are shaken up, and laid
lightly over the part, they involve a considerable quantity of air, which,
being a bad conductor, retains the heat in them for a considerable time.
"In every process of fomenting there should be two flannels, each (say)
three yards long, with the ends sewed together, to admit of the boiling
water being wrung out of them; and the one flannel should be got ready
whilst the other is applied. The fineness or the coarseness of the flannel
is not a matter of indifference. The coarser it is the less readily does
it conduct heat, and the longer it retains its warmth; therefore it is
more efficient for fomenting. White flannel also retains the heat longer
than coloured flannel." (Dr R. E. Griffith.) More harm than good is
frequently done by allowing the patient to become chilled during the
application. "If only one (flannel) is used, the skin becomes chilled
during the time occupied in removing the flannel, soaking it in the water,
wringing it out, and reapplying it; but if two are used, one of them is
ready, and can be applied the moment the other is taken off, by which
means the part is never exposed to the air, no matter how long the
fomentation is continued. In some diseases (rheumatism, peritonitis, &c.),
the patient is scarcely conscious of a degree of heat which scalds the
nurse's hands. In this case the fomenting flannels should be put in a
towel, by which means they may be wrung out without being handled by the
nurse, and may be applied far hotter than can be done by any other
method." (Dr J. B. Nevins.)

The quantity of liquid forming a fomentation, as well as the size of the
cloths employed, must entirely depend upon circumstances. In some cases
(as in slight affections of the face, &c.) the application may be
effectually made by holding the part in the steam of the hot liquid, and
bathing it continually by means of a sponge or cloth. In some instances
1/2 pint to a pint of liquid may be found a sufficient quantity; whilst in
others several quarts will be required. Under all circumstances, care must
be taken to keep the fomentation as near as possible at the temperature
ordered, during the whole time of its application; and, as soon as the
operation is finished, to quickly wipe the part dry, and to cover it with
ample clothing, in order that the reaction set up may not be prematurely
checked.

Fomentations usually consist of simple water, or the decoction of some
simple vegetable substance, as chamomiles, elder flowers or mallows; but,
occasionally, the leaves and flowers of aromatic and narcotic plants, and
saline matter, are employed under this form. The following formulae are
given as examples:--

=Fomentation, Acetic.= _Syn._ FOTUS ACETICUS (Paris Codex). Fomentations
of vinegar are sometimes prepared with white, with rose, or with aromatic
vinegar (Paris Codex) in the proportion of one of vinegar to four of
water.

=Fomentation, An'odyne.= _Syn._ FOTUS ANODYNUS, FOMENTATIO ANODYNA,
FOMENTUM ANODYNUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Simple decoction of poppy-heads.

2. (Hosp. F.) Poppy-heads (without the seeds), 1-1/2 oz.; water, 3-1/2
pints; boil to 2-1/2 pints; add of elder flowers, 3/4 oz.; boil to a quart
and strain. Used to allay pain.

3. (Pierquin.) Opium, 1 oz.; wine, 1 quart; boil to a pint and strain.
Used in severe gouty, rheumatic, neuralgic, and syphilitic pains.

4. Opium, 1 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to 3/4 pint, add pyroligneous acid,
2 fl. oz.; boil for 10 minutes longer, then further add of sherry wine,
3/4 pint; and as soon as the whole again boils, strain it for use.
Superior to the last, and cheaper.

=Fomentation, Antineural'gic.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO ANTINEURALGICA, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Mialhe.) Acetate of morphia, 2 gr.; acetic acid, 2 or 3 drops;
eau de Cologne, 2 or 3 dr.; dissolve. In facial neuralgia.

2. (Trousseau and Reveil.) Cyanide of potassium, 1 dr.; distilled water, 6
fl. oz.; dissolve and keep it in a well-closed bottle in the dark. Used in
neuralgia, especially in that of the face (tic douloureux). A compress of
lint or soft linen is dipped in it and applied to the part. It must not be
used internally or applied to a wounded surface, as it is very poisonous.
See FOMENTATIONS, ANODYNE, Nos. 3 and 4 (above), also FOMENTATION,
STIMULANT.

=Fomentation, Antiseptic.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO ANTISEPTICA, L. _Prep._ 1.
Decoction of mallows, 4 pints; sal ammoniac, 2 oz.; dissolve, and add of
disulphate of quinine, 20 gr., dissolved in camphorated spirit, 4 fl. oz.

2. (Hosp. F.) Decoction of bark, 1 quart; infusion of chamomile, 1 pint;
camphorated spirit, 2 fl. oz.; hydrochloric acid, 1 fl. dr. Both are used
when there is a tendency to gangrene or putrescence.

=Fomentation of Ar'nica.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO ARNICAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Flowers
of arnica, 1 oz.; water, 3 pints; boil to a quart, and strain. Used in
contusions.

2. (Graefe.) Flowers of arnica, 2 oz.; rue (leaves), 1 oz.; boiling water,
q. s. to strain 12 fl. oz. of infusion after an hour's maceration at
nearly the boiling temperature. Used in contusions and extravasations,
especially as an application to black eyes.

3. (Radius.) Flowers of arnica, 1/2 oz.; boiling vinegar, q. s. to strain
6 fl. oz. of infusion, in which dissolve of carbonate of ammonia, 2 dr.
Used in [oe]dema of the scrotum.

=Fomentation, Aromat'ic.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO AROMATICA, FOTUS AROMATICUS,
L. _Prep._ 1. Sea wormwood, southernwood, and chamomiles, of each 1 oz.;
laurel leaves, 1/2 oz.; water 5 pints; boil to half gall., and strain. In
rheumatism, cutaneous affections, colic, &c.

2. (Augustin.) Rosemary, 1/2 oz.; red wine, and water, of each 3 fl. oz.;
infuse and strain with expression. In contusions, especially black eyes.

3. (Hosp. F.) Cloves and mace, of each 1 oz.; opium, 20 gr.; red wine
(boiling), 1 pint; digest at near boiling for 1 hour, and strain. Used as
both the last.

4. (Rideau.) Bay leaves, rosemary, southernwood, and wormwood, of each 1
oz.; water, 2 quarts; boil 5 minutes, and strain. As No. 1.

=Fomentation, Astrin'gent.= _Syn._ FOTUS ASTRINGENS, F. ROBORANS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Decoction of oak bark.

2. To each quart of the last add of alum 1 dr.

3. (Ph. Chirur.) Bruised galls, 1 oz.; boiling water, 2-1/2 pints; digest
1 hour, and strain.

4. (Ricord.) Tannin, 2-1/2 dr.; aromatic wine (hot), 1/2 pint; dissolve.

5. Bistort and pomegranate peel, of each 2 oz.; sal ammonia, 1/4 oz.; red
wine, 1 pint.; infuse at a gentle heat. The above are used in haemorrhages,
piles, prolapsus, &c.

=Fomentation of Belladon'na.= _Syn._ FOTUS BELLADONNAE, L. _Prep._
(Ophthalmic Hosp.) Extract of belladonna, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint.
Used to dilate the pupil in certain affections of the eye; it is usually
applied on the forehead.

=Fomentation of Bitter-sweet.= _Syn._ DECOCTUM DULCAMARAE, L. _Prep._
Bitter-sweet stalks, 10 dr.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, and
strain.

=Fomentation of Cham'omile.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO ANTHEMIDIS, L. _Prep._
Chamomiles, 2 oz.; water, 3 pints; boil 10 minutes, and strain with
expression. Emollient.

=Fomentation, Com'mon.= _Syn._ FOTUS COMMUNIS. (L. 1744.) _Prep._ Dried
southernwood, sea wormwood, chamomile, of each 1 oz.; dried bay leaves,
1/2 oz.; water, 5 pints; boil slightly, and strain.

=Fomentation, Compound of Hemlock.= (Guy's Hosp.) _Syn._ FOMENTUM CONII
COMPOSITUM. _Prep._ Dried hemlock, 2 oz.; dried chamomiles, 1/2 oz.;
boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; macerate for 2 hours, strain, and press.

=Fomentation, Diuret'ic.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO DIURETICA, L. _Prep._
(Trousseau.) Tinctures of squills and foxglove, of each 2 oz.; hot water,
6 fluid oz.; mix. Applied by lint or linen compresses to the insides of
the thighs, in dropsies, when the stomach will not bear diuretics.

=Fomentation of El'der Flowers.= _Syn._ FOTUS SAMBUCI, L. _Prep._ From
elder flowers, 1 oz.; boiling water, 2 quarts; digest in a hot place for 1
hour, and express the liquor. Emollient.

=Fomentation, Emol'lient.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO EMOLLIENS. L. _Prep._ 1.
Marshmallow root and poppy heads, of each 1 oz.; water, 3 pints; boil to a
quart, and strain.

2. (P. Cod.) Emollient herbs, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 quart; infuse 1
hour, and strain with expression. (See _above_.)

=Fomentation, Foxglove.= _Syn._ FOMENTUM DIGITALIS. Dried foxglove, 1 oz.;
boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; infuse, and strain.

=Fomentation of Galls.= _Syn_ FOMENTUM GALLAE. _Prep._ Bruised galls, 1/2
oz.; boiling water, 2 lbs.; macerate for an hour and strain.

=Fomentation, Narcot'ic.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO NARCOTICA, L. _Prep._ (P.
Cod.) Narcotic herbs, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; infuse as last.

=Fomentation, Poppy.= _Syn._ FOMENTUM PAPAVERIS. As DECOCTION OF POPPIES.

=Fomentation, Resol'vent.= _Syn._ FOTUS RESOLVENS, L. _Prep._ (Richard.)
Fomentation of elder flowers, 8 fl. oz.; liquor of diacetate of lead, 1/2
fl. dr.; mix. Used to discuss tumours, &c.

=Fomentation, Stim'ulant.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO STIMULANS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Sesquicarbonate of ammonia, 1 oz.; tincture of cantharides, 2 fl. oz.;
warm water, 1 pint.

2. Household mustard, 4 oz.; hot water, 1-1/2 pint; mix. Both the above
are rubefacient and counter-irritant, and excellent in rheumatism,
neuralgia, &c.

=Fomentation, Tannin.= _Syn._ FOMENTUM TANNINI. (Ricord.) _Prep._ Tannin,
2 dr.; aromatic wine, 8 oz.

=Fomentation, Ver'mifuge.= _Syn._ FOMENTATIO VERMIFUGA, FOTUS
ANTHELMINTICUS, L. _Prep._ Leaves and flowers of tansy, wormwood, and
chamomile, of each 3 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to 1-1/2 pint, and strain.
Applied to the abdomen, &c., in worms.

=Fomentation, Wine.= _Syn._ FOTUS VINOSUS (Par. Cod.) _Prep._ Red wine, 2
pints; honey 4 oz.

=FOOD.= _Syn._ CIBUS, MATERIA ALIMENTARIA, L. Anything which feeds or
promotes the natural growth of organic bodies, by supplying them with
materials which, by assimilation, may be converted into the substances of
which they are composed; or which, by its decomposition or slow
combustion, maintains the temperature, or some other essential condition
of life, at the proper standard. The numerous articles employed as food
are all compounds; and in many cases they consist of mechanical mixtures
or chemical combinations of two or more compounds. Organized matter, or
that which has possessed either animal or vegetable life, or which has
been produced by living organs, seems to be alone capable of assimilation,
to any extent, by the animal system; and hence it is from the organic
kingdom that our aliments are necessarily derived. Water, iron, earthy
phosphates, chloride of sodium, and other salts, which form the inorganic
constituents of the body, though not of themselves nourishing, are also
assimilated when taken in conjunction with organic aliments, and then
contribute essentially to nutrition. In the animal and vegetable
substances employed as food, these inorganic compounds are provided in
small but sufficient quantities to meet the requirements of the healthy
body, and in this state of combination alone can they be regarded in the
light of aliments. A complete consideration of this subject embraces, not
only all the substances used as food, but also those things which when
taken with them improve their flavour, promote their digestion, and render
them more wholesome and nutritive; and also their preparation for the
table in its various relations with health and disease.

The following 'BILLS OF FARE,' for which we are indebted chiefly to Soyer,
Rundell, and others, exhibit the various articles in season at different
periods of the year.

FIRST QUARTER. January.--Poultry and game: Pheasants, partridges, hares,
rabbits, woodcocks, snipes, turkeys, capons, pullets, fowls, chickens, and
tame pigeons.--Fish: Carp, tench, perch, lampreys, eels, cray-fish, cod,
soles, flounders, plaice, turbot, thornback, skate, sturgeon, smelts,
whitings, lobsters, crabs, prawns, and oysters.--Vegetables: Cabbage,
savoys, colewort, sprouts, leeks, onions, beet, sorrel, chervil, endive,
spinach, celery, garlic, scorzonera, potatoes, parsnips, turnips, brocoli
(white and purple), shalots, lettuces, cresses, mustard, rape, salsafy,
and herbs of all sorts (some dry and some green); cucumbers, asparagus,
and mushrooms are also to be had, though not in season.--Fruit: Apples,
pears, nuts, walnuts, medlars, and grapes.

February and March.--Meat, fowls, and game, as in January, with the
addition of ducklings and chickens.--Fish: As the last two months (cod is
not thought so good from February to July, although it is still sold at
the fishmonger's).--Vegetables: The same as the previous months, with the
addition of kidney-beans.--Fruit: Apples, pears, and forced strawberries.

SECOND QUARTER. April, May, and June.--Meat: Beef, mutton, veal, lamb, and
venison (in June).--Poultry: Pullets, fowls, chickens, ducklings, pigeons,
rabbits, and leverets.--Fish: Carp, tench, soles, smelts, eels, trout,
turbot, lobsters, chub, salmon, herrings, cray-fish, mackerel, crabs,
prawns, and shrimps.--Vegetables: As before; and in May, early potatoes
and cabbages, peas, radishes, kidney-beans, carrots, turnips,
cauliflowers, asparagus, artichokes, and numerous salads (forced).--Fruit:
(in June) strawberries, cherries, melons, green apricots, and currants and
gooseberries for tarts; pears, grapes, nectarines, peaches, and some other
fruit.

THIRD QUARTER. July, August, and September.--Meat, as before.--Poultry,
&c.: Pullets, fowls, chickens, rabbits, pigeons, green geese, leverets,
and turkey poults. Two former months, plovers and wheat-ears (in
September), partridges, geese, &c.--Fish: Cod, haddocks, flounders,
plaice, skate, thornback, mullets, pike, carp, eels, shellfish (except
oysters), and mackerel (during the first two months of the quarter, but
they are not good in August).--Vegetables: Of all sorts, beans, peas,
French beans, &c.--Fruit: (In July)--Strawberries, gooseberries,
pine-apples, plums (various), cherries, apricots, raspberries, melons,
currants, and damsons. (In August and September)--Peaches, plums, figs,
filberts, mulberries, cherries, apples, pears, nectarines, and grapes.
(During the latter months)--Pines, melons, strawberries, medlars, and
quinces. (In September)--Morella cherries, damsons, and various plums.

FOURTH QUARTER. October, November, and December.--Meat, as before, and doe
venison.--Poultry and Game: Domestic fowls, as in first quarter; pheasants
(from the 1st of October); partridges, larks, hares, dotterels (at the end
of the month), wild-ducks, teal, snipes, widgeon, and grouse.--Fish:
Dories, smelts, pike, perch, halibuts, brills, carp, salmon-trout, barbel,
gudgeons, tench, and shellfish.--Vegetables: (As in January),
French-beans, last crops of beans, &c.--Fruit: Peaches, pears, figs,
bullace, grapes, apples, medlars, damsons, filberts, walnuts, nuts,
quinces, services, and medlars. (In November)--Meat, &c.: Beef, mutton,
veal, pork, house-lamb, doe venison, and poultry and game as in the last
month.--Fish: As the last month.--Vegetables: Carrots, turnips, parsnips,
potatoes, skirrets, scorzonera, onions, leeks, shalots, cabbage, savoys,
colewort, spinach, chardbeats, chardoons, cresses, endive, celery,
lettuces, salad-herbs, and various pot-herbs.--Fruit: Pears, apples, nuts,
walnuts, bullace, chestnuts, medlars, and grapes. (In December)--Meat,
&c.: Beef, mutton, veal, house-lamb, pork, and venison.--Poultry and Game:
Geese, turkeys, pullets, pigeons, capons, fowls, chickens, rabbits, hares,
snipes, woodcocks, larks, pheasants, partridges, sea-fowls, guinea-fowls,
wild ducks, teal, widgeon, dotterels, dun-birds, and grouse.--Fish: Cod,
turbot, halibuts, soles, gurnets, sturgeon, carp, gudgeons, codlings,
eels, dories, and shell-fish.--Vegetables: As in last month. Asparagus,
&c., forced.--Fruit: As before, except bullace.

=Food, Inspection of.= The Public Health Act enacts that--

"Any medical officer of health or inspector of nuisances may at all
_reasonable times_, inspect and examine any animal, carcase, meat,
poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables, corn, bread, flour, or milk
exposed for sale, or deposited in any place for the purpose of sale, or of
preparation for sale, and intended for the food of man, the proof that the
same was not exposed or deposited for any such purpose, or was not
intended for the food of man, resting with the party charged; and if any
such animal, carcase, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables,
corn, bread, flour, or milk, appears to such medical officer or inspector
to be diseased, or unsound, or unwholesome, or unfit for the food of man,
he may seize and carry away the same himself or by an assistant, in order
to have the same dealt with by a justice." (P. H., s. 116.)

"If it appears to the justice that any animal, carcase, meat, poultry,
game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables, corn, bread, flour, or milk so
seized is diseased, or unsound, or unwholesome, or unfit for the food of
man, he shall condemn the same and order it to be destroyed, or so
disposed of, as to prevent it from being exposed for sale, or used for
such food; and the person to whom the same belongs or did belong at the
time of sale, or of exposure for sale, or in whose possession, or on whose
premises the same was found, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
L20 for every animal, carcase, or fish, or piece of meat, flesh, or fish,
or any poultry or game, or for the parcel of fruit, vegetables, corn,
bread, or flour, or for the milk so condemned, or at the discretion of the
justice, without the infliction of a fine, to imprisonment for a term of
not more than _three months_.

"The justice who, under this section, is empowered to convict the
offender, may be either the justice who may have ordered the article to be
disposed of or destroyed, or any other justice having jurisdiction in the
place." (P. H., s. 117.)

"Any person who in any manner prevents any medical officer of health or
inspector of nuisances from entering any premises and inspecting any
animal, carcase, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables,
corn, bread, flour, or milk exposed or deposited for the purpose of sale,
or of preparation for sale, and intended for the food of man, or who
obstructs or impedes any such officer or inspector, or his assistant, when
carrying into execution the provisions of this Act, shall be liable to a
penalty, not exceeding L5." (P. H., s. 118.)

"Any complaint made on oath, by a medical officer of health, or by an
inspector, or other officer of a local authority, any justice may grant a
warrant to any such officer, to enter any building, or part of a building
in which any such officer has reason for believing that there is kept or
concealed any animal, carcase, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit,
vegetables, corn, bread, flour, or milk which is intended for sale for the
food of man, and is diseased, unsound or unwholesome, or unfit for the
food of man and to search for, seize, and carry away any such animal, or
other article, in order to have the same dealt with by a justice under the
provisions of this Act.

Any person who obstructs any such officer in the performance of his duty,
under such warrant shall, in addition to any other punishment to which he
may be subject, be liable to a penalty not exceeding L20." (P. H., s.
119.)

=FOOL.= Cooks give this name to a species of jam made of boiled and
crushed fruit, mixed with milk or cream, and sweetened.

=Fool, Ap'ple.= From the peeled and cored fruit, placed in a jar, with
moist sugar, q. s. to render it palatable, and a very little cider or
perry; the jar is set in a saucepan of water over the fire, and the heat
continued until the apples become quite soft, when they are pulped through
a colander, and a sufficient quantity of milk, a little cream, and some
sugar, added to bring them to the proper 'palate.'

=Fool, Goose'berry.= From gooseberries, as the last. Those which are
unripe are generally preferred. These preparations, when nicely made, are
very pleasant and wholesome.

=FOOT (Human).= See FEET.

=FOOTS.= Coarse moist sugar. The scrapings of the sugar hogsheads, refuse
sugar, waste, and dirt, is also sold to the publicans under this name, who
use it in the adulteration of their beer; chiefly to make it stand more
water, and to impart 'briskness.'

=FORCE'MEAT.= _Syn._ FARCE, STUFFING. A species of sausage meat, either
served up alone, or employed as an ingredient in other dishes.

Mrs Rundell truly remarks that "at many tables, where everything else is
done well, it is common to find very bad forcemeat or stuffing." To avoid
this error, care should be taken to so proportion the ingredients that "no
one flavour should predominate; yet if several dishes be served the same
day, there should be a marked variety in the tastes of the forcemeats as
well as of the gravies. A general fault is, that the tastes of lemon peel
and thyme overcome all others; therefore they should only be used in small
quantities." Forcemeats should be just consistent enough to cut with a
knife, but not dry and heavy. Herbs are very essential ingredients; and it
is the copious and judicious use of them that chiefly gives the cookery of
the French its superior flavour. "To force fowls, meat, &c., is to stuff
them." (Mrs Rundell.)

=FOR'CING.= Horticulturists apply this term to the art of accelerating the
growth of plants, so as to obtain fruits or flowers at unusual seasons.
Dung-beds, bark-beds, and frames, pits, and houses, with glass roofs, are
commonly employed by the gardeners for this purpose.

=FORGERIES, PROTECTION FROM.= See PAPER, PROTECTIVE.

=FORMATE.= _Syn._ FORMIATE. Salts, in which one atom of hydrogen in formic
acid is replaced by a metal or other basic radical. They are best obtained
either by direct saturation of the acid, or by double decomposition; most
of them are very soluble, and are decomposed by hot oil of vitriol.
Formate of ammonium crystallises in square prisms; formate of sodium, in
rhombic prisms; formate of potassium is deliquescent, and crystallises
with difficulty; the formates of barium, calcium, magnesium, and
strontium, form small prismatic crystals; formate of lead assumes the
shape of small colourless needles, soluble in 40 parts of water; the
formates of cobalt, iron, manganese, nickel, and zinc, are easily
crystallisable, whilst that of copper forms very beautiful, large,
bright-blue rhombic prisms; formate of silver is less soluble than the
salt of lead, and is decomposed at a gentle heat.

=FORMIC ACID.= HCHO_{2}. _Syn._ HYDROGEN FORMIATE. An organic acid,
obtained by oxidizing many organic substances, and found in the red ant.

_Prep._ Sugar, 1 part; water, 2 parts; binoxide of manganese, 3 parts; mix
in a retort capable of holding fully 10 times the bulk of the ingredients,
and add, cautiously, oil of vitriol, 3 parts, diluted with an equal weight
of water; as soon as the first violent effervescence has subsided, heat
may be applied, and the product collected and purified, as below.

Formate of lead in fine powder is introduced into a long glass tube, one
end of which is connected with an apparatus evolving sulphuretted
hydrogen, and the other with a receiver. As soon as the salt is entirely
decomposed (blackened) a very gentle heat is applied, and the distilled
liquid collected; the product is, lastly, boiled for a minute or less, to
expel any adhering sulphuretted gas. This furnishes chemically pure formic
acid.

From wood spirit, 1 part; bichromate of potassium and sulphuric acid, of
each 3 parts; the sulphuric acid, diluted with an equal weight of water,
being gradually added last. A portion of wood spirit distils over with the
acid, and may be again treated with bichromate of potassium and sulphuric
acid, when a fresh portion of formic acid will be produced. This process
yields a large product.

_Prop., purific., &c._ The products of the above processes are limpid and
colourless; the stronger ones fume slightly in the air, and possess an
extremely penetrating odour. The acid obtained by the second process boils
at 209 deg. Fahr., crystallises in brilliant scales below 32 deg., and has the sp.
gr. 1.2353. Its vapour is inflammable, and burns with a blue flame. It is
extremely corrosive, and rapidly destroys the texture of living organic
substances. The products of the other processes are very dilute, and
possess the above properties in only a minor degree. They may all be
purified and concentrated by saturating them with pure carbonate of sodium
or of potassium, and after subjecting the liquid to a gentle heat for a
short time, and liberating the formic acid from the salt by means of
dilute sulphuric acid, finally submitting the mixture to distillation,
when the hydrated acid will come over perfectly pure.

Formic acid reduces the salts of mercury and silver, and forms salts with
the bases termed formiates.

Formic acid is readily distinguished from acetic acid, which in many
points it resembles, by heating it with a little solution of oxide of
silver or mercury; the metal is reduced, and precipitated in a pulverulent
state, while carbonic acid is extricated. The odours of the two acids also
vary.

=FORMICA.= _Syn._ THE ANT. The following are the principal species of the
genus _Formica_. _F. flava_, the yellow ant. Many careful observers say
this species keeps in its nest the _Aphis radicans_, which when its
abdomen is touched by the ant, excretes a saccharine substance on which
the ants feed. _F. rufa_, or large red ant, _F. fusca_; or brown ant,
_Polyergus rufescens_, and _F. sanguinea_. These two latter are sometimes
called amazon ants, from their pugilistic propensities. They have been
known to make regular raids against other species of ants, and to carry
off their larvae and pupae to their own nests, where they rear the insects
that come of them, and afterwards employ them as slaves, causing them to
excavate passages, to collect food, to carry larvae and (so dependent do
the masters become on the exertions of their bondsman) even to feed them;
it being a well-attested fact that the slave holders would starve if left
to themselves. See ANT.

=FORMOBENZOIC ACID.= (HC_{7}H_{6}O,CHO_{2}). _Syn._ FORMIATE OF HYDRIDE OF
BENZOYLE. MANDELIC ACID. When the distilled water of bitter almonds
(containing hydrocyanic acid and the essential oil) is boiled with
hydrochloric acid, a curious reaction occurs; the hydrocyanic acid is
decomposed--into ammonia which unites with the hydrochloric acid, and
formic acid which enters into combination with the oil of
almonds--producing a new body possessed of acid properties, and termed
_Formobenzoic acid_. On evaporating the solution the acid may be obtained
in mixture with ammonia hydrochlorate, from which it may be separated by
ether; the ethereal solution deposits it in rhomboidal tables. It has a
sour taste and is easily soluble in alcohol. When heated it fuses at a low
temperature, emitting an agreeable odour of hawthorn blossoms. (Miller.)

=FORM'ULA.= [L.] In _pharmacy_ and _medicine_, a short form of
prescription; a recipe. By chemists the term is applied to a grouping of
symbols, expressing the composition of a body; thus, HCl (standing for 1
atom of hydrogen united to 1 atom of chlorine) is the formula for
hydrochloric acid. A chemical formula is termed empirical when it merely
gives the simplest possible expression of the composition of the substance
to which it refers. A rational formula, on the contrary, aims at
describing the exact composition of molecule, or combining weight of the
substance, but stating the absolute number of atoms of such of the
elements essential to that object, as well as the mere relations existing
between them. The empirical formula is at once deduced from the analysis
of the substance, reckoned to 100 parts; the rational formula requires, in
addition, a knowledge of its combining quantity, which can only be
obtained by direct experiment, by synthesis, or by the careful examination
of one or more of its most definite compounds. Thus, the composition of
acetic acid is expressed by the formula CH_{2}O, which exhibits the
simplest relations of the three elements; if we want to express the
quantities of these, in atoms required to make up one molecule of acetic
acid, we have to adopt the formula C_{2}H_{4}O_{2} or HC_{2}H_{3}O_{2}.

=FOR'MYL.= _Syn._ FORMYLE. A hypothetical organic radical, having the
composition C_{2}H. Its existence was inferred from the constitution of
certain organic compounds which are now referred to the methyl-series.
Formic acid was supposed to be an oxide of formyl; and chloroform, the
terchloride of formyl.

=FOXGLOVE.= _Syn._ DIGITALIS (B. P.), L. A genus of plants belonging to
the natural order _Scrophulariacae_. The leaves of the uncultivated
'_Digitalis purpurea_,' or purple foxglove, are officinal in our
pharmacop[oe]ias. They must be gathered before the terminal flowers have
expanded. "The petiole and midrib of the leaf being cut off, dry the
lamina." (Phar. L.) The seeds (DIGITALIS SEMINA), which were ordered, as
well as the leaves, in former pharmacop[oe]ias, are said to be in many
points preferable to them. When good, the leaves are of a dull-green
colour, and possess a feeble narcotic odour, and a bitter, unpleasant
taste. Both the dried leaves and the powder should be preserved in corked
bottles covered with dark-coloured paper, or in well-closed tin canisters,
and kept in a dark cupboard; and the stock should be renewed yearly, as
age considerably diminishes the medicinal activity of digitalis.

_Action, uses, &c._ Foxglove is diuretic, sedative, and antispasmodic, and
exerts a specific action over the cerebro-spinal system, promoting the
functions of the absorbents, and reducing the force of the circulation in
a remarkable manner. It is administered in fevers and inflammations, to
reduce the frequency of the pulse, and to allay excessive vascular
excitement; in dropsy (unless the habit is full and pulse tight and
cordy), as a diuretic, either alone, or combined with squills, calomel,
salines, or bitters; in internal haemorrhages, as a sedative, when the
pulse is full, hard, and throbbing; in diseases of the heart and great
vessels, and in phthisis, to reduce the force and velocity of the
circulation; in epilepsy and insanity, to repress vascular excitement; and
in spasmodic asthma, scrofula, and several other diseases, with one or
other of the above intentions.

The greatest caution is required in the use of foxglove, as its effects
accumulate in the system, and the unwary practitioner is occasionally
surprised at the sudden demise of his patient, even after he has left off
the use of this drug.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr. to 1-1/2 gr., in powder, every 6
hours. See EXTRACT, INFUSION, TINCTURE, &c.

=FOX'ING.= See MALT LIQUORS.

=FRACT'URE.= _Syn._ FRACTURA, L. The breaking or disrupture of a bone.
When the bone is nearly divided into two parts, it is called a SIMPLE
FRACTURE; when the integuments are also lacerated, a COMPOUND FRACTURE;
and when the bone is splintered, a COMMINUTED FRACTURE.

=FRAGRANT PAIN-CURER= (Five-minute). Dr Walter Scott, New York. A remedy
to remove all kinds of pain in five minutes. A clear colourless fluid
containing ether, 6 grammes; glycerin, 21 grammes; common salt, 3.4
grammes; distilled water, 170 grammes. (Hager.)

=FRANK'INCENSE.= _Syn._ COMMON FRANKINCENSE; THUS (Ph. L.), L. The
turpentine which exudes from the bark of _Abies excelsa_ (Norway spruce
fir) and _Pinus palustris_ (pitch or swamp pine), hardened by the air.
(Ph. L.) The gum-resin olibanum, which is the produce of the _Boswellia
thurifera_, is the 'odorous frankincense' of commerce.

=Prepared Frankincense.= _Syn._ THUS PRAEPARATUM (Ph. L.), L. _Prep._ (Ph.
L.) Frankincense, 1 lb.; water, q. s. to cover it; boil until the resin is
melted, and strain through a hair sieve; when the whole has cooled, pour
off the water, and keep the frankincense for use. Resembles common resin
in its general properties.

=FRAX'ININ.= _Syn._ FRAXIN; FRAXINA, L. A peculiar bitter, neutral, and
crystallisable substance, soluble in boiling water, extracted from the
bark of _Fraxinus excelsior_, or common ash. It is febrifuge.

=FREC'KLES.= These are round or oval-shaped yellowish spots, similar to
stains, developed on the skin. There are two varieties--FRECKLES, or
SUMMER FRECKLES, resulting from the action of the sun and heat during the
summer season, and disappearing with the hot weather or exposure;
and--COLD FRECKLES, which occur at all times of the year. The former are
chiefly confined to persons of fair complexion, whilst the latter attack
persons of all complexions indifferently, and sometimes assume a lively
yellow or greenish colour.

_Treatment._ Common freckles may generally be removed by the frequent
application of dilute spirits, acids or alkaline solutions; the last two
just strong enough to prick the tongue. Cold freckles commonly occur from
disordered health, or some general disturbance of the system, to which
attention should be chiefly directed. In both varieties the solution of
bichloride of mercury (Ph. L.), or Gowland's lotion, will be found a most
useful external application. See _below_.

=Freckles, Lotion for.= _Prep._ 1. Bichloride of mercury, 5 gr.;
hydrochloric acid, 30 drops; lump sugar, 1 oz.; rectified spirit of wine,
2 oz.; rose water, 7 oz.; agitate together until the whole is dissolved.

2. Petals or leaves of red roses, 1 oz.; hot water, 12 fl. oz.; infuse an
hour, and strain, with expression, 1/2 pint; add of citric acid, 30 gr.;
dissolve, and in a few hours, decant and clear.

3. Rose leaves (dried), 1/4 oz.; lemon juice (freshly expressed) and rum
or brandy, of each 1/4 pint; digest 24 hours, and squeeze out the liquor
for use.

4. (Kittoe's.) Sal ammoniac, 1 dr.; spring water, 1 pint; lavender water
or eau de Cologne, 1/4 oz; mix. The above are applied with the fingers
night and morning, or oftener.

=Freckles, Pomade for.= _Prep._ 1. Citrine ointment, 1 dr.; simple
ointment, 7 dr.; otto of roses, 3 drops.

2. Elder flower ointment, 1 oz.; sulphate of zinc (levigated), 20 gr.; mix
by porphyrization, or by trituration in a wedgwood-ware mortar. Both the
above, applied night and morning, are excellent for either cold or summer
freckles.

=FREEZ'ING MIXTURES.= See ICE and REFRIGERATION.

FRENCH BER'RIES. _Syn._ PERSIAN BERRIES, AVIGNON B.; GRAINES D'AVIGNON,
Fr. The unripe berries or fruit of the _Rhamnus infectorius_. They are
imported from France and Persia; those from the latter country being
esteemed the best. Some writers state that the Persian berries are the
product of a distinct species, namely, _R. amygdalinus_. They are chiefly
used for dyeing morocco leather yellow. Their decoction dyes cloth,
previously mordanted with alum, tartar, or protochloride of tin, of a
yellow colour; with sulphate of copper, an olive; and with red sulphate of
iron, an olive-green colour.

=FRENCH POL'ISH.= Several varnishes are used under this name. That most
generally employed is a simple solution of pale shell-lac in either
methylated spirit or wood naphtha. Sometimes a little mastic, sandarac, or
elemi, or copal varnish, is added to render the polish tougher.

_Prep._ 1. From pale shell-lac, 5-1/2 oz.; finest wood naphtha, 1 pint;
dissolve.

2. Pale shell-lac, 3 lbs.; wood naphtha, 1 gall. Methylated spirit (68 o.
p.) may be substituted for the naphtha in each of the above formulae.

3. Pale shell-lac, 5 oz.; gum sandarac, 1 oz.; spirit (68 o. p.), 1 pint.

4. Pale shell-lac, 5-1/2 oz.; gum elemi, 3/4 oz.; spirit, 1 pint.

5. Pale shell-lac, 1-1/4 lbs.; mastic, 1/4 lb.; spirit, 2 quarts.

6. Pale shell-lac, 2-1/4 lbs.; mastic and sandarac, of each 3 oz.; spirit,
1 gall.; dissolve, add copal varnish, 1 pint, and mix by roughly agitating
the vessel. All the above are used in the manner described below.

7. Shell-lac, 12 oz.; wood naphtha, 1 quart; dissolve, and add of linseed
oil, 1/2 pint.

8. Shell-lac, 1/2 lb.; gum sandarac, 1/4 lb.; spirit, 1 quart; dissolve,
add of copal varnish, 1/4 pint; mix well, and further add of linseed oil,
1/2 pint. The last two require no oil on the rubber.

_Obs._ The preparation of French polish is precisely similar to that of
other spirit or naphthalic varnishes. Sometimes it is coloured, in order
to modify the character of the wood. A REDDISH TINGE is given with
dragon's blood, alkanet root, or red sanders wood; and a YELLOWISH TINGE,
by turmeric root or gamboge. When it is simply desired to DARKEN the wood,
brown shell-lac is employed to make the polish; and when the object is to
keep the wood LIGHT COLOURED, a little oxalic acid (2 to 4 dr. to the
pint) is commonly added. These substances are either steeped in or
agitated with the polish, or with the solvent, before pouring it on the
'gums,' until they dissolve, or a sufficient effect is produced. French
polish is not required to be so clear and limpid as other varnishes, and
is, therefore, never artificially clarified. See VARNISH, and _below_.

=FRENCH POL'ISHING.= This process, now so generally employed for furniture
and cabinet work, is performed as follows:--The surface to be operated on
being finished off as smoothly as possible with glass paper, and placed
opposite the light, the 'rubber' being made as directed below, and the
polish (see above) being at hand, and preferably contained in a
narrow-necked bottle, the workman moistens the middle or flat face of the
rubber with the polish, by laying the rubber on the mouth of the bottle
and shaking up the varnish against it, once, by which means the rubber
imbibes the proper quantity to cover a considerable extent of surface. He
next encloses the rubber in a soft linen cloth, doubled, the rest of the
cloth being gathered up at the back of the rubber to form a handle. The
face of the linen is now moistened with a little raw linseed oil, applied
with the finger to the middle of it, and the operation of polishing
immediately commenced. For this purpose the workman passes his rubber
quickly and lightly over the surface uniformly in one direction, until the
varnish becomes dry, or nearly so, when he again charges his rubber as
before, omitting the oil, and repeats the rubbing, until three coats are
laid on. He now applies a little oil to the rubber, and two coats more are
commonly given. As soon as the coating of varnish has acquired some
thickness, he wets the inside of the linen cloth, before applying the
varnish, with alcohol, or wood naphtha, and gives a quick, light, and
uniform touch over the whole surface. The work is, lastly, carefully gone
over with the linen cloth, moistened with a little oil and rectified
spirit or naphtha, without varnish, and rubbed, as before, until dry.

The RUBBER for French polishing is made by rolling up a strip of thick
woollen cloth (list) which has been torn off, so as to form a soft elastic
edge. It should form a coil, from 1 to 3 inches in diameter, according to
the size of the work.

=FRES'CO-PAINTING.= See PAINTING.

=FRICANDEAU.= [Fr.] Among _cooks_, a ragout, or fricassee of veal. The
same term is also sometimes applied to stewed beef, highly seasoned.

=FRICASSEE.= [Fr.] A dish prepared by stewing or semi-frying, highly
flavoured with herbs, spices, or sauce. Small things, as chickens, lamb,
&c., and cold meat, are usually formed into fricassees.

=FRIC'TION=. In a general sense, the act of rubbing one body against
another; attrition.

=Friction.= In _mechanics_ this is the resistance which the surface of a
moving body meets with from the surface of the body on which it moves. To
lessen the amount of friction in machines, various unctuous substances, as
oil, tallow, soap, black-lead, &c., are used by engineers. These
substances act by imparting smoothness to the points of contact, and thus
reduce their resistance to each other. The full consideration of the
subject belongs to engineering.

=Friction.= In _medicine_, friction, whether simple or conjoined with
liniments, is a therapeutical agent of considerable power. By it the
circulation is promoted in debilitated parts, and medicinal substances
(iodine, mercurials, opium, &c.) are made to penetrate the pores of the
skin. "The benefit of friction, which consists of motion and heat, whether
or not the same be raised by rubbing the body with a coarse cloth or the
flesh-brush, has advantages inconceivable and scarcely credible, by which
the obstructions of the pores and cutaneous glandules are opened, their
stagnating juices broken into small particles, dissolved, and rendered fit
to be carried off in perspiration, in the room of which, as my Lord
Verulam well observes, new juice will succeed with new vigour to the body;
and longevity, saith that great naturalist, is this way most certainly
promoted" (Daniel Turner).

Simple friction is performed by the hand alone, or with a piece of
flannel, a hair glove, or a flesh-brush. "If it be properly
performed--namely, by short, brisk strokes with the tips of the fingers,
and with great celerity, when the naked hand is the agent; and if it be
continued for an hour or upwards, and repeated several times a day--its
influence in reducing swelled glands and swellings of the joints, as well
as in alleviating rheumatic pains, is very great; but, besides being well
performed, the friction should be continued for (at least) half an hour,
in order to render it useful." (Dr R. E. Griffith.)

Gentle, slow, and equable friction, by producing a continued repetition of
an agreeable impression on the nervous system, acts both as an anodyne and
hypnotic. For this purpose "the operator should sit by the side of the
bed, and introducing the hand under the bedclothes, rub the legs or the
arms (or other parts) gently with equally lengthened but slow movements.
When the invalid is a child, its influence is more powerful when aided by
a monotonous, but a soft tune, which, although it operates upon a distinct
sense, yet, by combination, renders the friction more soporific."
(Griffith.)

When the friction is accompanied with the use of any acrid or irritating
substance, or is intended to introduce any active remedy into the system,
the rubbing should be brisk, and of sufficient force to slightly abrade
and inflame the cuticle; and should be continued until the substance,
which is usually in the form of an ointment, either wholly or partially
disappears, owing to its absorption by the skin. The hand of the operator
should, in most cases, be guarded by a glove; otherwise he is likely to
share with the patient the effects of the medicine, a result not always
agreeable or even safe.

=FRIGORIFIC MIXTURES.= See REFRIGERATION.

=FRIT.= The pulverulent materials of glass, heated until they coalesce
without melting. See ENAMEL, GLASS, &C.

=FRIT'TERS.= Fried batter. A species of pancake, containing fruit,
sweetmeats, poultry, meat, or fish.

_Prep._ 1. (M. Alexis Soyer.) "The following is thirty receipts in
one:"--Soak crum of bread, 1 lb., in cold water, q. s.; take the same
quantity of any kind of boiled or roasted meat (a little fat), and chop it
into fine dice; press the water out of the bread; put into the pan butter,
lard, or dripping, 2 oz., with chopped onions, two teaspoonfuls; fry two
minutes, add the bread, stir with a wooden spoon until rather dry, then
add the meat, and season with salt, 1 teaspoonful, pepper, 1/2 do., and a
little grated nutmeg if handy; stir till quite hot; then further add two
eggs, one at a time, mix very quickly, and pour it on a dish to cool; next
roll it into the shape of small eggs, then in flour, 'egg' them, and
bread-crum them; lastly, fry in abundance of fat to a nice yellow colour,
and serve either plain or with any sharp or other savory sauce you fancy.
Innumerable dishes can be made in this way; in fact, from everything that
is eatable, and at any season of the year--from the remains of meat,
poultry, game, fish, vegetables, &c. The same can be done with chopped,
dried, or preserved fruits, simply using a 1/4 lb. more bread, and sifting
powdered sugar and cinnamon over them. Cream may also be used for fruit,
or curds.

Fritters are also (and more commonly) fried in ordinary batter, instead of
bread-crumbs. "There is no end to what may be done with these receipts."
"They can be ornamented and made worthy the table of the greatest epicure
if the bread be soaked in cream, and spirits or liquor introduced into
them." (Soyer.)

2. Mrs Rundell:--_a._ (APPLE FRITTERS.) See FRUIT FRITTERS.

_b._ (BUCKWHEAT FRITTERS, B. CAKES, BOCKINGS.) Made by beating up
buckwheat flour to a batter with some warm milk, adding a little yeast,
letting it rise before the fire for 30 or 40 minutes, then beating in some
eggs and milk or warm water, as required, and frying them like pancakes.
Buckwheat fritters, when well prepared, are excellent. Made without eggs
and served up with molasses, they form a common dish in almost every
breakfast in North America.

_c._ (CURD FRITTERS.) From dried curd, beaten with yolk of egg and a
little flour, and flavoured with nutmeg.

_d._ (FRENCH FRITTERS.) Common pancakes, beaten up with eggs, almonds, and
flavouring sugar, orange-flower water, and nutmeg, and the paste dropped
into a stew- or frying-pan half full of boiling lard, so as to form cakes
the size of large nuts, which are cooked till brown.

_e._ (FRUIT FRITTERS.) From the sliced fruits, with rich batter.

_f._ (SOUFFLE FRITTERS.) Rich pancakes, flavoured with lemon.

_g._ (SPANISH FRITTERS.) From slices of French rolls soaked in a mixture
of cream, eggs, sugar, and spices, and fried brown.

=FROG.= The esculent variety, in Europe, is the common green or gibbous
frog, the _Rana esculenta_ of Linnaeus. As an aliment, it is much esteemed
on the Continent, the hind legs only being eaten. Its liver is among the
simples of the Ph. L. 1618, and was once considered a useful remedy in
certain forms of ague.

The Americans eat the bull-frog (the _Rana taurina_). This variety of the
edible frog, which is a native of the Northern States and is much prized
as a table delicacy, has been lately introduced into France by the Societe
d'Acclimatisation. Its flesh, when cooked, is said to have a taste very
like that of turtle. In South Africa, a large frog called Matlametlo is
eaten. Frogs are also favourite food with the natives of China and
Australia.

=FROG OINTMENT or Thrush Mixture.= Brown syrup, 90 grammes; verdigris, 6
grammes; strong acetic acid, 10 grammes; solution of perchloride of iron,
2 grammes. (Hager.)

=FROST-BITES.= When those parts of the body in which the circulation of
the blood is most languid are exposed to extreme cold, they quickly become
frozen, or, as it is called, 'frost bitten.' The fingers, toes, ears,
nose, and chin are most liable to this attack. The remedy is
long-continued friction with the hands or cold flannel, avoiding the fire,
or even a heated apartment.

=FROSTBEULENTINCTUR, FROSTBEULENWASSER--Chilblain Tincture, Chilblain
Water.= Manufactured by a chiropodist of Munich. It is a solution of 2
grammes zinc sulphate in 60 grammes water. (Wittstein.)

=FROSTSALBE--Frost Ointment= (Wahler, Kupferzell). Mutton tallow, 24;
hog's lard, 24; iron oxide, 4; heat it in an iron vessel, stirring
continually with an iron rod until the whole has become black; then add 4
parts Venice turpentine, 2 parts bergamot oil, and 2 parts Armenian bole
rubbed smooth with olive oil.

=FRUIT.= _Syn._ FRUCTUS, L. Among botanists this is the mature ovary or
pistil, containing the ripened ovules or seeds. In familiar language, the
term is applied to any product of a plant containing the seed, more
especially those that are eatable.

Fruits are extensively employed as articles of diet by man, both as
luxuries and nutriment. The fruit of the cereals furnishes our daily
bread; that of the vine gives us the well-known beverage, wine, whilst
other varieties enrich our desserts, and provide us with some of our most
valuable condiments and aromatics. The acidulous and subacid fruits are
antiseptic, aperient, attenuant, diuretic, and refrigerant. They afford
little nourishment, and are apt to promote diarrh[oe]a and flatulency.
They are, however, occasionally exhibited medicinally, in putrid
affections, and are often useful in bilious and dyspeptic complaints. The
farinaceous fruits (grain), as already stated, furnish the principal and
most useful portion of the food of man. The oleo-farinaceous (nuts, &c.)
are less wholesome and less easy of digestion than those purely
farinaceous. The saccharine fruits, or those abounding in sugar, are
nutritious and laxative, but are apt to ferment and disagree with delicate
stomachs when eaten in excess. Stone fruits are more difficult of
digestion than the other varieties, and are very apt to disorder the
stomach and bowels.

As a rule, fruit should never be eaten in large quantities at a time, and
only when quite ripe. It then appears to be exceedingly wholesome, and to
be a suitable corrective to the grossness of animal food. It also
exercises a powerful action on the skin, and is a specific for scurvy in
its early stages. Many cutaneous diseases may likewise be removed by the
daily use of a moderate quantity of fruit, or other fresh vegetable food.
Cases are not uncommon which, after resisting every variety of ordinary
medical treatment, yield to a mixed fruit or vegetable diet.

Fruits should be gathered in dry weather, and preferably about noon,
because the dew and moisture deposited on them during the night and
earlier part of the morning has then evaporated. They should be quite ripe
when gathered, but the sooner they are removed from the tree after this
point is arrived at, the better. Immature fruit never keeps so well as
that which has ripened on the tree; and overripe fruit is liable to be
bruised and to lose flavour. The less fruit is handled in gathering the
better. Some of them, as PEACHES, NECTARINES, GRAPES, PLUMS, &c., require
to be treated with great delicacy, to avoid bruising them or rubbing off
the bloom. Some fruit, as a few varieties of APPLES, PEARS, and ORANGES,
&c., are gathered before they are fully ripe, in order that they may the
better undergo the perils of transit and storage.

_Pres._ Ripe fruits are commonly preserved in the fresh state by placing
them in a cool dry situation, on shelves, so that they do not touch each
other; or by packing them in clean, dry sand, sawdust, straw, bran, or any
similar substance, with like care, to preserve them from the action of air
and moisture. An excellent plan, commonly adopted for dessert fruit in
this country, is to wrap each separately in a piece of clean, dry paper,
and to fill small, wide-mouthed jars or honey-pots with them. The filled
pots are then packed one upon another (see _engr._) in a dry and cold
place (as a cellar), where the frost cannot reach them. The space (_a_)
between the two pots may be advantageously filled up with plaster of Paris
made into a paste with water. The joint is thus rendered air-tight, and
the fruit will keep good for a long time. The mouth of the top jar is
covered with a slate. For use, the jars should be taken one at a time from
the store-room as wanted, and the fruit exposed for a week or ten days in
a warm dry room before being eaten, by which the flavour is much improved.

[Illustration]

Fruit is preserved on the large scale for the London market by placing in
a cool situation first a layer of straw or paper, and so on alternately,
to the height of 20 or 25 inches, which cannot be well exceeded, as the
weight of the superincumbent fruit is apt to crush or injure the lower
layers. Sometimes alternate layers of fruit and paper are arranged in
baskets or hampers, which are then placed in the cellar or fruit-room. The
baskets admit of being piled one over the other without injury to the
fruit. The use of brown paper is inadmissible for the above purposes, as
it conveys its peculiar flavour to the fruit. Thick white-brown paper is
the cheapest and the best.

=Fruit Essences (Artificial).= These remarkable products first attracted
attention at the Exhibition of 1851. To speak somewhat generally, they are
mixtures of amylic, butyric, pelargonic, valerianic, and other ethers, in
alcohol. By judicious mixture, the flavour of almost any fruit can be more
or less perfectly imitated. The artificial essences are generally coloured
to represent the juice of the fruit from which they are supposed to be
derived. The ESSENCE OF JARGONELLE PEAR and the ESSENCE OF APPLE, which
are, perhaps, the best of all the artificial essences, are respectively
formed from the ACETATE and VALERIANATE OF AMYLE. See AMYLE, ESSENCE, &c.

=FRU'MENTY.= Wheat boiled in water until quite soft, then taken out,
drained, thinned with milk, sweetened with sugar, and flavoured with
nutmeg. When currants and eggs are added, it forms 'SOMERSETSHIRE
FRUMENTY,' Some persons boil the wheat like rice. "Eaten with milk, in the
evening, for some time, it will often relieve costiveness." (Griffith.)

=FRY'ING.= "The frying-pan is, without doubt, the most useful of all
kitchen implements, and, like a good-natured servant, is often imposed
upon and obliged to do all the work, while its companion, the gridiron, is
quietly reposing in the chimney corner." "The usual complaint of food
being rendered greasy by frying is totally remedied by sauteing the meat
in a small quantity of fat, butter, or oil, which has attained a proper
degree of heat, instead of placing it in cold fat, and letting it soak
while melting." "According to the (common) mode in which all objects are
cooked which are called fried, it would answer to the French word 'saute,'
or the old English term 'frizzle,' but to fry any object, it should be
immersed in very hot fat, oil, or butter." "To frizzle, saute, or, as I
will now designate it, semi-fry, is to place in the pan any oleaginous
substance, so that, when melted, it shall cover the bottom of the pan by
about two lines; and when hot, the article to be cooked is to be placed
therein. To do it to perfection requires a little attention, so that the
pan shall never get too hot. It should also be perfectly clean--a great
deal depends on this." (Soyer.)

According to the writer quoted above, a chop or steak, for frying, should
be chosen 3/4 of an inch thick, and should "never exceed one inch, nor be
less than half an inch, and to be as near as possible of the same
thickness all over." "An ill-cut chop (or steak) never can be but
ill-cooked; you can always equalise them (when badly cut) by beating them
out with a chopper."

"The motive of semi-frying food is to have it done quickly; therefore, to
fry a whole fowl, or even half (for example), is useless, as it could be
cooked in a different way in the same time; but to semi-fry a fowl (in
joints or pieces), with the object of having it quickly placed on the
table, in order to satisfy a good, and perhaps fastidious appetite, it
should be done in a similar way to that practised in Egypt some 3000 years
since, and of late years for the great Napoleon--that is, cooked in oil.
In France this dish is called '_Poulet a la Marengo_,' It is related that
the great conqueror, after having gained that celebrated victory, ate
three small chickens at one meal done in this way, and his appetite and
taste were so good, and he approved of them so highly, that he desired
that they may always be served in the same way during the campaign."

"For many objects I prefer the frying-pan to the gridiron; that is, if the
pan is properly used. As regards economy, it is preferable, securing all
the fat and gravy, which is often lost when the gridiron is used." "This
simple _batterie de cuisine_" may be employed "equally as well in the
cottage as in the palace, or in the bachelor's chamber as in the rooms of
the poor." (Soyer.)

=FUCH'SIN.= See TAR COLOURS.

=FUCUS'AMID, FU'CUSINE, and FU'CUSOL.= Compounds obtained by Dr Stenhouse
from several varieties of FUCUS by treatment with sulphuric acid, as in
the preparation of FURFURINE (which _see_).

=FU'EL.= Matter used for the production of heat by burning. The principal
substances employed as fuel are--ANTHRACITE, CHARCOAL, COAL GAS, COKE,
OIL, SPIRIT, PITCOAL, TURF, and WOOD.

The heating power of almost every description of fuel has been determined
by the direct experiments of Lavoisier, Regnault, Andrews, and others; the
general principle of their methods consisting in the use of an apparatus
wherein the entire heat of combustion was absorbed by a known weight of
water, the whole arrangement being protected from the influence of
external changes of temperature, and the increase of the temperature of
the water being known by the simultaneous indication of several delicate
thermometers suspended in it. The real value of such determinations is
simply relative. The imperfect character of most boiler and furnace
arrangements, and the large quantity of fuel which passes into the
'ash-pit' unconsumed, together with the irregular 'draught,' and the
amount of heat absorbed by excess of cold air, result practically in an
enormous loss of heating power, even under the most careful management.
The mechanical condition of a fuel must be considered in estimating its
value. In a series of trials instituted by the Government it was a _sine
qua non_ that the toughness of each kind of coal must be such, for naval
use, as to resist, without crumbling, the constant friction in the ship's
hold, at the same time that its 'fracture' must be such that it packs into
the smallest possible space.[319]

[Footnote 319: For full information on coal and other fuels, refer to
Ure's 'Dict. of Arts, Manufactures, &c.,' Percy's 'Metallurgy,' and Watt's
'Dict. of Chemistry.']

In the _chemical laboratory_ COAL GAS is now generally employed as fuel.
It is cheap and manageable, and, with proper apparatus, may be made to
supply almost any amount of heat. Where gas cannot be conveniently
procured, OIL and SPIRIT are used as fuel for lamps. See ANTHRACITE,
CHARCOAL, COKE, FURNACE, PITCOAL, &c., also _below_.

=Fuel, Econom'ical.= Various mixtures have been recommended under this
name. The following is one of the best:--

_Prep._ Small coal, charcoal, or sawdust, 1 part; clay, loam, or marl, 1
part; sand, or ashes, 2 parts; water, q. s.; make the mass up wet into
balls. For use, these balls are piled on an ordinary fire to a little
above the top bar. They are said to produce a heat considerably more
intense than that of common fuel, and ensure a saving of one half the
quantity of coals, whilst a fire thus made up will require no stirring,
nor fresh fuel for ten hours. The quantity of the combustible ingredient
in them should be doubled, when they are intended to be used with a very
little foundation of coal.

_Obs._ Of late years simple FIRE-CLAY BALLS have been much used for
radiating heat from parlour-grates, and so effecting saving in the
consumption of fuel. They are very useful for partially filling up those
roomy, old-fashioned, badly-constructed grates, which are still to be
found in many private houses.

PEAT and TURF, both recent and charred, are commonly used as fuel by the
lower classes, in neighbourhoods where they are plentiful. FIR CONES or
TOPS contain a great quantity of solid woody in addition to the resinous
matter, and are well adapted for domestic fires.

=Fuel, Prepared.= _Syn._ COMPRESSED FUEL, PATENT F., STEAM F. Many
artificial fuels are now in use. The greater number have one character in
common--they are composed of small coal cemented by some bituminous
matter. The following are the principal kinds:--

FUEL, ABERDARE PATENT STEAM. From the 'small' of the South Wales Steam
Coal mixed with coal, pitch, and compressed by hydraulic machinery. The
pitch is broken up, and thoroughly mixed with the small coal over a
furnace, in iron pans, in which shafts with obliquely attached blades are
continually revolving. The mixture is afterwards pressed into iron moulds
by a force equal to about 2-1/2 tons per inch. The weight of a cubic foot
of this excellent fuel is 80 lbs.; the space occupied by 1 ton, 28 cubic
feet.

FUEL, CASE AND MORRIS'S PATENT. From the 'small' of the 'best steam coal,'
ground moderately fine, treated so as to absorb a certain portion of
liquid coal tar, and then pressed by machinery into blocks. It is said to
occupy less space by about 10% than ordinary coal.

FUEL, GRANT'S PATENT. This is formed of coal dust, 1 cwt., and coal-tar
pitch, 20 lbs., melted together by a heat of 220 deg. Fahr., and moulded into
blocks the size of common bricks, under a pressure of 5 or 6 tons. These
are, lastly, whitewashed. It is heavier than common steam coal, and is
said to go fully one third further, by which facility of transport and
economy is combined.

FUEL, PURIFIED BLOCK. This is prepared by the torrefaction of washed coal
dust, and is said to possess in a remarkable degree the advantages of both
coke and steam coal.

=FU'LIGOKA'LI.= _Prep._ (Dr Polya.) Caustic potassa, 1 part; water, q. s.;
dissolve; add of wood soot, 5 parts; boil 1 hour, dilute with water,
filter, evaporate the filtrate to dryness, and put the product at once
into warm, dry bottles.--_Dose_, 2 to 3 gr., thrice a day, made into
pills, which must be coated with gum and kept from the air. (See _below_.)

=Fuligokali, Sulphuretted.= _Syn._ FULIGOKALI SULPHURETUM, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Polya.) Caustic potassa, 7 parts; sulphur, 2 parts; water, q. s.; dissolve
with heat, add of fuligokali, 30 parts, evaporate to dryness, and preserve
it in well-corked dry bottles.--_Dose, &c._ As the last.

_Obs._ M. Gibert states that he has tried both fuligokali and sulphuretted
fuligokali on his patients at the Hospital Saint-Louis, both internally
and externally, with manifest advantage in various obstinate chronic skin
diseases. He made a pomade of 30 grammes (say 1 oz.) of lead ointment, and
1 or 2 grammes (say 20 to 25 gr.) of fuligokali, in which he recognised
positive resolvent, detersive, and stimulant properties. See ANTHRACOKALI.

=FULLER'S EARTH.= _Syn._ CIMOLIA, C. TERRA, L. A soft, unctious, friable,
greenish or yellowish-grey species of clay, containing 53% of silica, 10%
of alumina, and about 9% of oxide of iron. After being dug out of the
earth it is thoroughly dried in ovens, and then thrown into cold water,
where it soon falls to powder, and is purified by the common process of
edulcoration or washing-over. It is extensively used to extract oil and
grease from cloth in the process of 'fulling,' it forms an excellent
filtering powder for oils, and is applied as a cooling and healing
dressing by the poor to inflamed breasts, excoriations, &c.

=FUL'MINATING COMPOUNDS.= These are numerous, and are scattered through
several distinct classes of bodies. Among the most powerful and dangerous
are the chloride and iodide of nitrogen and the fulminates of silver and
mercury.

=Fulminating An'timony.= _Syn._ PYROPHORUS OF ANTIMONY, L. _Prep._ Tartar
emetic (dried), 100 parts; lampblack or charcoal powder, 3 parts;
triturate together, put it into a crucible that it will three fourths fill
(previously rubbed inside with charcoal powder), cover it with a layer of
dry charcoal powder, and lute on the cover; after 3 hours' exposure to a
strong heat in a 'reverberatory furnace,' and 6 or 7 hours' repose to
allow it to cool, &c., cautiously transfer the solid contents of the
crucible, as quickly as possible, without breaking it, to a wide-mouthed
stoppered phial, where, after some time, it will spontaneously crumble
down into a powder.

_Obs._ When the above process is properly conducted, the resulting powder
contains potassium, and fulminates violently on contact with water. A
piece the size of a pea introduced into a mass of gunpowder explodes it on
being thrown into water, or on its being moistened in any other manner.

=Fulminating Bis'muth.= _Prep._ From bismuth, 120 parts; carburetted cream
of tartar, 60 parts; nitre, 1 part. Very rich in potassium.--_Prop., &c._,
resemble those of the last. We have been assured that this is the compound
used by the late Capt. Warner for some of his secret fusees.

=Fulminating Cop'per.= _Syn._ FULMINATE OF COPPER. _Prep._ Digest copper
(in powder or filings) with fulminate of mercury or of silver, and a
little water. It forms soluble green crystals that explode with a green
flame.

=Fulminating Gold.= _Prep._ Recently precipitated peroxide of gold is
digested in strong liquor of ammonia for 24 hours, and the resulting
product is dried in the open air or at a temperature below 180 deg. Fahr.,
care being taken to avoid the slightest friction, lest it should explode.
A deep olive-coloured powder.

_Obs._ This compound can only be safely made in very small quantities at a
time, as without great care it explodes with extreme violence. This is
caused by the slightest friction or sudden increase of heat. Its
fulminating property may be destroyed by boiling it in pearlash lye, or
weak oil of vitriol; and by heating the residuum after washing it in
water, pure gold will be obtained.

=Fulminating Mer'cury.= _Syn._ FULMINATE, FULMINATE OF MERCURY. _Prep._ 1.
Mercury, 1 part; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.375), 12 parts; dissolve, add at
intervals, to this solution, alcohol (sp. gr. .850), 16.3 parts; apply
heat till the effervescence and cloud of gas disappears, adding,
gradually, on the action becoming violent, 16.3 parts more of
alcohol.--_Product._ 112% of the mercury employed.

2. Mercury, 100 parts; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.4), 1000 parts (or 740 parts
by measure); dissolve by a gentle heat, and when the solution has acquired
the temperature of 130 deg. Fahr., slowly pour it through a glass funnel tube
into alcohol (sp. gr. .830), 830 parts (or 1000 parts by measure); as soon
as the effervescence is over, and white fumes cease to be evolved, filter
through double paper, wash with cold water, and dry by steam (not hotter
than 212 deg.) or hot water. The fulminate is then to be packed in 100 gr.
paper parcels, and these stored in a tight box or corked
bottle.--_Product_, 130% of the weight of mercury employed.

_Prop., &c._ Small brownish-grey crystals, which sparkle in the sun;
entirely soluble in 130 parts of boiling water, and deposited as the
solution cools under the form of beautiful pearly spangles. It greatly
resembles fulminate of silver in its appearance and general properties. It
explodes violently by both friction and percussion, but unlike the
silver-salt, merely burns with a sudden and almost noiseless flash when
kindled in the open air.

_Obs._ The second formula is not only the cheapest, but the best and
safest. The first is more expensive and dangerous. There is no little
hazard in pouring the alcohol into the nitric solution; for at each
effusion an explosive blast takes place; whereas, by pouring the solution
into the alcohol, no danger whatever is incurred. This preparation is used
for priming the copper percussion caps for fowling-pieces, muskets, &c. Dr
Ure, in his first report to the Board of Ordnance, recommended the use of
a spirituous solution of gum sandarac, as the best substance for diluting
the fulminate, and fixing it in the caps; but in a subsequent report to
the same Board, he stated that a solution of mastic in spirit was to be
preferred. At the present time the following composition is applied to the
interior of percussion caps in quantities varying from .2 to .3 of a
grain:--Chlorate of potassium, 26 parts; nitre, 30; fulminate of mercury,
12; sulphur, 17; ground glass, 14; gum, 1, making altogether 100 parts.
(Watts.)

_Caution._ Fulminate of mercury should only be dried in small parcels at a
time, and these should be placed at a distance from each other. The
dreadful explosion which occurred some years ago at Apothecaries' Hall,
and by which Mr Hennel, the talented chemist of the Apothecaries'
Company, lost his life, was occasioned by the spontaneous detonation of
this substance.

=Fulminating Plat'inum.= _Syn._ PLATINUM FULMINANS, L. _Prep._ By acting
on binoxide of platinum with pure ammonia. It is analogous to the gold and
silver ammonio-compound.

=Fulminating Powder.= _Syn._ DETONATING POWDER; PULVIS FULMINANS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Nitre, 3 parts; carbonate of potash (dry), 2 parts; flowers of
sulphur, 1 part; reduce them separately to fine powder, before mixing
them. A little of this compound (20 to 30 gr.), slowly heated on a shovel
over the fire, first fuses and becomes brown, and then explodes with a
deafening report.

2. Sulphur, 1 part; chlorate of potassa, 3 parts. When triturated, with
strong pressure, in a marble or wedgwood-ware mortar, it produces a series
of loud reports. It also fulminates by percussion.

3. Chlorate of potassa, 6 parts; pure lampblack, 4 parts; sulphur, 1 part.
A little placed on an anvil detonates with a loud report, when struck with
a hammer. No. 1 is the substance commonly known as 'FULMINATING POWDER,'
See BLASTING POWDER.

=Fulminating Sil'ver.= _Syn._ ARGENTUM FULMINANS, L. Two very distinct
compounds are known by this name, the one containing oxide of silver and
ammonia, and the other being a true fulminate of silver.

_Prep._ 1. (AMMONIA-COMPOUND OF SILVER, BERTHOLLET'S FULMINATING
SILVER.)--_a._ Digest oxide of silver (recently precipitated and dried by
pressure between bibulous paper) in concentrated liquor of ammonia, for 12
or 15 hours, pour off the liquid, and cautiously dry the black powder in
the air, in divided portions. The decanted ammoniacal liquor, when gently
heated, yields, on cooling, small crystals, which possess a still more
formidable power of detonation than the black powder, and will scarcely
bear touching, even whilst under the liquid.

_b._ Dissolve chloride of silver in strong liquor of ammonia, cautiously
add pure potassa (in fragments), and when effervescence ceases, decant the
fluid portion, and wash and dry the powder, as before.

2. (FULMINATE OF SILVER, BRUGNATELLI'S FULMINATING SILVER; ARGENTI
FULMINAS, L.)--_a._ Pour alcohol, 1 oz., on nitrate of silver (in fine
powder), 100 gr., previously placed in a capacious flask or beaker glass,
and shortly afterwards add strong nitric acid, 1 oz.; as soon as all the
powdered nitrate assumes the form of white clouds, add cold distilled
water, q. s. to suspend the ebullition, and next collect the powder on a
filter, and otherwise proceed as with the ammonia-compound (_above_).

_b._ (Fownes.) Metallic silver, 40 to 50 gr.; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.37),
3/4 fl. oz.; dissolve by the aid of a gentle heat, add, whilst the
solution is still hot, alcohol, 2 fl. oz., and again apply heat until
reaction commences; the fulminate slowly separates from the hot liquid
under the form of small, brilliant, white, crystalline plates, which,
after being slightly washed with a little cold distilled water, are to be
distributed upon separate pieces of filtering paper, in portions not
exceeding 1 or 2 gr. each, and left to dry in the air. When dry, the
papers are to be folded up, and carefully preserved in a box or bottle. A
sixpence and the strongest commercial nitric acid and rectified spirit
answer for the above purpose.

_c._ (Liebig.) Grain silver, 1 part; nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.36 to 1.38),
10 parts; dissolve at a gentle heat, and add the solution to alcohol of
85%, 23 parts; apply a gentle heat till the liquid begins to boil, then
remove it from the fire and set it aside to cool; the fulminate of silver
is deposited in lustrous, snow-white, acicular crystals, and when washed
and dried, equals in weight that of the silver employed.

_Prop., &c._ The properties of both compounds are very similar. Those of
the true FULMINATE OF SILVER (No. 2) need only be considered here. This
dissolves in 36 parts of boiling water, but the solution deposits the
greater portion of the fulminate as it cools. It is one of the most
dangerous substances for which we are indebted to modern chemistry. It
explodes with unparalleled violence by friction or percussion, or when
strongly heated, or when touched with strong sulphuric acid; the metal is
reduced, and a large volume of gaseous matter suddenly liberated. Strange
to say, though its explosive tendency is so great that it can be hardly
made, handled or kept, with safety, it may, when very cautiously mixed
with oxide of copper, be burned in a tube to determine its composition, in
a similar manner to that employed in the analysis of other organic
substances. Many frightful accidents have happened from the spontaneous
explosion of this substance. 1 or 2 gr. are the most that can be exploded
with safety in a building or confined space.

=Fulminating Zinc.= _Syn._ FULMINATE OF ZINC; ZINCUM FULMINANS, ZINCI
FULMINAS, L. _Prep._ From fulminate of silver, zinc filings, and a little
water, digested together, as FULMINATING COPPER.

=FULMINA'TION.= _Syn._ FULMINATIO, L. Detonation. A sudden explosion,
accompanied with a loud report and extreme violence. Some chemists,
without sufficient reason, have endeavoured to confine the application of
the term to the explosion of a fulminate.

=FUMIGA'TION.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO, SUFFUMIGATIO, L. Fumigations
(FUMIGATIONES) are vapours of gases extemporaneously extricated for the
purpose of destroying contagious or noxious miasmata or effluvia, or to
mask unpleasant odours, or to produce a medicinal action on those parts of
the body with which they are brought in contact.

Fumigations, for the purpose of obviating or masking unpleasant odours in
the sick chamber, must never be employed to the neglect of cleanliness and
ventilation; for most of them, instead of purifying the air, actually
render it less fit for respiration. The common practice of burning scented
paper, pastilles, sugar, juniper berries, benzoin, cascarilla, &c., so as
to create an odoriferous smoke, is of this character. As disinfecting
agents, they are probably useless, and are relics of an ancient custom of
burning frankincense and other odorous substances in vitiated air, to
overcome the fetor which is more or less present. The fumes thus diffused
through the atmosphere "disguise unpleasant odours; but they accomplish
nothing more. The infection remains not only unaltered by the diffusion of
the most powerful aromatic vapours, but its deleterious properties are
sometimes augmented by them."[320]

[Footnote 320: We deem it right to remark that a different opinion
respecting the disinfecting power of odoriferous smoke is now held by many
scientific men. According to this opinion, the minute particles of
aromatic substances do really destroy or render inert the noxious
miasmata.]

Among the various substances used as DISINFECTING FUMIGATIONS, chlorine,
by almost general consent, holds the first place. Dr Carmichael Smyth
recommended nitrous acid, which is even now preferred by Dr Christison to
chlorine; whilst Prof. Graham regarded the fumes of burning sulphur as
more efficacious than either of these substances. The vapours of
hydrochloric acid and of vinegar, and the smoke of gunpowder, which once
had their advocates, have now justly sunk into disfavour.

No apartment should be submitted to fumigation until it is vacated; as
until then its thorough disinfection is impossible, and but little benefit
or immunity from contagion is conferred by any aerial disinfecting agent,
the presence of which fails to cause discomfort to the patient.

Of all common diseases, scarlet fever appears to be the one most requiring
fumigation. For this purpose, chlorine gas or heat should be employed. The
infectious matters of certain diseases, especially scarlet fever, are
either dissipated or destroyed at a heat slightly above that of boiling
water. (Dr Henry.) Contagious diseases are very commonly propagated in
this metropolis by persons having their linen washed by laundresses who
perform their operations in the same sinks of dirt and misery in which
they live. See CIGARS (in _pharmacy_), DISINFECTANT, INHALATION, &c., and
_below_.

=Fumigation, Ace'tic.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO ACETICA, L. The fumes of strong
vinegar or acetic acid, obtained by heating the liquid over a lamp, or by
sprinkling it on a hot shovel. Aromatic vinegar in this way yields very
refreshing fumes, and was formerly thought more efficacious than simple
acetic acid.

=Fumigation, An'odyne.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO ANODYNA, L. _Prep._ (Trousseau &
Reveil.) Stramonium and sage, equal parts, sufficient to fill a small
pipe. Smoked in spasmodic asthma, irritating coughs, &c.

=Fumigation, Aromat'ic.= See BALSAMIC FUMIGATION.

=Fumigation, Balsam'ic.= _Syn._ AROMATIC FUMIGATION; FUMIGATIO AROMATICA,
F. BALSAMICA, L. _Prep._ 1. From gum benzoin, either alone or mixed with
olibanum or styrax, thrown on hot cinders or a heated shovel.

2. (Dr Dohrn.) Gum olibanum, 4 parts; gum benzoin, styrax, and flowers of
roses and lavender, of each 1 part; to be reduced to powder, and used as
before.

3. Amber, mastic, and olibanum, of each 3 oz.; benzoin and styrax, of each
1 oz.; camphor, 1 dr. As last. The above are used in hooping-cough,
asthma, &c.; a small quantity only being employed at a time.

=Fumigation, Belladon'na.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO BELLADONNAE, L. _Prep._ (M.
Schroeder.) From dried belladonna leaves, 1 to 2 dr.; as before. In
spitting of blood, asthma, tickling cough, &c.

=Fumigation, Chlorine.= _Syn._ DISINFECTING FUMIGATION, GUYTON-MORVEAU'S
F.; FUMIGATIO CHLORINII, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.) Common salt, 3 parts;
water and sulphuric acid, of each 2 parts; black oxide of manganese 1
part; mix in a shallow vessel, placed in the centre of the apartment. This
is used to disinfect unoccupied rooms.

2. Hydrochloric acid and powdered black oxide of manganese mixed in
proportions so as to make a thin paste. Used as directed under 1.

3. Chloride of lime, either sprinkled on the floor (if uncarpeted) or (if
carpeted) placed about the room in shallow dishes. Used for inhabited
rooms, and on shipboard, &c.

4. A solution of chloride of lime (1 oz. of the chloride to each quart of
water). Used as the last but more freely.

_Obs._ Chlorine fumigations, although so popular, and so much relied on by
many medical practitioners, are apparently useless in preventing the
progress of certain contagious diseases. "In Moscow, chlorine was
extensively tried and found unavailing, nay, even injurious, in cholera."
(Dr Pereira.) "At the time that the cholera hospital was filled with
clouds of chlorine, then it was that the greatest number of the attendants
were attacked." (Dr Albers.) At the Smallpox Hospital, where chlorine was
tried, with the view of arresting the progress of erysipelas, "all
offensive smell was removed, but the power of communicating the disease
remained behind." ('Lond. Med. Gaz.') Notwithstanding these marked
failures, the confidence of many eminent members of the profession
continues unabated. "As a fumigating agent, disinfectant and antiseptic,
chlorine, I believe, stands unrivalled." "For destroying miasmata, noxious
effluvia, and putrid odours, it is the most powerful agent known." (Dr
Pereira.) Our own experience leads us to the conclusion that chlorine is
more useful in neutralising the contagious or morbific matter of fevers
(especially of scarlet fevers) and putrid diseases generally, than of the
other diseases in which it has been employed.

=Fumigation, Hydrochlo''ric.= _Syn._ MURIATIC FUMIGATION; FUMIGATIO
MURIATICA, F. ACIDI HYDROCHLORICI, L. _Prep._ From common salt placed in a
cup or saucer, and an equal weight of sulphuric acid poured over it. Now
seldom used. It rapidly neutralises ammoniacal fumes.

=Fumigation, I'odine.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO IODINII, L. _Prep._ 1. From
iodine, 5 to 25 gr., or more, according to extent of surface, placed on a
heated iron contained in a box or case in which the limb is enclosed. In
the usual skin diseases in which the use of iodine is indicated. Iodine
may be readily diffused through the atmosphere by placing a small quantity
on a hot plate. Duroy says iodine powerfully arrests putrefaction.

2. (Compound; FUMIGATIO IODINII COMPOSITA--Sellers.) Iodine, 20 gr.; red
sulphide of mercury, 40 gr.; sulphur, 6 dr.; mix, and divide into 12
powders. One to be used, as the last, 3 times daily; in lepra, psoriasis,
&c.

=Fumigation, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO MERCURIALIS, L. _Prep._
(Bouchardat.) Olibanum (in powder), 2 parts; red sulphide of mercury, 3
parts. A little is sprinkled on red-hot coals or a heated shovel held
beneath the part; or the fumes are inhaled. _Obs._ Abernethy used the
black oxide of mercury (1-1/2 to 2 dr.), and applied it to the whole body,
excepting the head, in a similar way to the sulphur bath, and continued
the application for about a quarter of an hour. See CANDLES, (Mercurial),
and No. 2 (_above_).

=Fumigation, Mu'riatic.= See HYDROCHLORIC F. (_above_).

=Fumigation, Ni'trous.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO NITROSA. _Prep._ (P. Cod.)
Sulphuric acid, diluted with half its weight of water, is placed in a
porcelain cup (any shallow vessel of glass or earthenware will do), placed
over heated cinders, and small quantities of powdered nitre added to it
from time to time.

_Obs._ Heat causes the gas to be evolved more rapidly, and thus renders
the fumes more offensive, without increasing their efficacy. Equal weights
of oil of vitriol and water are the proportions usually employed, 1/4 oz.
of nitre is said to be sufficient for a small room. (Dr Bateman.) The
vessel containing the ingredients should be placed in an elevated position
in the centre of the apartment.

Dr Carmichael Smith, who introduced nitrous acid gas as a fumigation
(1799), received a reward of L5000 from Parliament for publishing his
formula.

=Fumigation, Sulphu'rous.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO SULPHUROSA, F. SULPHURIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. The gas produced by burning sulphur, sulphurous anhydride, or,
as Mr Keates has suggested, by burning bisulphide of carbon.

To guard against the danger arising from fire, when sulphur is burnt for
the purposes of fumigation, the operator is advised to proceed as
follows:--Having closed the fireplace, windows, &c., of the apartment to
be disinfected, procure a common pail or a large earthenware pan, and
place it in the centre of the room; then into the middle of the pail or
pan put upside down an ordinary flower-pot. Then pour water into the pail
or pan (as the case may be) until it nearly reaches to the top of the
inverted flower-pot. Now stand on the flower-pot a plate or saucer of
earthenware or common crockery, sufficiently large to hold the quantity of
sulphur required; place this quantity of sulphur in the plate or saucer,
and put on it a few live coals; then close the door of the apartment, and
leave it undisturbed for six or eight hours. At the expiration of this
time the door may be opened, as well as the windows, the barricade being
at the same time removed from the fireplace; a thorough draught of air
being thus established, the sulphurous smell will soon disappear. During
the fumigation all articles within the room should be spread out so as to
expose as great a surface as possible. "The cubic space to be thus
disinfected should be calculated by multiplying the length, height, and
breadth together, and taking an ounce and a half of sulphur for every 100
cubic feet. For a small bedroom one pound of sulphur would be sufficient.
Indeed, eighteen ounces would suffice for a room measuring 12 ft. x 10 ft.
x 10 ft."[321]

[Footnote 321: 'Water, Air, and Disinfectants,' by Noel Hartley.]

2. Flowers of sulphur, 7 parts; nitre, 4 parts; benzoin and olibanum, of
each 2 parts; camphor, 1 part; pressed into the bowls of tobacco-pipes,
and lighted with a quick-match. See BATH and DISINFECTANT.

=Fumigation, Tar.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO PICEA, SUFFUMIGATIO PICIS LIQUIDAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. Vegetable tar, 1 part; water, 7 or 8 parts; mix, and let it
simmer in an open vessel set over a spirit lamp placed near the centre of
the apartment.

2. (Sir A. Crichton.) Norway tar, 1 lb.; powdered carbonate of potash, 1/2
oz. or 1 oz.; mix, and heat it as last. The potash is added to neutralise
any volatile acid. Formerly highly thought of in bronchitis and pulmonary
consumption.

=Fumigation, Tooth'ache.= _Syn._ FUMIGATIO ODONTALGICA, F.
ANTI-NEURALGICA, L. _Prep._ 1. From henbane seeds, powdered and thrown
into a basin of boiling water, and the affected part held in the steam.
Sometimes a little of the seed is placed on a heated iron spoon, and the
part exposed to the fumes.

2. (Beasley.) A popular remedy is to throw henbane seed on hot cinders,
inverting a cup over them to receive the smoke and empyreumatic oil
produced. The cup is then filled with hot water, and the steam conveyed to
the affected side of the mouth.

=FU''MING LIQUORS.= See AMMONIUM SULPHYDRATE, ARSENIC TRICHLORIDE, TIN
BICHLORIDE, &c.

=FUNG'I.= In _botany_, a natural order of cellular plants, producing their
fructification in the air; growing in or upon decaying or living organic
substances, and nourished through their vegetative structure called the
spawn or mycelium. Fungi have very variable properties. Some are medical,
others edible, others are deadly poisons. The various diseases of plants
known as blight, mildew, rust, smut, vine-mildew, potato-disease, ergot,
&c., are either caused by or accelerated by the agency of fungi. See
AGARIC, MUSHROOM, &c.

=FUR'NACE.= An enclosed fireplace for obtaining a high degree of heat.
Furnaces vary much in construction and size, according to the particular
manufacture in which they are employed. They may be broadly divided into
two classes--WIND-FURNACES and BLAST FURNACES. In the former a high
temperature is produced without the aid of bellows by means of a powerful
draught. In the latter heated air is blown in through a pipe or pipes at
the bottom. For many metallurgic and large chemical operations
REVERBERATORY FURNACES are employed. A furnace of this kind is usually
long, with a low roof to keep down the flame and hot air upon the 'hearth'
or space between the fireplace and the flue.[322] For the smaller
operations in chemistry, a variety of furnaces have been invented, and the
introduction of coal-gas as a fuel by Develle, Griffin, Gore, Fletcher,
and others, has wrought a complete change in the arrangements of the
laboratory. The GAS-FURNACES of Mr J. J. Griffin are adapted for almost
every operation performed by the aid of heat. Those more recently
introduced by Mr W. Gore are very compact and portable, and will rapidly
produce a 'white heat,' without the help of bellows or high chimney, by
means of ordinary coal-gas and atmospheric air. The first and smallest
size consumes 33 cubic feet of gas (value seven farthings) per hour, and
is suitable for assayers, jewellers, analytical chemists,
experimentalists, dentists, and others. It is capable of fusing eight
ounces of copper or six ounces of cast iron, copper begins to melt in it
in about twelve minutes from the time of lighting. The second-sized one
consumes about twice that quantity of gas, is suitable for manufacturing
jewellers generally, and for a great variety of practical persons who
require to melt small quantities of gold, silver, copper, german silver,
brass, cast iron, glass, and other substances, or require a small crucible
heated to high temperatures. It is capable of melting 45 ounces of copper,
or 40 ounces of cast iron, and with its heat up it melts one pound of
copper in eight minutes; copper begins to melt in about twenty minutes
from the time of lighting.

[Footnote 322: For an illustration of this kind of furnace, see SODIUM,
Carbonate of.]

Fletcher's[323] UNIVERSAL FURNACES for high temperatures, which are said
to require neither blast nor attention, are intended for laboratory
purposes, enamel burning, heating soldering irons, and for jewellers' and
dentists' work. These furnaces are made in two distinct types; one with a
perforated cover to the crucibles and muffles to attain the maximum heat;
the other with a slide chimney and a double lid over the crucible.

[Footnote 323: Manufactured by Thos. Fletcher, Museum Street, Warrington.]

The power and rapidity of working depend in each case on the length of the
chimney used. A furnace with a four-feet chimney will melt a crucible of
cast-iron in thirty-five minutes; a furnace with an eight-feet chimney
will melt the same quantity of iron in about twenty minutes, starting with
the furnace cold. The stove with the side chimney, although more
convenient in use, is slower in working, taking about twice as long to
obtain the same temperature.

The following are varieties of Fletcher's UNIVERSAL FURNACE:--

1. SMALL LABORATORY FURNACE for crucibles, with nickel-plated burner
tubes. This takes crucibles up to 2-1/2 by 2-1/4 inches outside, and with
a three-feet chimney, as supplied with the furnace, will, it is stated,
melt copper, gold, silver, &c., in about ten minutes, or cast-iron in
thirty-five minutes from the time the gas is lighted. Small muffle
fittings, with muffles 2-1/4 by 3 by 2-1/2 inches inside, can be supplied
with this furnace.

2. SMALL CRUCIBLE FURNACE, with fixed chimney. This furnace is more
especially designed for gold, silver, copper, &c., and, as sent out with a
four-feet chimney and a single lid, is amply powerful, and practically of
a very convenient form.

3. SMALL MUFFLE FURNACE, with three feet chimney. This requires about
eighteen inches longer chimney than the small crucible furnace to obtain
the same temperature in the same time, owing to a slight loss of heat by
radiation from the stoppers.

4. _a._ LARGE MUFFLE FURNACE. This is identical in design and construction
with the smaller one. The clear working space inside the muzzle is 3-7/8
by 5 inches, by about 3 inches deep. This is recommended as a useful
furnace for watch dial enamellers, assayers, photo-enamel burning, and for
all purposes where exact temperatures are required not exceeding the
fusing point of cast iron.

The burner of this furnace is twice the size of the small laboratory
furnace, and requires a gas supply from a pipe and tap of half-an-inch
bore. The burner is the same shape as the muffle, and is unfit for
crucible work.

_b._ EXTRA LARGE MUFFLE FURNACE 4-1/2 by 3-3/4 by 7 inches clear inside
working space. This will take a No. 3 plumbago pot, and with half an inch
gas pipe, giving a supply of about 35 feet per hour, will, it is affirmed,
melt 3 or 4 lbs. of brass in about 25 minutes, and the same quantity of
cast iron in 60 or 70 minutes from the time the gas is first lighted,
without the slightest trouble or attention.

5. LADLE FURNACE. This takes ladles up to 6-1/2 inches diameter, and will
melt 6 or 8 lbs. of zinc in about 15 minutes, or the same quantity of
lead, tin, &c., in about half the time. It is said to be a convenient and
powerful arrangement for dentists, heating soldering-irons, making
granulated zinc, sand baths, &c.

6. SMALL LABORATORY FURNACE, complete for crucibles, muffles, ladles, and
sand baths.

7. FLETCHER'S INJECTOR GAS FURNACE (with Blast). This furnace is intended
for general purposes, and for the treatment of refractory substances at
high temperatures. The patentee states "that it will burn perfectly in the
same space any available gas supply from 10 to 50 feet per hour, or more,
if required, giving temperatures in exact proportion; and any operation
may be repeated at any time by taking a note of the position of the air
slide which governs the combustion of the gas."

Mr Fletcher gives the power of the small furnace as follows:--With an 1/2
inch gas supply-pipe, day pressure, starting with the furnace cold, it
will melt silver in 3 minutes, cast iron in 8 minutes, cast steel in 25
minutes.

With a supply of 50 feet per hour, the same results are stated to be
obtained in a little over half the time, and so on in proportion with a
greater or less gas supply. It is also said to work satisfactorily for
gold, &c., melting it with a supply of gas too small for any other
furnace, and the maximum temperatures obtained are limited, only by the
available gas supply and the fusibility of the casing. The highest
temperature as obtained by measuring by Wedgwoods' Pyrometer, is said to
be 9000 Fahrenheit. This furnace is stated to be particularly suited for
gold and silver melting, and refining, iron assays, and general crucible
work, and safe in the hands of the most careless workman. It is adapted
for crucibles not exceeding 4 inches by 2-1/4, 5 inches by 3-1/2, 7-1/2
inches by 5. For further information respecting furnaces intended for use
in the laboratory and assay office, the reader is referred to 'Watt's
Dictionary of Chemistry,' also to 'Ure's Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures,
and Mines,' for description of the furnaces employed in the different
metallurgical operations; and to the 'Chemical News' (June 30th, 1876, and
February 2nd, 1877), for a description of a new decomposing furnace. See
ASSAYING, CHIMNEYS, COPPER, CRUCIBLE, FUEL, &c.

=FUR'NISHING.= It is essential for the sake of neatness, and for a
pleasing effect to the eye, that there should be a harmony of colours, and
also a similarity of style, in the main articles of furniture. The tints
of the carpet, of the paper or paint of the walls, and of the
window-curtains, should be all in harmony in each room; that is, either
possess a general resemblance of colour, or various colours in pleasing
contrast and harmony with each other. If the preponderating colour of the
curtains is scarlet, and the colour of the walls or carpet blue, a most
inharmonious and unpleasing effect is produced; but brown and green, or
green and gold, will be in harmony, and may, therefore, be placed
together. Carpets being the most expensive articles, it is safest to buy
them first, and then to let their colour guide us in the tone and style of
the curtains, paper-hangings, chair-covers, hearth-rugs, and the various
minor articles. It is also economical to buy carpets of the same pattern
for several rooms, because in the event of removal to a house with
different sized apartments, a piece of one carpet may be taken to alter
the size of another.

=FUR'NITURE.= See FRENCH POLISHING, OIL, POLISH, VARNISH, &c.

=FURS.= Of these the most valuable are Ermine and Sable. Fur skins, when
unprepared, or merely dried, go under the name of 'Peltry.' (Brande.)

Furs may be preserved from moths and other insects by placing a little
colocynth pulp (bitter apple), or spice (cloves, pimento, &c.), wrapped in
muslin, among them; or they may be washed in a very weak solution of
corrosive sublimate in warm water (10 to 15 gr. to the pint), and
afterwards carefully dried. As well as every other species of clothing,
they should be kept in a clean, dry place, from which they should be taken
out occasionally, well beaten, and exposed to the air, and re-turned.

=FU'SEL-OIL.= _Syn._ FOUSEL OIL, POTATO-OIL, OIL OF POTATO SPIRIT, GRAIN
OIL, GRAIN-SPIRIT OIL, MARC-BRANDY OIL, CRUDE HYDRATED OXIDE OF AMYL.
_Source._ An offensive, strong-smelling oil, produced along with alcohol
during the fermentation of grain, potatoes, &c., on the large scale, and
which gives the peculiar and disagreeable flavour and odour to raw
whiskey. It is found chiefly in the last portion of the spirit which
passes over, called the 'faints,' to which it imparts its characteristic
odour and flavour. By rectifying the faints at a very gentle heat, most of
the alcohol and water first pass over together with only a little fusel
oil, whilst the latter forms the residuum in the still. Various names (as
_above_) are given to the crude oil thus obtained, according to its
source. In each case it essentially consists of hydrated oxide of amyl,
but trifling and variable quantities of other organic compounds are mixed
with it, which slightly modify its character, more particularly its odour
and flavour. The oil of potato spirit is the purest form of crude fusel
oil.

_Obs._ The exertions of the distiller are directed, as much as possible,
to lessen the formation of fusel oil during the fermentation of his
'worts,' and to eliminate, during the distillation and rectification of
his liquors, the greatest possible proportion of that with which they may
be contaminated.

_Prop., &c._ Fusel oil is a nearly colourless volatile liquid, with a
rather high boiling point, a durable, penetrating, offensive smell, and an
acrid, burning taste; when swallowed, it occasions nausea, giddiness,
headache, &c.; in slightly larger quantities, vomiting, delirium,
oppressive respiration, and lessened sensibility to pain; its vapour also
produces these effects. In quantity, it is a narcotic poison. The greater
intoxicating power of whiskey, more especially that from raw grain, than
other spirit, is due to the larger quantity of fusel oil which it
contains. This appears to be well known to the lower class of whiskey
drinkers in these countries, and to the consumers of corn brandy in some
of the northern parts of Europe. The last are said to frequently demand to
be served with "a glass of good fusel." In England fusel oil is chiefly
used for lamps and varnishes.

_Purific._ The AMYLIC ALCOHOL (ALCOHOL AMYLICUM) of the Dublin College is
thus prepared. Introduce the ordinary fusel oil of the distilleries into a
small still or retort, connected with a condenser, and apply heat; as soon
as the oil begins to flow over, unmixed with water, the receiver should be
changed, and the distillation resumed, and carried nearly to dryness; the
product in the second receiver, and the oily matter which separates from
the water in the first receiver, are to be reserved for use. It is
employed in the preparation of VALERIANATE OF SODA. See AMYL.

=FU'SIBLE ALLOY'.= _Syn._ FUSIBLE METAL. _Prep._ 1. Bismuth, 2 parts;
lead, 5 parts; tin, 3 parts. Melts in boiling water.

2. (D'Arcet's.) Bismuth, 8 parts; lead, 5 parts; tin, 3 parts. Melts below
212 deg. Fahr.

3. (Walker.) Bismuth 8, tin 4, lead 5 parts; antimony, 1 part. The metals
should be repeatedly melted and poured into drops, until they are well
mixed.

4. (Onion's.) Lead, 3 parts; tin, 2 parts; bismuth, 5 parts. Melts at 197 deg.
Fahr.

5. To the last, after removing it from the fire, add of quicksilver
(warm), 1 part. Liquid at 172 deg., solid at 140 deg. Fahr.

_Obs._ The first four of the above are used to make TOY-SPOONS, to
surprise children by their melting in hot liquors. A little mercury may be
added to lower their melting points. Nos. 2 and 3 are specially adapted
for making ELECTROTYPE MOULDS. The beautiful casts of the French medals
known to all electrotypers as Clichee moulds are in the alloy No. 3. The
above alloys are also used to form PENCILS for writing on asses' skin, or
paper prepared by rubbing burnt hartshorn into it, &c.; also as a METAL
BATH in the laboratory. The last is used for ANATOMICAL INJECTIONS.

=FU'SION.= _Syn._ FUSIO, L. The liquefaction of solid bodies by the action
of heat. The term AQUEOUS FUSION has been applied to the melting of salts
in their combined water when heated; and the term IGNEOUS FUSION, to the
liquefaction of bodies by heat alone.

The vessels in which substances are fused are formed of various materials
and shapes, according to the properties of the solid operated on, and
principally with reference to the degree of heat required for its fusion.
In every case the containing vessel should be capable of sustaining the
proper degree of heat, without either melting or cracking, and should also
be unacted on by the substances melted in them. See CRUCIBLE, FURNACE, &c.

=FUeRSTENBALSAM, Bamberger fuer Frauen=--BAMBERG PRINCE'S BALSAM FOR WOMEN.
An embrocation for strengthening women after confinement. A hexagonal eau
de Cologne bottle containing about 100 grammes of a clear reddish-brown
fluid, which is a filtered mixture of equal parts of spirit of lavender
(Sp. Lavand. Co.) and spirit of soap, mixed with a little camphor and
ammonia. (Hager.)

=FUS'TIC.= _Syn._ FUSTIC WOOD. Two distinct dye-stuffs are known by this
name, but are distinguished by the adjectives 'old' and 'young.'

=Fustic, Old.= _Syn._ BOIS JAUNE, Fr. The wood of the _Maclura tinctoria_.
Its decoction dyes woollens yellow of different shades, according to the
'mordant.' Alum, tartar, and spirits of tin brighten the tint; acetate and
sulphate of iron and common salt darken it; with sulphate of iron it gives
olives and browns; with the indigo vat and sulphate of indigo green. These
colours are very permanent. Its yellow turns on the lemon when pale, and
on the orange when darker. 1 lb. of old fustic will dye 3 to 5 lbs. of
wool.

=Fustic, Young.= _Syn._ YELLOW FUSTIC; FUSTET, Fr. The wood of the _Rhus
Cotinus_ or Venice sumach. It gives a yellow turning on the green, but its
colours are not very permanent. It is chiefly used in combination with
other dye-stuffs.


=GAL'BANUM.= _Syn._ GUM GALBANUM; GALBANUM (B. P.), L. "A gum-resin
derived from an unascertained umbelliferous plant. In irregular tears
about the size of a pea, usually agglutinated into masses; of a
greenish-yellow colour, translucent, having a strong disagreeable odour,
and an acrid bitter taste." (B. P.) Its properties are similar to the
other fetid antispasmodic gum-resins. It ranks between ASSAF[OE]TIDA and
AMMONIACUM.

=Galbanum, Strained.= _Syn._ PREPARED GALBANUM; GALBANUM COLATUM, G.
PRAEPARATUM (Ph. L.), L. From crude galbanum, as prepared ammoniacum.
Formerly the common practice was to melt it in the dry state, by heat
cautiously and quickly applied, and to strain it through a piece of coarse
canvas stretched across a wooden frame or 'horse.' The 'strained galbanum'
of the shops is seldom pure. The following forms are current in the trade
for its 'reduction,' as this species of adulteration is technically
termed:--

1. Galbanum (true), 9 lbs.; strain as above, then add, towards the end
black resin (clean), 3 lbs.; and when the whole is melted, further add of
Venice turpentine, 2 lbs.--_Product._ 12 lbs.

2. Strained galbanum and black resin, of each 6 lbs.; melt, and add, of
strained assaf[oe]tida, 2 oz.; Venice turpentine, 3 lbs.--_Prod._ 14-1/2
lbs.

=Galbanum, Facti''tious Strained.= _Syn._ GALBANUM COLATUM FACTITIUM, L.
_Prep._ 1. From black resin, 4 lbs.; melt, and add of Venice turpentine, 2
lbs.; assaf[oe]tida, 2-1/2 oz.; oils of juniper and fennel, of each 1-1/2
dr.; water, 1/2 pint.

2. As the last, adding soft soap, 5 oz. Sometimes the small and 'waste' of
the chests are added to the above to improve them.

=GALENE-EINSPRITZUNG--Galen's Injection= (J. F. Schwarzlose Soehne,
Berlin). According to Hager:--Gum Arabic, 25 grammes; water, 65.5 grammes;
sugar of lead, 4.5 grammes; tinct. opii with saffron, 5 grammes. According
to Schaedler:--Sulphocarbolate of zinc, 3 grammes; gum Arabic, 20 grammes;
tinct. opii, 2 grammes; water, 100 grammes.

=GALL.= _Syn._ BILE; BILIS, CHOLE, FEL, L. A bitter fluid secreted by the
liver; in part flowing into the intestines, and in part regurgitating into
the gall-bladder. Its uses in the animal economy appears to be--to
separate the chyle from the chyme, to promote digestion of oleaginous
substances, and to assist in exciting the peristaltic action of the
intestines. The faeces appear to owe their colour chiefly to the presence
of bile, since, without, they appear of a dirty pipe-clay colour.

The gall of various animals was formerly used in medicine. From whatever
source it was obtained, it was believed to be calefacient, desiccant,
detergent, discutient, and parturifacient; but besides these properties,
each variety was conceived to possess virtues peculiarly its own. Thus,
bear-gall (fel ursi) was reputed anti-epileptic; eel-gall (fel
anguillarum), parturifacient; hare-gall (fel leporis), "good in cataract;"
and ox-gall (fel bovis), "sovereign against stiff joints, rheumatics,
angry ulcers, and stomach colics." The gall of the bat, goat, hen, hog,
partridge, silurus, &c., were also employed as remedies. At the present
time ox-gall is the only one used in medicine and the arts.

Ox-gall has been recently reintroduced into medicine by Dr Allnatt and
others, and in certain cases of dyspepsia and biliary derangement appears
to be a valuable remedy.

Crude ox-gall is extensively employed by the scourers of woollen cloth,
clothes renovators, &c. It rapidly extracts grease and oil from textile
fabrics without injuring the colour. See CONSTIPATION, DYSPEPSIA, OX-GALL,
&c.

=Gall, Glass.= See SANIVER.

=GAL'LATE.= _Syn._ GALLAS. L. A salt of gallic acid. The alkaline gallates
are soluble. They rapidly suffer decomposition in the presence of excess
of the base, and the liquor gradually acquires a blackish colour. The
gallates of most of the other metallic oxides are insoluble.

=GALLEN-MIXTUR FUeR PFERDE=--GALL MIXTURE FOR HORSES (F. Barth, veterinary
surgeon, Freibach-by-Altenhofen, Carinthia). A clear decanted solution of
8 parts wood tar in 92 parts common kienoel (ol. pini). (Hager.)

=Gallen-Mixtur=--GALL MIXTURE (Ph. Barth, Marburg in Steiermark). The same
preparation as the above, coloured with 3/4 per cent. of dragon's blood.
(Wittstein.)

=Gallen-Tinctur=--GALL TINCTURE (Dr G. Krieger, Garz). 5 parts wood tar,
10 parts water, 30 parts spirit, 1 part corrosive sublimate, and 1/20 part
rosanilin, mixed with a gentle heat, allowed to deposit, and filtered.
(Hager.)

=GAL'LIC ACID.= H_{3}C_{7}H_{3}O_{5}.Aq. _Syn._ ACIDUM GALLICUM (B. P.),
L. "A crystalline acid prepared from galls." (B. P. L.) It may be also
obtained from other vegetable substances. It appears to be a product of
the oxidation of tannic acid, and probably does not exist ready formed in
recent vegetables.

_Prep._ 1. (Dumas.) Nut-galls, reduced to powder, are moistened with
water, and exposed to the action of the air, in a warm situation (say 70 deg.
to 80 deg. Fahr.), for two or three months, adding more water, from time to
time, to make up for that lost by evaporation. At the end of the above
period the mouldy, dark-coloured mass is strongly pressed in a cloth, and
the solid portion boiled in a considerable quantity of water. The solution
(filtered whilst hot) deposits, on cooling, crystals of gallic acid,
which, after being thoroughly drained and pressed dry between bibulous
paper, are purified by boiling them along with about 1/6th of their weight
of prepared animal charcoal in 8 parts of water, and filtering, &c., as
before.

2. (Graham.) A strong infusion or decoction of galls is precipitated with
sulphuric acid in the cold; the resulting thick mass is mixed with dilute
sulphuric acid (cold), and the liquid expressed; the 'marc' is next
treated with sulphuric acid diluted with twice its weight of water, and
after boiling the mixture for some minutes the whole is allowed to cool;
the resulting crystals are purified as before.

3. (Liebig.) A strong aqueous solution of tannic acid (tannin) is added to
sulphuric acid as long as a precipitate falls; the powder is collected,
washed, and dissolved by the aid of heat in dilute sulphuric acid; the
solution, after being boiled for a few minutes, deposits, on cooling,
crystals of gallic acid in considerable quantity.

4. (Scheele.) A filtered decoction of galls is exposed for some months in
an open vessel; after a time it grows mouldy, and becomes covered with a
thick, glutinous pellicle; in two or three months the sides of the vessel
and the under portion of the pellicle are found to be covered with small
yellow crystals of gallic acid, which are purified as directed above. (See
No. 1.)

5. (Ph. D., B. P.) The Dublin contains two formulae for gallic acid, the
one being based on that of Dumas or Scheele, the other on that of Graham
or Liebig.--_a._ From galls (in coarse powder), 1 lb.; water, q. s. to
make a stiff paste; a porcelain dish is ordered, and the exposure in the
moistened condition is to be continued for 6 weeks; the solution of the
first crop of crystals is to be made in 10 fl. oz. of boiling water, and
when the filtrate has cooled to 80 deg. Fahr., it is to be poured off from the
crystals which have formed, which are then to be washed with ice-cold
water, 3 fl. oz., and dried--first in blotting paper, and finally by a
steam or water heat. By boiling the undissolved portion of the galls with
45 fl. oz. of fresh water, more crystals may be obtained.

_b._ Powdered gall-nuts, 1 lb., are steeped for 24 hours in water, 1 pint,
and after being placed in a porcelain displacement apparatus, are treated
with water, 1-1/2 pint, added in successive portions; oil of vitriol, 5
fl. oz., diluted with an equal volume of water, and allowed to cool, is
now added to the percolated infusion, and after thorough admixture the
liquid is filtered from the viscid precipitate which forms; oil of
vitriol, 5 fl. oz. (diluted as before), is then added to the filtrate, the
precipitates, enveloped in calico, are submitted to powerful pressure, and
subsequently dissolved in oil of vitriol, 16 fl. oz., previously diluted
with water, 56 fl. oz.; the solution is boiled for 20 minutes, and set
aside for a week; at the end of this time the deposit which forms is
dissolved in three times its weight of boiling water, and the solution
treated as before.

_Prop._ Gallic acid forms small, feathery, and nearly colourless crystals,
which have a beautiful silky lustre; that of commerce is usually of a
pale-yellow colour; it is soluble in 100 parts of cold water, and in 3
parts of boiling water; it is also soluble in alcohol, and slightly so in
ether; the aqueous solution is decomposed by exposure to the air;
dissolved in hot oil of vitriol, it forms a deep, rich, red solution,
which, when thrown into water, drops the gallic acid, deprived of some of
its water. This substance is soluble in the alkalies, and dyes cloth like
madder. When strongly heated, gallic acid is converted into metagallic
acid, or into pyrogallic acid, according to the manner in which the heat
is applied.

_Tests._ Gallic acid is distinguished from tannic acid by not affecting
solutions of gelatin, the protosalts of iron, or the salts of the
alkaloids, and by giving a deep bluish-black precipitate with the
sesquisalts of iron, which disappears when the liquid is heated. It is
distinguished from pyrogallic acid by its inferior insolubility in water,
and by its not affecting the solutions of the protosalts of iron. To
detect gallic acid mixed with tannic acid, the latter should be removed,
either by digesting the substance in ether, or by immersing for some time
in its solution a piece of skin depilated by lime, previously to applying
the tests.

_Pur._ Free from colour; decomposed by heat; soluble in water and in
rectified spirit. It turns preparations of the sesquioxide of iron,
dissolved in water, of a bluish black colour, but throws down nothing from
a solution of isinglass.

_Uses, &c._ The principal use of pure gallic acid is in the art of
_photography_. It has recently been employed in _medicine_, as an internal
astringent, in doses of 3 to 10 gr., thrice a day, or oftener; in
haemorrhage and fluxes, as well as for checking the night sweats in
phthisis. Dr Todd says, that in all cases of internal haemorrhage, or
haemorrhagic tendency, it is the best astringent or styptic we possess. As
an external astringent, it is greatly inferior to tannic acid. It has been
given in doses of 15 to 30 gr. in tape-worm, "but without any benefit."
(Pereira.)

_Purification._ Gallic acid, as obtained by either of the above forms, is
never quite pure; but it may be rendered absolutely pure by combining it
with oxide of lead, and decomposing the compound (gallate of lead) by
sulphuretted hydrogen. The sulphuret of lead acts like animal charcoal in
removing the colour. (Liebig.) Commercial gallic acid "may be rendered
nearly white by dissolving it in 20 times its weight of boiling distilled
water, and causing the solution to traverse a stratum of prepared animal
charcoal, spread upon a calico filter. When the liquid passes through
colourless, it should be evaporated to 1-6th its volume, and then suffered
to cool, in order to the separation of the crystallised acid." (Ph. D.)

=GALLIC FERMENTATION.= This name has been given to the peculiar process by
which tannic acid is converted into gallic acid, under the joint influence
of moisture and atmospheric oxygen. According to the researches of M.
Antoine Larocque, the peculiar ferment of nut-galls which operates this
change also converts sugar into alcohol and carbonic acid, in the same way
as yeast does; whilst beer yeast, muscular flesh, and caseous matter
change tannin into gallic acid. The similarity of the gallic and vinous
fermentation may hence be reasonably inferred.

=GALLIUM.= A new metal discovered in August, 1875, by means of the
spectroscope, by M. Lecoq Boisbaudran, in a specimen of blende from the
mines of Pierrefitte, in the Pyrenees. The new element was named gallium
in honour of France, the discoverer's native country.

Gallium gives a spectrum composed of two bands in the violet, one of the
bands being brilliant, and of wave length 417, and the other, a feeble one
of wave length, 403.3.

The Pierrefitte blende contains one part of gallium in four hundred
thousand. It is, however, found much more abundantly in a black blende
from Bensberg, on the Rhine, one hundred thousand parts of this latter
yielding one part of gallium.

Gallium resembles lead in appearance, but is less blue in colour. Exposed
to moist air it tarnishes slightly. It is a little harder than lead, is
flexible, malleable, and may be easily cut with a knife. If melted and
poured upon glass, it adheres to it, and forms a mirror which is whiter
than that caused by mercury. A red heat fails to volatilise it to any
appreciable extent, and it is only slightly oxidised at that temperature;
therefore it is not tarnished when exposed to the air. Hot nitric acid
dissolves it, but the cold acid has scarcely any action on it. It melts at
30.15 C. When once fused, it preserves the liquid condition even for
several months at 0 deg. C.,[324] until it is touched by some solid body, or
by a piece of solid gallium, when it congeals to a crystalline solid,
having a specific gravity of 5.93; when fused it has a specific gravity of
6.08. It crystallises in square octohedra. In properties gallium is more
or less intermediate between the metals aluminium and indium.

[Footnote 324: In consequence of this curious property gallium was first
described as a liquid metal.]

Chemical reactions of gallium:--The following are the chief reactions of
the salts of gallium when in solution. With ammonia they give a white
gelatinous precipitate, soluble, but not readily in excess of the
precipitant; potash gives a similar precipitate, soluble in excess;
acetate of ammonia, on boiling in a solution free from excess of acid,
precipitates a basic compound; barium carbonate readily precipitates
gallium salts in the cold. A sulphate and a chloride of gallium have
already been obtained. These salts are both very soluble; the sulphate is
a non-deliquescent substance, the chloride, on the contrary, is
excessively so, and decomposed by a large excess of water. Gallium also
forms an alum consisting of the double sulphate with ammonium. Gallium
alum is a beautifully crystalline body, more soluble in cold than in hot
water.

At a meeting of the 'Academie des Sciences' in March, 1878, M. de
Baubradon stated that he had determined the atomic weight of gallium. The
mean of two experiments showed it to be 69.9.

The 'Comptes Rendus' for February, 1878 (No. 7), contains a communication
from MM. Lecoq de Boisbaudran and E. Jungfleisch, on the extraction of
gallium from the ores in which it is found associated with indium.

The following is the process given by the authors:--The blende of
Bendsberg is pulverised and then roasted in a Perret furnace, by which
treatment the greater part of the indium is volatilised. The residue is
treated with sulphuric acid in quantity sufficient to dissolve almost all
the zinc, and there is thus obtained a residue which is treated with
excess of sulphuric acid.

The persalts of iron present are then reduced by means of metallic zinc,
and the filtrate fractionally precipitated with carbonate of sodium; the
precipitates are redissolved in sulphuric acid, and the reduction with
zinc and the fractional precipitation repeated, the latter operation being
in both cases watched by the spectroscope.

The precipitate containing the gallium concentrated in a small bulk, is
redissolved in acid, and the excess of the latter reagent removed by
evaporation, after which it is boiled with much water. The filtrate
separated from the sediment containing titanic acid, which form is treated
with sulphuretted hydrogen, then mixed with acetate of ammonium and again
treated with sulphuretted hydrogen, which throws down the galliferous
sulphide of zinc free from alumina. Again the precipitate is dissolved in
sulphuric acid, and the solution fractionally precipitated with carbonate
of sodium, which operation, guided as it is by spectral examination,
entirely removes the zinc. By once more dissolving in the exactly
necessary amount of sulphuric acid, and treating with sulphuretted
hydrogen, cadmium, lead, indium and zinc are removed, and the filtrate is
then largely diluted with water and boiled. The bulky sub-salt of gallium
which separates at this temperature is treated with potash, which leaves
iron, indium, &c., undissolved, and the alkaline liquor when treated with
sulphuretted hydrogen, and subsequently with sulphuric acid to slight
acidity, yields a deposit consisting mainly of sulphide of indium.

The slightly acid liquid is then boiled with much water, and the deposit
of sub-salt of gallium thus obtained is dissolved in potash, and the
solution subjected to electrolysis, by which means a metallic deposit of
gallium is obtained.

It is interesting to note how accurately many of the chemical physical
properties to gallium had, previously to its discovery, been predicted by
the Russian chemist, Mendelejeff, by reasoning on the so-called "periodic
law," which he thus defines:--"The properties of the simple bodies, as
also the properties and constitution of their combinations, are periodic
functions of the atomic weights of the elements."

In 1864 an English chemist named Mr Newlands, observing certain relations
existing between the atomic weights of many of the elements, was the first
to arrange them in such a manner or serial form as to suggest that when
certain gaps were observed in the atomic weights of a series, new elements
might be assumed to exist. Guided by this theory, Mendelejeff affirmed
that the "periodic law" not only indicates vacancies in the classificatory
scheme of the known elements, but enables us to predict the properties of
elements as yet undiscovered, and of their compounds. Thus, of one of the
vacancies observable in the table of the elements arranged according to
his classification, Mendeljeff asserted, that should the element (which he
named _Eka aluminium_) with the corresponding atomic number be discovered,
it would possess the following characteristics:--It would most probably,
like indium and thallium, be discovered by the aid of spectrum analysis.
Gallium, as we have seen, was found by this means. The formula of its
oxide would be El_{2}O_{3}; the oxide of gallium is best represented by
Ga_{2}O_{3}.

The salts would have the general formula ElX_{3}; the salts of gallium
have most probably the general formula GaX_{3}. It will form an alum
isomorphous with common alum, this we have seen gallium does. Its salts
would be precipitable by barium carbonate; the gallium salts are thrown
down by this reagent. It would not oxidise in the air; gallium does not
tarnish upon exposure to the air. It would decompose water at a red heat;
gallium readily does this at high temperatures. Its specific gravity (and
this is very remarkable) would be about 5.9; gallium has a specific
gravity of 5.93. Its atomic weight would be about 68; that of gallium is
69.9.

The hypothetical _Eka aluminium_ of Mendelejeff appears therefore to
correspond with the gallium of Boisbaudran.

=GALLS.= _Syn._ GALL-NUTS, NUT-GALLS; GALLA (B. P.); GALLAE (Ph. E.).
"Excrescences on _Quercus infectoria_ caused by the puncture and deposited
ova of _Diplolepis Gallae tinctoriae_." The best galls are blueish-black,
heavy, and not yet perforated; intensely astringent. They are imported
from Aleppo, and are known in commerce as black or blue galls (GALLAE
NIGRAE, G. C[OE]RULAE). The next quality is termed, from their colour, green
galls (GALLAE VIRIDES). Both are gathered before the insect has escaped,
and are styptic and powerfully astringent. White galls (GALLAE ALBAE) are
lighter, less astringent, and inferior.

_Uses, &c._ Galls are extensively employed in the art of dyeing, and
constitute one of the principal ingredients in all the shades of black,
and are also employed to fix or improve several other colours. A decoction
of galls, to which a little green copperas and gum Arabic has been added,
forms common writing ink. In _medicine_ they are used as an astringent, in
haemorrhages and fluxes, in doses of 10 to 20 gr.; and topically, under the
form of infusion or decoction, as a gargle in relaxation of the uvula; as
an injection in gleet and leucorrh[oe]a; as a lotion or fomentation in
flabby ulcers, prolapsus ani, &c.; and as an ointment in piles, watery
ulcers, &c. The infusion or decoction is also used as an antidote to
poisoning by the alkaloids, and was formerly given as a tonic in
intermittents. See GALLIC ACID, INK, &c.

=GALL'STONE.= _Syn._ CALCULUS BILIOSUS, C. CYSTICUS BOVINUS, L. Formed in
the gall-bladder of neat cattle in winter, when they are fed upon dry
food. Used as a yellow pigment, and in medicine--_Dose_, 1 gr.; in
dyspepsia and flatulency. Man is also subject to gall-stone, the presence
or passage of which is attended with the most acute pain, frequently
accompanied with nausea and sickness. In no case should a patient
suffering from a paroxysm such as above described delay to seek immediate
medical aid. The following treatment is recommended for the benefit of
those only who, like emigrants and others, may be unable to obtain
professional assistance.

The pain and spasm should be endeavoured to be alleviated by full doses of
laudanum, given in soda water. If there be much sickness, the laudanum
should be given in the form of an enema. If the paroxysm be excessive, the
cautious inhalation of ether or chloroform should be tried. When the pain
is of long duration, leeching should be had recourse to. Ice applied
freely to the pit of the stomach has sometimes been found to give relief.
See CALCULUS.

=GALV'ANIZED IRON.= See IRON and ZINCING.

=GAM'BOGE.= _Syn._ (CAMBOGE; CAMBOGIA, L. B. P.) GAMBOGIA, L. "A gum-resin
obtained from _Garcinia Morella_." (B. P.) Gamboge is an active hydragogue
and drastic purgative, which occasionally proves useful in torpor of the
abdominal and pelvic viscera; but which is highly dangerous in an
irritable or inflammatory state of the stomach or bowels, and during
pregnancy. It is very apt to induce nausea and vomiting. In large
quantities it is a violent poison. "The deaths which have occurred from
the use of enormous quantities of Morrison's pills are mainly ascribable
to the gamboge contained in those medicines." (Pereira.)--_Dose_, 1 to 5
gr., made into pills or mixture, every 4 to 6 hours; in obstinate
constipation, in dropsies, in apoplexy and like cerebral affections, and
in worms (especially tape-worm), either alone or combined with other
cathartics. See COMPOUND EXTRACT OF COLOCYNTH.

=GAME.= The flesh of game is believed to possess strengthening qualities
superior to that of poultry. It also contains less fat. Game is tender and
easy of digestion, and it has a delicate and marked flavour. It forms a
valuable diet for the invalid, by reason of its easy digestibility.

Respecting the choice and preservation of game, Eliza Acton writes--"Buck
venison, which is in season only from June to Michaelmas, is considered
finer than doe venison, which comes into the market in October, and
remains in season through November and December; neither should be cooked
at any other part of the year.

"The greater the depth of fat upon the haunch the better the quality of
the meat will be, provided it be clear and white, and the lean of a dark
hue.

"If the cleft of the hoof, which is always left on the joint, be small and
smooth, the animal is young; but it is old when the marks are the reverse
of these.[325] Although the haunch is the prime and favourite joint of
venison, the neck and shoulder are also excellent, dressed in various
ways, and make much-approved _pasties_. A free current of air in a larder
where venison is kept is always a great advantage.

[Footnote 325: Venison is not in perfection when young.]

"All moisture should be wiped daily, or even more frequently, from the
venison with soft cloths, when any appears upon the surface, and every
precaution must be taken to keep off the flies when the venison is not
hung in a wire safe. Black pepper thickly powdered on it will generally
answer the purpose.

"Hares and rabbits are stiff when freshly killed, and if young the ears
tear easily, and the claws are smooth and sharp. A hare in cold weather
will remain good for ten or fourteen days; care only must be taken to
prevent the inside from becoming musty, which it will do if it has been
emptied in the field. Pheasants, partridges, and other game, may be chosen
by nearly the same tests as poultry--by opening the bill the staleness
will be detected easily if they have been kept too long by the hardness of
the bill. With few exceptions game depends almost entirely for the fine
flavour and the tenderness of its flesh, on the time which it is allowed
to hang before it is cooked, and it is never good when very fresh; but it
does not follow that it should be sent to table in a really offensive
state."

=Game, Hashed.= _Ingredients._--The remains of cold game, one onion stuck
with three cloves, a few whole peppers, a strip of lemon peel, salt to
taste, thickening of butter and flour, one glass of port wine, one
tablespoonful of lemon juice, one tablespoonful of ketchup, and one pint
of water or weak stock.

Proceed as follows:--Cut the remains of cold game into joints, reserve the
best pieces, and put the inferior ones and the trimmings into a stewpan
with the onion, pepper, lemon peel, salt, and water or weak stock; stew
these for about an hour, and strain the gravy; thicken it with butter and
flour; add the wine, lemon juice, and ketchup; lay in the pieces of game,
and place them by the side of the fire until they are warmed through,
avoiding boiling, otherwise the game will become too hard. Just on the
point of simmering serve, and garnish the dish with sippets of toasted
bread. _Time._ Altogether, an hour and a quarter.

[asterism] The above recipe applies to any kind of game.

If desirable, the flavour may be varied by adding flavoured vinegars,
curry powder, &c.; these, however, cover the gamey taste of the dish, and
are, therefore, not to be recommended.

=Grouse, to Roast.= _Ingredients._--Grouse, butter, a thick slice of
toasted bread. _Mode._--Let the birds hang as long as possible; pluck and
draw them; wipe (but do not wash them) inside and out, and truss them
without the head, the same as for a roast fowl. Put them down to a sharp
clear fire, keep them well basted the whole of the time they are cooking,
and serve them on buttered toast, soaked in the dripping-pan, with a
little melted butter poured over them, or with bread sauce and gravy.
_Time._ Half an hour; if liked thoroughly done, thirty-five minutes.
Seasonable from the 12th of August to the beginning of December. (Mrs
Beeton.)

=Hare, Jugged.= _Ingredients._--One hare, a bunch of sweet herbs, two
onions, each stuck with three cloves, six whole allspice, half a
teaspoonful of black pepper, a strip of lemon peel, thickening of butter
and flour, two table-spoonfuls of mushroom ketchup, quarter of a pint of
port wine. _Mode._--Wash the hare nicely, cut it up into joints (not too
large), and flour and brown them; then put them into a stewpan with the
herbs, onions, cloves, allspice, pepper, and lemon peel; cover them with
hot water, and when it boils carefully remove all the scum, and let it
simmer gently till tender, which will be in about 1-3/4 hour, or longer
should the hare be very old. Take out the pieces of hare, thicken the
gravy with flour and butter, add the ketchup and port wine, let it boil
for about ten minutes, strain it through a sieve over the hare, and serve.
A few fried forcemeat balls should be added at the moment of serving, or,
instead of frying them, they may be stewed in the gravy, about ten minutes
before the hare is wanted for use. Do not omit to serve red-currant jelly
with it. _Time._ Altogether, two hours. Seasonable from September to the
end of February. (Mrs Beeton.)

=Hare, to Roast.= _Ingredients._--Hare, forcemeat, a little milk, and
butter. To be eaten in perfection, the hare must hang for some time. After
it is skinned wash it well, and soak it for an hour in warm water to draw
out the blood. Make a forcemeat, wipe the hare dry, fill the belly with
it, and sew it up. Bring the hind and fore legs close to the body towards
the head, run a skewer through each, fix the head between the shoulders by
means of another skewer, and be careful to leave the ears on. Put a string
round the body from skewer to skewer and tie it above the back.
_Mode._--The hare should be kept at a distance from the fire when it is
first laid down. Baste it well with milk for a short time, and afterwards
with butter; and particular attention must be paid to the basting, so as
to preserve the meat on the back juicy and nutritive. When it is almost
roasted enough, flour the hare, and baste well with butter. When nicely
frothed dish it, remove the skewers, and send it to table with a little
gravy in the dish, and a tureen of the same. Red-currant jelly must be
served with it. If the liver is good it may be parboiled, minced, and
mixed with the stuffing; but it should not be used unless quite fresh.
_Time._ A middling-sized hare an hour and a quarter; a large hare one and
a half to two hours. (Mrs Beeton.)

=Partridges, to Roast.= Let the birds hang as long as they can possibly be
kept without becoming offensive; pick them carefully, draw and singe them,
wipe the insides thoroughly with a clean cloth, truss them with the head
turned under the wing and the legs drawn close together, not crossed.
Flour them when first laid to the fire, and baste them plentifully with
butter. Serve them with bread sauce and good brown gravy; a little of this
last should be poured over them. _Time._ 30 or 40 minutes. In preparing
them for the spit the crop must be removed through a slit cut in the back
of neck, the claws clipped close, and the legs held in boiling water for a
minute, that they may be skinned more easily. (Eliza Acton.)

=Pheasant, to Roast.= Let it hang as many days as possible without
becoming tainted. Pluck off the feathers carefully, cut a slit in the back
of the neck to remove crop, then draw the bird in the usual way, and
either wipe the inside very clean with a damp cloth, or pour water through
it; wipe the outside also, but with a dry cloth; cut off the toes, turn
the head of the bird _under_ the wing, with the bill laid straight along
the breast; skewer the legs, which must not be crossed; flour the pheasant
well, lay it to a brisk fire, and baste it constantly and plentifully with
well-flavoured butter. Send bread sauce and good brown gravy to table with
it. _Time._ Three quarters of an hour, a few minutes less if liked very
much underdone, five or ten more for thorough roasting, with a _good_ fire
in both instances. In season from October to the end of January. (Eliza
Acton.)

=Rabbit, to Boil.= Rabbits that are three parts grown, or, at all events,
which are still quite young, should be chosen for boiling. Wash them well,
truss them firmly, with the heads turned and skewered to the sides, drop
them into sufficient boiling water to keep them quite covered until they
are cooked, and simmer them gently from thirty to forty-five minutes; when
_very_ young they will require even less time than this. Cover them with
rich white sauce mixed with livers parboiled, finely pounded, and well
seasoned with cayenne and lemon juice; or with white onion sauce, or with
parsley and butter, made with milk or cream instead of water (the livers,
minced, are often added to the last of these), or with good mushroom
sauce. _Time._ 30 to 45 minutes. (Eliza Acton.)

=Rabbit, to Roast.= This is much improved by having the backbone taken
out. When this is done line the inside with thin slices of bacon, fill it
with forcemeat, sew it up, truss, and roast it at a clear, brisk fire, and
baste it constantly with butter. Flour it well soon after it is laid down.
Serve it with good brown gravy, and with currant jelly, when this last is
liked. _Time._ 3/4 hour to 1 hour; less if small. (Eliza Acton.)

=Venison, Haunch of, to Roast.= To prepare the venison for the spit wash
it slightly with tepid water, or merely wipe it thoroughly with damp
cloths, and dry it afterwards with clean ones; then lay over the fat side
a large sheet of thickly-buttered paper, and next a paste of flour and
water about three quarters of an inch thick; cover this again with two or
three sheets of stout paper, secure the whole well with twine, and lay the
haunch to a sound, clear fire; baste the paper immediately with butter or
clarified dripping, and roast the joint from three hours and a half to
four and a half, according to its weight and quality. Doe venison will
require half an hour less time than buck. Twenty minutes before the joint
is done remove the paste and paper, baste the meat in every part with
butter, and dredge it very lightly with flour; let it take a pale-brown
colour, and send it to table as hot as possible, with gravy in a tureen
and good currant jelly. _Time._ 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 hours. The kind of gravy
appropriate to venison is a matter on which individual taste must decide.
(Eliza Acton.)

=Venison, Hashed.= _Ingredients._--The remains of roast venison, its own
or mutton gravy, thickening of butter and flour. _Mode._--Cut the meat
from the bones in neat slices, and, if there is sufficient of its own
gravy left, put the meat into this, as it is preferable to any other.
Should there not be enough put the bones and trimmings into a stewpan with
about a pint of mutton gravy; let them stew gently for an hour, and strain
the gravy. Put a little flour and butter into the stewpan, keep stirring
until brown, then add the strained gravy, and give it a boil up; skim and
strain again, and when a little cool put in the slices of venison. Place
the stewpan by the side of the fire, and when on the point of simmering
serve. Do not allow it to boil. Send red-currant jelly to table with it.
_Time._ Altogether, an hour and a half. A small quantity of Harvey sauce,
ketchup, or port wine, may be added to enrich the gravy.

=GAN'GRENE.= See MORTIFICATION.

=GAN'TEINE.= A composition used to clean kid and other leather gloves.

_Prep._ 1. (M. Buhan.) Curd soap (in small shavings), 1 part; water, 3
parts; mix with heat, and stir in of essence of citron, 1 part.

2. (SAPONINE,--Duvignau.) Soap (in powder), 250 parts; water, 155 parts;
dissolve with heat, cool, and add, of _eau de javelle_, 165 parts,
solution of ammonia, 10 parts, and rub the whole to a smooth paste.
Patent. A small portion of either of the above is rubbed over the glove
with a piece of flannel (always in one direction), until it is
sufficiently clean. See GLOVES.

=GARAN'CINE.= See MADDER RED.

=GAR'DENING.= See HORTICULTURE.

=GAR'GLE.= _Syn._ GARGARISM, THROATWASH; GARGARISMA, GARGARISMUS,
GARGARISMUM, L. A liquid medicine applied to the back part of the mouth or
upper part of the throat. Gargles are applied by allowing a small mouthful
to run as much as possible over the affected part, by holding the head
backwards and breathing through it, by which means the liquid is agitated
and its action promoted.

Gargles are not to be swallowed. It often happens, however, that patients,
either by accident or from negligence, do swallow a certain quantity,
notwithstanding the instructions given them to the contrary. Care should
therefore be taken to avoid making gargles of such substances as may
occasion unpleasant symptoms in small doses, though they may not, perhaps,
amount to poisoning.

Gargles usually have for their basis either simple water, or milk, wine,
or vinegar, diluted with water, to which, in both cases, sugar, honey, or
syrup is generally added. Their other ingredients vary with the
indication, but must, in all cases, be either in the liquid form, or
soluble in the liquid used as the excipient.

Gargles are commonly dispensed in mixture bottles. The quantity used at a
time, under ordinary circumstances, may be about 2-3rds of a
wine-glassful.

=Gargle.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA, G. COMMUNE, G. SIMPLEX, L. _Prep._ 1. (St. B.
Hosp.) Honey or honey of roses, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; strong vinegar, 2-1/2 fl.
oz.; barley water, 1 pint.

2. (St. George's.) Oxymel, 1 fl. dr.; decoction of barley, 5 fl. dr. In
common sore throats, &c. The formulae of several other hospitals are
similar.

=Gargle of Ac'etate of Ammo''nia.= _Syn._ GARGARISMS AMMONIAE ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ (Wendt.) Solution of acetate of ammonia and honey of roses, of
each 1 fl. oz.; elder-flower water, 8 fl. oz.; mix. In the ulcerated sore
throat of scarlet fever.

=Gargle of Acetate of Manganese.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA MANGANESII ACETATIS.
_Prep._ Acetate of Manganese, 1 drachm; water, 7 fluid ounces; clarified
honey, 1 oz. The chloride and sulphate of manganese are also used, about
1/2 drachm or 2 scruples to 6 oz. of barley water.

=Gargle of Ace'tic Acid.= _Syn._ OXYMEL GARGLE; GARGARISMA ACIDI ACETICI,
L. _Prep._ 1. (St. B. Hosp.) Acetic acid, 1 dr.; oxymel, 2 fl. dr.; water
to make up 4 fl. oz.

2. Barley water, 12 fl. oz.; acetic acid, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; honey, 6 dr.
Antiseptic. For sore throat.

=Gargle of Aluminium Chloride.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ALUMINII CHLORIDI.
_Prep._ (Throat Hosp.) Solution of chloride of aluminium 12 minims, water
1 fl. oz. Astringent and antiseptic.

=Gargle of Al'um.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ALUMINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Augustin.)
Oak-bark (in powder), 1 oz.; water, 1-1/2 pint; boil to a pint, filter,
cool, and add, of alum, 1/2 dr.; brandy, 2 fl. oz. In inflammation of the
mouth and throat.

2. (Cavarra.) Alum, 3 dr.; water, 6 fl. oz.; dissolve. In offensive
breath.

3. (Foy.) Alum, 1 dr.; tincture of myrrh, 2 fl. dr.; tincture of bark, 4
fl. dr.; honey of roses, 2 oz.; laudanum, 20 drops; wine, 2/3 pint. In
scurvy.

4. (Grant.) Alum, 1 oz.; tincture of myrrh, 1/2 fl. oz.; peppermint water,
7 fl. oz. In relaxation of the uvula, &c.

5. (Mid. Hosp.) Alum, 1 dr.; honey, 2 dr.; water to make 6 fl. oz. As No.
4.

6. (P. Cod.) Alum, 40 gr.; honey of roses, 1 oz.; infusion of roses, 6 fl.
oz. As the last.

7. (Ratier.) Alum, 1 oz.; infusion of red roses and barley water, of each
3 fl. oz.; honey of roses, 2 oz. As No. 4.

8. (Westm. Hosp.) Alum, 1 dr.; dilute sulphuric acid, 1 fl. dr.; treacle,
4 dr.; water to 15 fl. oz.

9. (Ph. Wirtem.) Alum and nitre, of each 3 oz.; cream of tartar, 4 oz.;
dilute acetic acid, 4 lbs.; dissolve, evaporate to dryness, and powder the
residuum. For use, 1/2 oz. of the powder is dissolved in water, 8 fl. oz.
Highly recommended in inflammation of the fauces and tonsils. This forms
Zobel's 'SPECIFIC FOR QUINSY,'

=Gargle, Antiscorbu'tic.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ANTISCORBUTICUM, L. _Prep._
(P. Cod.) Bitter species, 1 dr.; boiling water, 8 oz.; macerate 1 hour,
strain, and add, syrup of honey, 2 oz.; antiscorbutic tincture, 1 oz.

=Gargle, Antisep'tic.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ANTISEPTICUM, L. _Prep._ (Fr.
Hosp.) Decoction of bark, 6 oz.; camphor, 20 gr.; sal-ammoniac, 12 gr. In
putrid sore throat, &c.

=Gargle, Astrin'gent.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ASTRINGENS, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Collier.) Tincture of galls, 2 fl. dr.; honey, 1/2 oz.; water, 6 fl. oz.
In relaxation of the uvula and fauces.

2. (Collier.) Honey, 4 dr.; tincture of myrrh, 3 dr.; powdered alum, 40
gr.; compound infusion of roses, 5-1/2 fl. oz. As the last, and in fetid
sore throat.

3. (Sir A. Cooper.) Alum, 2 dr.; decoction of bark, 12 oz.; honey of
roses, 1-1/2 oz.

4. (Dr A. T. Thomson.) Infusion of roses, 7 fl. oz.; dilute sulphuric
acid, 1 fl. dr.; tincture of catechu, 6 fl. dr.; laudanum, 1-1/2 fl. dr.
For relaxation of the uvula. See GARGLE OF ALUM.

=Gargle of Bo''rax.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA BORACIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ellis.)
Borax, 1 dr.; tincture of myrrh, 4 fl. dr.; clarified honey, 1 fl. oz.;
rose water, 4 fl. oz.

2. (Fr. Hosp.) Borax, 2 dr.; honey or capillaire, 1 oz.; rose water, 7 fl.
oz.

3. (Guy's Hosp.) Borax, 2 dr.; honey of roses, 1 oz.; barley water, 7 fl.
oz.

4. (Mid. Hosp.) Borax, 1 dr.; simply oxymel, 2 dr.; water to make 3 fl.
oz. The above are used in thrush or aphthous sore mouth, ptyalism, &c.

=Gargle of Bromide of Potassium.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA POTASSII BROMIDI.
_Prep._ (Throat Hosp.) Bromide of potassium, 10 grains; water, 1 fl. oz.
Sedative.

=Gargle of Cap'sicum.= _Syn._ GARGLE OF CAYENNE PEPPER; GARGARISMA
CAPSICI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Dr Griffith.) Tincture of capsicum, 1/2 fl. oz.;
rose water, 8 fl. oz.

2. (St. B. Hosp.)--_a._ Capsicum, 3 dr.; common salt, 1 oz.; boiling
water, 1 pint; macerate for 12 hours, strain, and add of distilled
vinegar, 1 pint.

_b._ Tincture of capsicum, 1 fl. dr.; compound infusion of roses, 8 fl.
oz.

3. (U. C. Hosp.) Tincture of capsicum, 1 fl. dr.; honey, 6 dr.; water to 4
fl. oz. Used in ulcerated sore throat, scarlet fever, &c.

=Gargle of Carbolic Acid.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ACIDI CARBOLICI. _Prep._
(Throat Hosp.). Carbolic acid, 2 gr.; glycerin, 25 minims; water, 1 fluid
ounce. Stimulant and antiseptic.

=Gargle of Chlo''rate of Potas'sa.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA POTASSAE CHLORATIS,
L. _Prep._ (Beasley.) Chlorate of potassa, 1 dr.; honey of roses, 1 oz.;
water, 7 oz. Used in malignant sore throat, scarlatina, &c.

=Gargle of Chlo''ride of Lime.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA CALCIS CHLORINATAE, L.
_Prep._ From chloride of lime, 1 dr.; water, 1/2 pint; agitate together
for 10 minutes, filter through linen, and add of simple syrup, 1 fl. oz.
Used in putrid sore throat, scarlet fever, &c.

=Gargle of Chloride of So'da.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA SODAE CHLORINATAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Copland.) Liquor of chloride of soda, 12 fl. dr.; honey, 1/2
oz.; water, 6 fl. oz.

2. (Hosp. Form.) Chlorinated solution of soda, 4 fl. dr.; water to 4 fl.
oz. Used as the last.

=Gargle of Chlo''rine Water.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA CHLORINII, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Fr. Hosp.) Chlorine water, 1/2 fl. oz.; syrup, 1 fl. oz.; water, 4-1.2
fl. oz.

2. (Mid. Hosp.) Chlorine water, 2 fl. oz.; distilled water, 10 fl. oz.
_Use._ As the last.

=Gargle of Cincho'na Bark.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA CINCHONAE, L. _Prep._ 1. From
decoction of cinchona, 7 fl. oz.; simple oxymel, 1 fl. oz. Antiseptic and
astringent in relaxation, &c.

2. (Acidulated; GARGARISMA CINCHONAE ACIDUS, L.) Hydrochloric acid, 1-1/2
fl. dr.; honey, 1-1/2 oz.; decoction of bark to make up 8 fl. oz.

=Gargle, Com'mon.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA COMMUNE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ed. Hosp.)
Water, 6 fl. oz.; nitre, 1 dr.; honey of roses, 1 oz. For ordinary sore
throat, &c.

2. (Lond. Hosp.) Alum, 1 dr.; dilute sulphuric acid, 2 fl. dr.; tincture
of myrrh, 4 fl. dr.; water to 12 fl. oz.

=Gargle of Cy'anide of Mercury.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA HYDRARGYRI CYANIDI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Brera.) Cyanide of mercury, 10 gr.; honey of roses, 1 oz.;
barley water, 1 pint.

2. (Cullerier.) Cyanide of mercury, 10 gr.; linseed tea, 1 pint. Used in
the same cases as mercurial gargle.

=Gargle, Deter'gent.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA DETERGENS, L. _Prep._ 1. (P. Cod.)
Alcoholised sulphuric acid, 1 fl. dr.; honey of roses, 2 oz.; barley
water, 8 oz.

2. (Dr A. T. Thomson.) Nitre, 2 dr.; honey of roses, 4 fl. dr.; infusion
of roses, 5-1/2 fl. oz. In inflammatory sore throat.

=Gargle, Emol'lient.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA EMOLLIENS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Buchan.)
Marshmallow root, 1 oz.; figs, 2 oz.; water, 1 quart; boil to a pint and
strain. Demulcent, soothing.

2. (Trousseau & Reveil.) Barley water, 8 oz.; honey, 1-1/2 oz. Both are
used in inflammatory affections of the throat and mouth.

=Gargle of Horserad'ish.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ARMORACIAE, L. _Prep._
(Collier.) Compound spirit of horseradish, 1 fl. oz.; honey, 2 oz.; water,
4 fl. oz. A good gargle for scurvy of the fauces and pharynx, vulgarly
called the 'inward scurvy.'

=Gargle of Hydrochlo''ric Acid.= _Syn._ MURIATIC ACID GARGLE; GARGARISMA
ACIDI HYDROCHLORICI. L. _Prep._ 1. (Guy's Hosp.) Hydrochloric acid, 30
drops; honey of roses, 2 oz.; barley water, 6 fl. oz.

2. (Ratier.) Hydrochloric acid, 2 fl. dr.; clarified honey, 2 fl. oz.;
barley water, 1 pint.

3. (St. B. Hosp.) Red-rose leaves, 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint;
hydrochloric acid, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; digest 1 hour, and strain. In
inflammatory sore throat, ulcerations of the mouth, scarlet fever, &c.

=Gargle of I'odine.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA IODINII, L. _Prep._ 1. Iodine, 10
gr.; iodide of potassium, 12 gr.; rectified spirit and simple syrup, of
each, 1 fl. oz.; water, 5 fl. oz. In chronic enlargement of the tonsils,
in scrofulous habits.

2. (Dr Ross.) Tincture of iodine, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; tincture of opium, 1 fl.
dr.; water, 6 fl. oz.

3. (St. T. Hosp.) Compound tincture of iodine, 2 fl. dr.; water, 5 fl. oz.
In ulceration of the tonsils.

=Gargle, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA HYDRARGYRI, G. MERCURIALE, L.
_Prep._ 1. (G. HYD. BICHLORIDI.) Corrosive sublimate, 2 to 5 gr.; barley
water, 1 pint; honey of roses, 2 fl. oz. For syphilitic ulcers in the
throat.

2. (Plenck.) Calomel, 6 gr.; quicksilver, 30 gr.; powdered gum, 3 dr.;
syrup of poppies, 1/2 oz.; triturate till the globules of metal disappear,
and add of decoction of clematis, 26 fl. oz.; honey of roses, 1 oz.;
essence of myrrh, 1 dr. (or tincture of myrrh, 1 fl. oz.). In syphilitic
and putrid sore throat.

=Gargle of Mustard.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA SINAPIS. _Prep._ (Fleury). Black
mustard seed, bruised 4 ounces; salt, 4 scruples; vinegar, 8 scruples;
warm water, 7 ounces. Digest and filter.

=Gargle of Myrrh.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA MYRRHAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ainslie.)
Tincture of myrrh, 6 fl. dr.; vinegar, 1 fl. dr.; honey of roses, 1-1/2
fl. oz.; barley water, 12 fl. oz.

2. (Ph. Chirur.) Tincture of myrrh, 1/2 oz.; honey of roses, 1-1/2 oz.;
lime water, 6 fl. oz. In scarlatina and putrid sore throat. See ASTRINGENT
GARGLE, &c.

=Gargle of Ni'tre.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA SALIS NITRI, G. POTASSAE NITRATIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Nitre, 2 dr.; honey or syrup, 1/2 oz.; rose water, 5-1/2 fl.
oz.

2. (Brande.) Nitre, 2 dr.; oxymel, 1 fl. oz.; barley water, 7 fl. oz. In
inflammatory sore throat. See COMMON GARGLE.

=Gargle of Oak-Bark.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA CORTICIS QUERCUS, L. _Prep._ 1.
Oak-bark, 2 dr.; boiling water, 6 fl. oz.; macerate 1 hour, and strain.

2. (Ellis.) Decoction of oak-bark, 1 pint; alum, 1/2 dr.; brandy, 2 fl.
oz. In chronic sore throat, relaxation of the uvula, &c.

=Gargle of Oxide of Manganese.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA MANGANESII OXIDI.
_Prep._ (Pareira). Black oxide of manganese, 2 dr.; decoction of barley, 5
fl. oz.

=Gargle of Pel'litory.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA PYRETHRI. _Prep._ 1. Pellitory
root, 4 dr.; water, 16 fl. oz.; boil to 8 fl. oz., and add of liquor of
ammonia 2 fl. dr.

2. (Swediaur.) Infusion of pellitory, 1 pint; vinegar, 3 fl. oz.;
sal-ammoniac, 3 dr. To promote the maturation and healing of throat
ulcers.

=Gargle of Permanganate of Potash.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA POTASSAE
PERMANGANATIS. _Prep._ (Throat Hosp.) Solution of permanganate of potash
(B. P.), 6 minims; distilled water, 1 fl. oz. Antiseptic.

=Gargle of Ro''ses.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ROSAE, G. ROSARUM, L. _Prep._
(Kendrick.) Conserve of roses, 3 oz.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz.; infuse 1
hour; add of dilute sulphuric acid, 2 fl. dr., and strain. Antiseptic,
astringent; used in several indications.

=Gargle of Subacetate of Lead.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA PLUMBI SUBACETATIS.
_Prep._ (Ratier.) Liquid subacetate of lead, 1/2 dr.; barley water, 1 lb.;
syrup, 1 fl. oz.

=Gargle of Turpentine.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA TEREBINTHINATUM. _Prep._
(Geddings.) Oil of turpentine, 2 dr.; mucilage, 6-1/2 fl. oz. In
salivation.

=Gargle, Spirit.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA SPIRITUOSUM, G. SPIRITUS VINI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Dr Watson.) French brandy, 1 fl. oz.; water, 1/4 pint.

2. (St. George's.) Proof spirit, 1 fl. oz.; oxymel, 5 fl. dr.; decoction
of barley, to make up 6 fl. oz. In relaxations and salivation.

=Gargle, Stim'ulant.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA STIMULANS, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Copland.) Infusion of roses, 6-1/2 fl. oz.; dilute hydrochloric acid, 40
drops; tincture of capsicum, 1-1/2 fl. dr.; honey, 3 dr. See GARGLE OF
CAPSICUM.

=Gargle of Tan'nin.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ACIDI TANNICI, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Beral.) Tannin, 1 dr.; honey of roses, 2 oz.; rose water, 2 fl. oz.;
distilled water, 8 fl. oz.

2. (Jannart.) As the last, but using only half the quantity of tannin. In
salivation and aphthous ulcerations.

=Gargle of Verd'igris.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA AERUGINUS, G. CUPRI ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ (Guy's Hosp.) Oxymel of verdigris, 4 dr.; honey of roses, 2 oz.;
barley water, 3-1/2 fl. oz. Used as a detergent for ulcers in the throat.
If swallowed it produces violent vomiting. The addition of 2-1/2 oz. of
water to the above produces a gargle sufficiently strong for most cases.

=Gargle of Vin'egar.= See GARGLE OF ACETIC ACID.

=Gargle of Zinc.= _Syn._ GARGARISMA ZINCI, G. Z. SULPHATIS, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Copland.) Sulphate of zinc, 20 gr.; oxymel, 1 fl. oz.; rose water, 7 fl.
oz. In aphthous sores, relaxations, ulceration of the tonsils, &c.

=GAR'LIC.= _Syn._ ALLIUM, L. The _Allium sativum_ of botanists. It is
diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant, stimulant, and tonic; and externally,
irritant, rubefacient, and even vesicant.--_Dose_, 1/2 dr. to 1-1/2 dr.;
in enfeebled digestion, chronic diarrh[oe]a, old chronic coughs, atonic
dropsies, and worms. An antispasmodic and counter-irritant liniment is
made of the juice, which was formerly esteemed in chest diseases and
infantile convulsions. A small clove of garlic, or a few drops of the
juice, was formerly introduced into the ear in certain forms of deafness.
As a condiment its properties resemble those of the onion, than which it
is much more powerful.

=GAR'NET.= In _mineralogy_, one of the precious stones or gems. The finest
specimens of noble garnet (SYRIAN or ORIENTAL GARNET) are brought from
Pegu. According to chemical analysis, the garnet is a double silicate of
alumina and lime, coloured with iron and manganese.

=Garnet, Facti''tious.= See PASTES.

=GA'RUM.= [L.] A species of pickle or sauce prepared of fish, in a state
of incipient putrefaction, strongly salted and seasoned with aromatics.
According to Pliny, the Romans used a species of lobster for this purpose.

=GAS.= _Syn._ GAZ, Fr. A permanently elastic aeriform fluid. In English
the term 'air' is now usually restricted to the gaseous mixture forming
the atmosphere, but it was formerly used as a synonym for 'gas.' The
principal gases are the elementary bodies hydrogen, chlorine, oxygen and
nitrogen, and the compounds ammonia, carbonic acid, carbonic oxide,
carburetted hydrogen, hydrochloric acid, phosphoretted hydrogen, protoxide
of nitrogen, sulphuretted hydrogen, and sulphurous acid. See these
substances under their respective heads.

=Gas.= _Syn._ COAL GAS, ILLUMINATING G. The term 'gas' is popularly
applied to the important mixture of hydrocarbons produced by the
destructive distillation of pit-coal, and now employed as a source of
artificial light in most of large towns of Europe and America. Although
artificial illumination by means of coal-gas was, previous to 1819, used
in Great Britain in isolated cases, and had been employed for the
occasional lighting up of the mansion of Culrose Abbey in Scotland, by
Lord Dundonald, as far back as 1787; and by Murdoch, in 1798, for lighting
the foundry of Boulton and Watts in Soho, it does not appear to have been
generally adopted in London, and the other large towns of England and
Scotland until that year; since which time to the present artificial gas
illumination has steadily progressed, and increased to so enormous an
extent, that some works are now delivering millions of cubic feet of
coal-gas a day. The apparatus used in the manufacture of gas on the large
scale consists essentially of a system of closed retorts (_a_) of cast
iron or fire-clay, generally having the form of a flattened cylinder, and
arranged in sets of three or five, and heated by the same coal fire, as
shown in the accompanying drawing.

[Illustration]

The quantity of coal required to charge each retort is about two bushels,
and it takes about four hours for the coal to give off all its gas. When
it has done this the resulting coke is removed from the retort, and a
fresh charge of coal is thrown into it, the mouth of the retort being then
closed with a thick iron plate, and luted with clay. An iron pipe ascends
from the upper side of the front of the retort, projecting from the
furnace, and after describing a curve at its upper extremity, this iron
pipe opens into a much wider tube, called the _hydraulic main_ (_b_),
which latter passes horizontally along the front of the range of furnaces,
the tubes from all the retorts dipping into it. The hydraulic main is
always kept half full of the water and the tar which condenses from the
ascending gas; owing to which arrangement the opening into each retort is
effectually closed by a water-valve, and thus permits a fresh charge of
coals to be thrown in, and of coke to be withdrawn in any one or more of
the retorts, without interfering with the distillation going on in the
others.

The aqueous portion of the liquid deposited in the hydraulic main, which
is known as the _ammoniacal liquor_, and forms the principal source of the
commercial salts of ammonia, consists principally of solution of carbonate
of ammonium, but contains also sulphide, cyanide, and sulphocyanide of
ammonium. After it leaves the hydraulic main, the gas passes into the
_condenser_ (_e_), which is composed of a series of bent iron tubes (shown
in the plate), these being kept cool either by the large surface they
expose to the air, or, if necessary, by means of a stream of cold water
applied to the outside.

Any of the volatile hydrocarbons or salts of ammonia escaping condensation
in the hydraulic main are arrested in the condensers, but not always;
hence it is necessary to afterwards carry the gas through a _scrubber_
(not figured in the plate) or case containing pieces of coke, over which a
stream of water being made to trickle, absorbs any remaining ammoniacal
vapours. The gas next passes through the _lime purifier_ (_f_), an iron
box fitted with shelves, on which is placed slaked lime, which absorbs the
carbonic acid, and part, but not the whole of, the sulphuretted hydrogen
contained in the gas. Of the many methods devised for the removal of the
sulphuretted hydrogen, none appears to be so successful and economical as
that which consists in passing the gas over a mixture of sulphate of iron,
slaked lime, and sawdust.

The gas, after it has become purified by the foregoing processes, is
passed into the gasometer (_g_) (part of which is represented in the
plate), whence it passes into the mains, by which it is conveyed to the
various condensers. Another prejudicial impurity formed in gas is carbon
disulphide, which when burned gives rise to small quantities of sulphuric
acid, and this in time attacks certain kinds of furniture, as well as the
bindings of books.

Dr Angus Smith effects the removal of the disulphide by passing the gas
through a solution of plumbic oxide in caustic soda, diffused through
sawdust.

The quality of coal-gas is largely dependent upon the temperature employed
in its manufacture. If the retorts are insufficiently heated, the result
will be the formation of certain easily-condensable hydrocarbons, which
not only diminish the bulk of the gas, but cause considerable
inconvenience by collecting in and blocking up the pipes. On the contrary,
should too much heat be used, the gas becomes partially decomposed by
contact with the red-hot retort, and deposits on its sides the substance
known as "gas carbon," thus not only removing to a certain extent the
constituent to which the gas owes its illuminating power, but
impoverishing its lighting qualities still more, by diluting it with an
unnecessary quantity of liberated hydrogen. These latter effects are
forcibly illustrated in the following analysis of the gas collected from
Wigan cannel coal at different periods of the distillation.

The best gas is said to be produced when the retorts are heated to a
bright cherry red.

  In 100 Volumes.                      1st Hour.  5th Hour.  10th Hour.

  Olefiant gas and volatile hydro-carbons   13.0     7.0       0.0
  Marsh gas                                 82.5    56.0      20.0
  Carbonic oxide                             3.2    11.0      10.0
  Hydrogen                                   0.0    21.3      60.0
  Nitrogen                                   1.3     4.7      10.0

"The value of gas as an illuminating agent may be said to depend on the
amount of hydrocarbons present, and on the relation which the carbon bears
to the hydrogen in these substances. In marsh gas, CH_{4}, which is,
practically speaking, non-luminous, the per-centage composition is, carbon
75, and hydrogen 25. In olefiant gas, C_{2}H_{4}, the carbon is 85.7, and
the hydrogen 14.3, and the gas possesses a correspondingly greater amount
of illuminating value. In acetylene, C_{2}H_{2}, we have a gas of still
greater illuminating value, the proportion of carbon to hydrogen being
also greater, the per-centage composition being, carbon 92.3, and hydrogen
7.7. In benzol, C_{6}H_{6}, we have the same per-centages; while in
naphthalene, C_{10}H_{8}, a still higher ratio between the carbon and
hydrogen exists, and a corresponding increased value in light-giving
power. It was formerly taken as an axiom that the illuminating value of a
mixture of gases was also proportionate to the relation between the carbon
and hydrogen, but although this is very good as a rough criterion in
practice, the statement must not be accepted as strictly true. The
illuminating power of a mixture of gases is known now to depend far more
on the nature of the particular compounds present, than upon the absolute
proportion between the hydrogen and carbon; for while on the one hand it
is possible to have a gas (marsh gas) containing as much as 75.4 per cent.
of carbon, and yet which is valueless for illuminating purposes; it is
also possible to have a mixture of gases in which the per-centage of
carbon is far less, although the illuminating value is much greater."[326]

[Footnote 326: 'Chemistry, Theoretical, Practical, and
Analytical,'--Mackenzie.]

Coal gas consists of a mixture of the following bodies:

  Marsh gas (light carbonetted hydrogen).
  Olefiant gas (heavy   "          "   ).
  Hydrogen.
  Carbonic oxide.
  Nitrogen.
  Vapours of liquid hydro-carbons.
  Vapour of bisulphide of carbon.

The yield of gas, and also the illuminating power of the product, vary
greatly with different kinds of coal. The average yield may be roughly
estimated at 10,000 cubic feet of gas per ton of coal.[327]

[Footnote 327: For practical details respecting the manufacture of this
product, see the article COAL GAS in 'Ure's Dictionary of Arts,
Manufactures, &c.,' 'Wagner's Chemical Technology,' and 'Chemistry,
Theoretical, Practical, and Analytical.']

Anthracite is by no means suited for a gas coal. The best coals for this
purpose are those which are bituminous; they comprise caking coal, parrot
coal, and certain varieties of cannel coal. London gas (which is generally
deficient in illuminating power) is manufactured principally from Durham
and Newcastle coal.

In addition to the elementary composition of the coal, the amount and
nature of the volatile matter contained in it is an important factor in
its value as a source for gas. It should also yield a small amount of ash,
and be as free as possible from sulphur, besides which its ultimate
analysis should show a comparatively small proportion of oxygen. If there
be an excess of this latter element, the production of the hydrocarbon
illuminants will be diminished, since the hydrogen which would go to their
formation would unite with the oxygen to form useless water.

The late Charles Mansfield proposed to increase the illuminating power of
ordinary coal-gas, and to render water gas or even atmospheric air
luminiferous, by passing them through sponges or over trays containing
mineral naphtha or benzole; and a patent was taken out for this purpose.
The gas so treated imbibes or dissolves a portion of the liquid, and burns
with increased brilliancy. The method of saturating the gas with the
liquid hydrocarbon is as follows:--"The apparatus consists of a brass
reservoir or chamber attached to the end of the gas-pipe, near the burner.
This reservoir may be in the shape of an oil-flask, made air-tight, with a
screw-joint, or other means of supplying any highly volatile oil,
turpentine, or mineral naphtha, and should be kept about half full. Into
this reservoir the gas-pipe ascends a little above the surface of the oil;
a very small jet-pipe of gas, regulated by a stop-cock, is branched off
below this chamber, to supply a minute flame, so as to cause a sufficient
evaporation from the oil to unite with the gas in the flask receiver. The
whole is, of course, surmounted with the usual burner and lamp-glass."

The naphthalising of gas did not work well on a large scale. Recently,
however, an attempt was made to get up a company in England to work a
French patented process, which differed only from that of Mansfield's in
the substitution of another hydrocarbon (probably a petroleum product) for
benzol. The chemical and technical journals exposed this invention, and
prevented the sinking of capital in a worthless undertaking. On a small
scale, simple 'naphthalisers' appear to work very well.

The illuminating power of gas, as well as of other sources of light, may
be directly ascertained by what is termed the 'comparison of shadows,' or
indirectly, and more conveniently, by chemical analysis.[328] See AIR GAS,
ILLUMINATION.

[Footnote 328: See 'Watts's Dictionary of Chemistry,' vol. i.]

=GASTROPHAN= (Apotheker J. Fuerst, Prague). For strengthening the digestion
and improving the appetite. Quassia, 30 grammes; orange berries, 15
grammes; galangal, 4 grammes; cardamoms, 2 grammes; star anise oil, 10
drops; orange-peel oil, 10 drops; spirit, 180 grammes; water, 120 grammes;
digested and filtered. (Hager.)

=GASTROPHILE= (Dr Borchard). There are several numbers of this
preparation. Soda water, containing common salt, perhaps in some of the
numbers mixed with Glauber's salts.

=GAZ'OGENE.= [Fr.] _Syn._ AERATING MACHINE. A portable apparatus for
aerating water and other liquids. Many forms have been given to this
instrument, but in all the principle is the same. Powders for generating
carbonic acid gas are placed in a separate compartment, and the liquid to
be aerated in another. The two compartments are connected by a suitable
tube, and a second tube, furnished with a spring tap, affords an exit for
the aerated liquid. By the aid of the gazogene, water, wine, ale, &c., may
in a few minutes be fully saturated with carbonic acid gas, and so
rendered brisk and piquant. By using fruit syrups, manufactured from
English and foreign fruits, the most delicious aerated summer beverages
can be made, resembling those so much esteemed by travellers in the South
of Europe and the sea-board cities of the Western world.

The following are the proportions of soda and acid required for charging
gazogenes:

For 2 pints, powdered tartaric acid, 280 grains; bicarbonate of soda, 340
grains.

For 3 pints, powdered tartaric acid, 340 grains; bicarbonate of soda, 420
grains.

For 5 pints, tartaric acid, 620 grains; carbonate of soda, 760 grains.

Put the acid and soda in different coloured papers.

=GEDACHTNISS-LIMONADE--Mnemonic Lemonade= (manufactured by G. M. Raufer,
Vienna). A mixture of 15 parts phosphoric acid, 15 parts glycerin, 70
parts water. (Schaedler.)

=GEHOR INSTRUMENT.= Instrument for deafness (Apotheker F. Brunner,
Troppau). A little tube of silver plate, 2 centimetres long and as thick
as a straw, with a small mussel-shaped widening at one end, which is
wrapped in cotton wool, to be inserted in the ear.

=GEHOR LIQUOR=, Schweizer--Swiss Cure for Deafness (Raudnitz). Water mixed
with a little coarse brandy. (Wittstein.)

=GEHOROL--Oil for Deafness= (C. Brockelmann, Soest). Provence oil
adulterated with sunflower oil and mixed with very small traces of camphor
and cajeput, sassafras, and rosemary oils. (Hager.)

=GEL'ATIN.= _Syn._ GELATINE; GELATINE, Fr.; GELATINA, L. Animal jelly,
obtained by the prolonged action of boiling water on the organic tissue of
the bones, tendons, and ligaments, the cellular tissue, the skin, and the
serous membranes. Glue and size are coarse varieties of gelatin, prepared
from hoofs, hides, skins, &c.; and isinglass is a purer kind, obtained
from the air bladders of some other membranes of fish.

_Prop., &c._ Gelatin is insoluble in cold water, but dissolves with
greater or less readiness on the application of heat, according to the
source where it is obtained, and in this state forms a tremulous and
transparent jelly on cooling; it is insoluble in both alcohol and ether,
and is decomposed by the strong alkalies and acids; with tannic acid it
forms an insoluble compound of a buff colour, which is the basis of
leather; when acted on by cold concentrated sulphuric acid, it yields
glycocoll or gelatin sugar; and when boiled with strong alkalies, it
yields glycocoll and leucine. Chlorine passed into a solution of gelatin
occasions a dense white precipitate (chlorite of gelatin), which
ultimately forms a tough, elastic, pearly mass, somewhat resembling
fibrin.

_Tests._ Its aqueous solution is recognised as follows:--1. It gelatinises
on cooling. 2. It is precipitated by alcohol. 3. Bichloride of mercury
gives a whitish flocculent precipitate. 4. Tannic acid or infusion of
galls gives a copious yellowish-white, curdy precipitate, which, on being
stirred, coheres into an elastic mass, insoluble in water, and incapable
of putrefaction, and which, when dried, assumes the appearance of
over-tanned leather. 5. The gelatinising property is destroyed by nitric
acid. 6. It is not affected by either alum or acetate of lead. In this
respect it differs from chondrin.

_Qual._ The goodness of commercial gelatin intended for food is readily
proved by pouring boiling water over it, and digesting the two together
for a short time. If it is pure and wholesome, its colour remains
unaltered, and during its solution it continues entirely free from smell.
The resulting solution and jelly are also odourless, neutral to
test-paper, free from unpleasant taste, and perfectly transparent. If it
forms a yellow gluey-looking mass, and evolves an offensive odour, it
should be rejected as of inferior quality, and unfit for culinary
purposes.

_Uses, &c._ Gelatin is largely employed as an article of food, as in
soups, jellies, &c.; but its value in this respect has been, perhaps,
overrated.[329] Animals fed exclusively on gelatin die of starvation. But
when mixed with other food, especially with substances abounding in
albumen, casein, or fibrin, gelatin may be useful as an aliment, and serve
directly to nourish the gelatinous tissues. (Liebig.) Hence gelatin is a
fitting substance to form part (but only a part) of the diet of
convalescents, as it conveys nutrition directly to these tissues, without
tasking the diminished powers of life for its conversion; but its use
should be accompanied by a proper quantity of azotised animal food to
supply the elements to the blood, for the support and increase of the
muscular tissue, or fleshy portion of the body. In France gelatin obtained
from bones is employed as a part of the diet in hospitals with the best
effect, materially abridging the period of convalescence; but when given
alone, all animals soon become disgusted with it, and die if not supplied
with other food. (D'Arcet.) See GLUE, ISINGLASS, and _below_.

[Footnote 329: The reader interested in this subject should consult a
paper by Carl Voit in the 'Zeitschrift fuer Biologie,' viii, 297-388.]

=Gelatin, Bone.= Obtained from crushed bones by boiling with water, or by
the action of steam and water successively, either with or without
pressure; or by maceration in dilute hydrochloric acid, to extract the
phosphate of lime, the remaining gelatinous mass being well washed in cold
water, and afterwards dissolved in boiling water in the usual manner. A
little carbonate of soda is commonly added to the last water. Gelatin has
even been extracted from fossil bones. "A soup was prepared from one of
the bones of the great mastodon by the prefet of one of the departments of
France." (Pereira.) Butchers' meat contains, on an average, 24% of dry
flesh, 56% of water, and 20% of bone. The last will yield, by proper
treatment, nearly 1-3rd of its weight of dry gelatin, or a quantity equal
to about 6% of the meat from which it is cut. This, as well as other
varieties of gelatin, is frequently blanched by sulphurous acid or animal
charcoal, and tinged of various colours with the ordinary vegetable dyes.
Thus, blue is given with sulphate of indigo or the juice of blue berries;
green, with the juice of spinach; and red, with juice of red-beet.

=Gelatin, French.= _Syn._ CAKE GELATIN. Gelatin made up into small thin
cakes, like the finer sorts of glue. A good deal of it is prepared in
Paris from the cuttings of the skins used in making kid gloves and
slippers.

=Gelatin, Patent.= Various qualities of gelatin are manufactured from glue
pieces, or cuttings of the hides of beasts and skins of calves, and from
inferior isinglass. According to Mr Nelson's specification, the crude
materials, freed from hair, wool, flesh, and fat, after being thoroughly
washed and 'scored,' are macerated for 10 days in a lye of caustic soda,
and are then placed in covered vessels at a temperature varying from 60 deg.
to 70 deg. Fahr., until they become tender; they are next washed to free them
from alkali, and are then exposed to the vapour of burning sulphur until
they acquire a sensibly acid reaction; they are now dissolved in water
contained in earthen vessels heated to 150 deg. Fahr., and the solution, after
being strained, is put into 'settling vessels,' and heated to 100 deg. to 120 deg.
Fahr., for 8 or 9 hours; at the end of this time the clear liquor is drawn
off, and poured on the 'cooling slabs,' to the depth of about 1/2 an inch.
As soon as the jelly is cold, it is cut into pieces, and washed in water
until perfectly free from acid. It is then redissolved in water at about
85 deg., the solution poured out on slabs as before, and when cold, it is cut
up, and, lastly, dried on nets.

According to another specification (Rattray's Patent) glue-pieces are
steeped in water until they begin to putrefy, then washed with water,
drained, and put from 12 to 24 hours into water strongly soured with
sulphurous acid; they are afterwards washed first with cold water, and
then in water at 120 deg. Fahr., and are lastly converted into size by
digestion for 24 hours in water at 120 deg. Fahr., the resulting solution
being filtered through bags of double woollen-cloth.

Patent gelatins are often sold cut up in imitation of 'picked isinglass,'
to which, for the preparation of jellies, soups, and blancmanges, they are
not much inferior.

=Gelatin, Rough.= _Syn._ GELATINE BRUT, Fr. From the skulls of oxen, the
spongy insides of the horns and ribs, and from several other soft bony
parts (deprived of fat), by washing them in water, digesting in an equal
weight of hydrochloric acid of 6 deg. Baume, in cold weather, and 4 deg. or 5 deg. in
summer, for 10 days, then in acid of only 1 deg. Baume for 24 hours longer;
afterwards soaking and washing in successive portions of cold water until
all the acid is washed out, adding an ounce of carbonate of soda to the
last water. Used to make glue, &c. A similar article is prepared from the
bones of sheep. The pieces, after being treated as above, are steeped in
boiling water for a few minutes, wiped dry, and shaken together in a bag
to remove the internal pellicle; after which they are cut into squares or
dice to disguise them, and finally dipped into a hot solution of gelatin
to varnish them. In this state the article is called 'GELATINE BRUT FIN,'
Used to make soup. It keeps better than the cakes of portable soup. When
less carefully prepared, it is also used to make glue for fine work. See
BONE GELATIN.

=GELEE (pour le Goitre).= See LINIMENT OF IODIDE OF POTASSIUM.

=GELSEMIUM SEMPERVIRENS.= _Syn._ GELSEMIUM NITRIDUM, GELSEMIUM
SEMPERVIRENS, GELSEMIUM LUCIDUM, ANONYMUS SEMPERVIRENS, BIGNONIA
SEMPERVIRENS; LISANTHUS SEMPERVIRENS. The YELLOW JASMINE, or WOODBINE. The
CAROLINA JASMINE.

Different botanists have placed the plant in different natural orders. De
Candolle assigns it to the _Loganiaceae_; Decaisne to the _Apocynaceae_;
Chapman to the _Rubiaceae_.

The root, which is the only part of this plant employed in medicine, and
of which a fluid extract has been introduced into the United States
Pharmacop[oe]ia, as met with in English commerce occurs in two states;
either in packets prepared by the shakers of New Lebanon, which contain
the root in small pieces, formed into a compact mass by hydraulic
pressure, and in which state it is difficult to powder; or it is simply
sold cut up into pieces varying from two to eight inches in length, and
one-third to three fourths of an inch in diameter. It is frequently mixed
with about half its bulk of long, wiry, pale-brown rootlets.

The so-called gelsemium root consists chiefly of subterranean stem with a
small proportion of true root, occasionally a slender piece of the aerial
stem may be found intermixed, and is readily distinguished by its purplish
colour and hollow centre, and by the silky and tow-like fibre, rendered
visible when the epidermis is peeled off (fig. 1 _e_).

The true root is hard and woody, slightly undulated in outline, very
sparingly branched, except in the slender pieces, externally of a pale
brown colour, nearly smooth, and furnished with a thin scurfy cuticle,
which is slightly cracked longitudinally. When a transverse section is
examined with a lens, the bark of the root is seen to be very thin, and to
consist of two layers, the inner one being usually almost as pale as the
woody portion, and of somewhat soft texture, the outer one is darker and
more compact (fig. 1 _b_, _c_).

The meditullium, or woody portion of the root occupies nearly its whole
diameter, is of a pale yellowish bright colour, the yellow tint becoming
much more distinct when the root is wetted. The medullary rays are white
and very distinct, and the woody tissue between the rays is very porous,
the pores being very small, but visible to the unaided eye, especially
when the root is broken instead of cut (fig. 1 _d_). There is no pith or
central cavity in the root. The root has a bitter taste and pleasant
flavour, somewhat between those of senega and green tea; this is more
readily perceived in the tincture.

The subterranean stem (fig. 1 _a_) is also furnished with rootlets, but is
easily distinguished from the root by the presence of a small, dark
coloured, central cavity representing the pith, and by the external
surface being rougher, and frequently variegated with dark longitudinal
lines, which are the remains of the same purplish cuticle which presents
so marked a feature in the aerial stem. The bark is thicker than that of
the true root, and the inner layer is usually dark brown. If the
subterranean stem is broken slowly and carefully, a thin row of silky
fibres projects fully a quarter of an inch from the broken edge. The
fibres do not appear when the bark of the root is broken, and thus serve
to distinguish the stem of this drug from the root. Experiments as to the
relative value of the bark of the root and stem are wanting. The bark of
the stem has the same bitter taste as that of the root, and if it be
hereafter shown that it is equally active, the above character of
scattered strong fibres, taken in conjunction with the flavour of the drug
and its porous structure, will serve to distinguish it from all other
roots and stems used in materia medica.[330]

[Footnote 330: Holmes.]

_Medicinal properties._--The American medical journals record the
successful administration of gelsemium in a great number and variety of
diseases, including intermittent, remittent, typhoid, and yellow fevers,
the irritative fevers of childhood, inflammation of the lungs and pleura,
dysentery, rheumatism, and other inflammatory affections, neuralgia,
obstinate menstruation, delirium tremens, morbid wakefulness, St. Vitus'
dance, hysteria, epilepsy, spasmodic stricture of the urethra, and
gonorrh[oe]a. Dr Hurd, an American physician, reports very favorably of
the drug as a cardiac sedative, and considers it more efficient than any
other remedy in the palpitation and the difficult breathing that accompany
heart disease; and Dr Hill, of Maine, finds it when combined with bromide
of potassium useful in irritable bladder.

[Illustration]

Its principal use, however, in American medical practice has been as a
febrifuge. In periodic fevers it has been employed with great advantage,
as well as in cases of intermittent fever, which having failed to yield to
quinine alone, succumbed, when this latter medicine was combined with
gelsemium.

In England gelsemium has been successfully employed for the relief of
facial neuralgia, or of the pain caused in the face and jaws by decayed
teeth; as well as in obscure nervous affections and severe headaches. It
is given principally in the form of tincture; but sometimes in powder in
doses of from one to two grains.

The therapeutic action of gelsemium is believed to be due to the sedative
effect it exercises on the nervous and arterial systems--hence its power
in controlling the nervous irritability so prevalent during fever. In
moderate doses it causes a sensation of agreeable langour, accompanied
with muscular relaxation; in larger doses, dizziness, dilated pupil,
double vision, general muscular debility and prostration; these symptoms
being accompanied by a diminution in the force and frequency of the pulse
as well as in the respiration. At the same time the patient becomes
insensible to pain; but is free from stupor and delirium. These symptoms
are said to pass off, after a time, and to be attended with no unpleasant
results.

The 'Lancet' as well as many of the American medical journals record
several cases of poisoning arising from giving an overdose of this drug.
The symptoms are a great prostration of nervous energy, accompanied by
paralysis of sensation and motion. When death occurs it is probably owing
to syncope. The antidotes are, first, an emetic, and after this has acted,
stimulants, such as carbonate of ammonia with brandy, or aromatic spirits
of ammonia. In cases accompanied with insensibility, recourse should be
had to electricity.

Kollock, in the 'American Journal of Pharmacy' for 1855, states that he
found the root on analysis to yield volatile oil, dry acrid resin, fatty
resin, fixed oil, gallic acid, starch, pectic acid, albumen, extractive
matter, lignin, gum, a yellow colouring matter, mineral matter (chiefly
salts of potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron and silica), and an alkaloid,
to which the name gelseminine or gelsemia has been given. Kollock also
states that the leaves and flowers contain the same ingredients as the
root, although in much smaller quantities.

Eberle, in the 'American Journal of Pharmacy' for 1864, says he failed to
obtain gelseminine from the root. In a paper contributed to the 'American
Journal of Pharmacy,' for January, 1870, by Dr Wormley, the author stated
that he said he not only succeeded in obtaining pure gelseminine from the
root, but also a peculiar acid which he calls gelseminic, or gelsemic[331]
acid; which he regards as existing in combination with the gelsemia,
forming the gelsemate of gelsemia.

[Footnote 331: Professor Sonneschien, having submitted the so-called
_Gelseminic Acid_ to analysis thinks there can be no doubt that it is
perfectly identical with aesculin, a glucoside obtained from the bark of
the horse-chesnut--the _Esculus hippocastanum_.]

Probably the alkaloid gelseminine may at some future time be introduced
into medicine, since it would appear to be the chief ingredient to which
the root owes its activity. It is strongly poisonous. Dr Wormley injected
one eighth of a grain under the skin of a large cat, which in 40 minutes
exhibited great prostration, and died in an hour and a half from the time
of the injection of the poison. The properties of the gelseminic acid, the
resin, the volatile oil, and other ingredients of the root, have not been
fully investigated. See TINCTURE OF GELSEMIUM, GELSEMININE.

In the 'American Journal of Pharmacy' for April, 1877, Dr Wormley gives
the following directions for the preparations of gelseminic acid, and
gelsemine:--A given volume of fluid extract, acidulated with acetic acid,
is slowly added with constant stirring to about eight volumes of water;
after the separated resinous matter has completely deposited, the liquid
is filtered, and the filtrate concentrated on a water bath, to something
less than the volume of fluid extract employed. The gelseminic acid is
then extracted from the concentrated fluid by ether, after which the
liquid is treated with slight excess of carbonate of sodium, and the
gelsemine extracted with ether or chloroform. For the extraction of the
first of these principles, it is not essential that the liquid should be
acidulated, but in the presence of a free acid the results are more
satisfactory.

=GEMS=. _Syn_. JEWELS; GEMMAE, L. "Gems are precious stones, which, by
their colour, limpidity, lustre, brilliant polish, purity, and rarity, are
sought after as objects of dress and decoration. They form the principal
part of the crown jewels of kings, not only from their beauty, but because
they are supposed to comprise the greatest value in the smallest bulk; for
a diamond, no larger than a nut, or an acorn, may be the representative
sign of the territorial value of a whole country, the equivalent in
commercial exchange for a hundred fortunes, acquired by severe toils and
privations." "Among these beautiful minerals mankind have agreed in
forming a select class, to which the title of gems or jewels has been
appropriated; while the term precious stone is more particularly given to
substances which often occur under a more considerable volume than fine
stones ever do. Diamonds, sapphires, emeralds, rubies, topazes, hyacinths,
and chrysoberyls, are reckoned the most valuable gems;--crystalline
quartz, pellucid, opalescent, or of various hues, amethyst, lapis lazuli,
malachite, jasper, agate, &c., are ranked in the much more numerous and
inferior class of ornamental stones." (Ure.)

_Tests._ The only tests applicable to gems and precious stones are the
determination of their relative hardness and their specific gravity. By
the first test, pastes or factitious gems are readily detected; but beyond
this, owing to the difficulty of applying it, it ceases to be useful to
persons unconnected with the trade. The determination of the specific
gravity is, however, of more general application, as gems are generally
dismounted when offered for sale, or are so set that they may be removed
from their 'mountings' without injury or inconvenience. See SPECIFIC
GRAVITY, and _below_.

_Obs._ The relative hardness of the different substances is measured by
the power they possess of cutting or scratching the other substances
having a smaller number attached to them in the table. Thus, no gem but
the DIAMOND (20) will scratch either the RUBY (17) or the SAPPHIRE (16);
and, for the same reason, a blue stone that will cut the EMERALD or the
TOPAZ can be no other than the SAPPHIRE. The sp. gr. is ascertained in the
usual manner, and will be found sufficiently indicative of the true nature
of the stone when considered in connection with its other characteristics.
The index of refraction is a certain key to the quality of the stone, in
the hands of those who are capable of determining it, and may be applied
to either mounted or unmounted gems. The most convenient instrument for
the purpose is Wollaston's 'REFLECTING-GONIOMETER,'

=Gems, Facti''tious.= These, with few exceptions, are made of very pure,
fusible, highly transparent, and dense glass, usually termed 'PASTE' or
'STRASS,' which is generally formed of oxide of lead, potassa, and silica,
with small quantities of other ingredients to increase the brilliancy and
clearness. The characteristic tints are imparted by the addition of
metallic oxides. The beauty of artificial stones and gems depends,
chiefly, upon the tint of the real stones being exactly imitated, and upon
proper care and skill being exercised in the cutting, polishing, and
mounting them. All the coloured glasses, and enamels, may be worked up
into artificial gems.

        TABLE _of the Hardness, Specific Gravity, and
        Refractive Power of the principal_ GEMS _and_ PRECIOUS
        STONES, _and some other_ MINERALS; _compiled expressly
        for this work_.


  |   Name.                 | Relative  | Specific Gravity. | Index of Reflection. |
  |                         | Hardness. |                   |                      |
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
  | Agate                   |    12     |       2.6         |                      |
  | Amethyst (occidental)   |    11     |       2.7         |                      |
  | Calcareous spar         |     6     |       2.7         |                      |
  | Chalk                   |     3     |       2.7         |                      |
  | Chrysolite              |    10     |       3.7         |                      |
  | Cornelian               |    11     |       2.7         |                      |
  | Crystal                 |    11     |       2.6         |                      |
  | Diamond (bluish)        |    19     |       3.3         |       }              |
  |   "    (cubic)          |    18     |       3.2         |       }              |
  |   "    (from Ormus)     |    20     |       3.7         |       } 2.439        |
  |   "    (pink)           |    19     |       3.4         |       }              |
  |   "    (yellowish)      |    19     |       3.3         |       }              |
  |   " (average colourless)| 19 to 20  |   3.3 to 3.55     |       }              |
  | Emerald                 |    12     |       2.8         |                      |
  | Fluor spar              |     7     |       3.5         |         1.434        |
  | Garnet                  |    12     |       4.4         |         1.815        |
  | Glass                   | {       } |   2.3 to 3.62     |    1.525 to 2.028    |
  |   " (crystal or flint)  | {various} |   3.0 "  3.6      |    1.830 "  2.028    |
  |   " (plate)             | {       } |   2.5 "  2.6      |    1.514 "  1.542    |
  | Gypsum                  |     5     |       2.3         |                      |
  | Jasper (green)          |    11     |       2.7         |                      |
  |   "    (reddish yellow) |     9     |       2.6         |                      |
  | Onyx                    |    12     |       2.6         |                      |
  | Opal                    |    10     |       2.6         |                      |
  | Quartz                  |    10     |       2.7         |         1.548        |
  | Ruby                    |    17     |       4.2         |       } 1.779        |
  |   " (pale, from Brazil) |    17     |       3.5         |       }              |
  |   " (spinelle)          |    13     |       3.4         |         1.764        |
  | Sapphire (deep blue)    |    16     |       3.8         |       } 1.794        |
  |   "      (paler)        |    17     |       3.8         |       }              |
  | Sardonyx                |    12     |       2.6         |                      |
  | Schoerl                 |    10     |       3.6         |                      |
  | Topaz                   |    15     |       4.2         |                      |
  |   "   (Bohemian)        |    11     |       2.8         |                      |
  |   "   (whitish)         |    14     |       3.5         |                      |
  | Tourmaline              |    10     |       3.0         |                      |
  | Zeolite                 |     8     |       2.1         |                      |
  | Zircon                  |    --     |        --         |         1.961        |


MM. Fremy and Feil have lately succeeded in manufacturing artificial
corundum, ruby and topaz, having a composition the same as the natural
stones. The process by which they have effected this consists in fusing
together at a red heat, in the furnace of a glass works for a considerable
time, a fusible aluminate (such as aluminate of lead), and some silicious
body.

The silica is found to unite with the lead, and to liberate the alumina in
the crystalline form. When equal weights of alumina and red lead are
heated together in a crucible made of some refractory silicious substance,
the above conditions if the temperature has been maintained sufficiently
long and high ensue, and there is found in the crucible at the end of the
operation a layer of silicate of lead, and very frequently another of pure
crystallised alumina or corundum.

The ruby colour is given by adding to the mixture in the crucible two or
three per-cent. of bichromate of potash, the blue being produced by the
addition of a small quantity of oxide of cobalt, with a trace only of
bichromate of potash. A film of silicate of lead very frequently adheres
to the ruby crystals, and this has to be removed.

In some instances, however, the crystals occur nearly pure, and are
precisely similar to the natural gems in crystalline form, composition,
hardness, and lustre.

Upon being heated, the artificial ruby, like the natural one, loses its
rose colour, and recovers it again on cooling. It is said that the
factitious gems hitherto obtained are not, as a rule, equal in lustre to
the natural ones, and are consequently not so well suited for jewellers'
work; also that they do not present to the lapidary conditions favorable
to cleavage or cutting. They are, however, very well adapted for the works
of watches. See ENAMELS, PASTES, &c.

=GENE'VA.= See GIN and HOLLANDS.

=GEN'TIAN ROOT.= _Syn._ GENTINAE RADIX, L. The dried root of _Gentiana
lutea_, or 'yellow gentian.' _Dose_, 10 to 30 gr.; as a simple bitter
tonic, and stomachic, in dyspepsia, loss of appetite, gout, &c. It was
formerly a favourite remedy in agues. "Joined with galls or tormentil, and
given in sufficient quantity, it has not failed in any intermittents in
which I have tried it." (Dr Cullen.) In excessive doses it is apt to relax
the bowels and disturb the system. When taken for some time, it imparts
its bitter flavour to the perspiration and urine. See DECOCTION, EXTRACT,
&c.

=GEN'TIANIN.= _Syn._ GENTIANINE; GENTIANINA, L. A substance obtained by
MM. Henry and Caventou from the root of common gentian.

_Prep._ 1. Gentian root (in powder) is digested for 2 or 3 days in cold
ether, with agitation, and the filtered tincture evaporated to dryness;
the residuum is dissolved in rectified spirit, and the solution is again
evaporated; the semi-crystalline mass is, lastly, redissolved in either
alcohol or ether, and crystallised by careful evaporation.

2. (Magendie.) The ethereal extract is exhausted with cold alcohol
(rectified spirit), as before, and the resulting tincture is evaporated to
dryness; the residuum is dissolved in water, calcined magnesia added in
excess, and the whole boiled and filtered; the sediment is digested in
ether, and the ethereal tincture allowed to crystallise by slow
evaporation.

_Prop., &c._ Gentianin forms golden-yellow needles, scarcely soluble in
cold water, but very soluble in alcohol and ether. It is a powerful bitter
and stomachic.--_Dose_, 1/2 gr. to 2 gr.

=GER'MAN PASTE.= _Prep._ From pea-meal, 2 lbs.; sweet almonds (blanched),
1 lb.; fresh butter or lard, 1/4 lb.; moist sugar, 5 oz.; hay saffron, 1/2
dr.; beat to a smooth paste, adding cold water q. s., granulate the mass
by passing it through a colander, and expose the product to the air in a
warm place, until quite hard and dry. The addition of 2 or 3 eggs improves
it. Used to feed larks, nightingales, and other insectivorous birds. It
will keep good for 12 months in a dry place.

=GER'MAN SILVER.= _Syn._ ALBATA, ARGENTAN, _Electrum_, NICKEL SILVER,
TUTENAG, VIRGINIAN PLATE, WHITE COPPER. A well-known alloy, the finer
varieties of which nearly equal silver in whiteness and susceptibility of
receiving a high polish, whilst they surpass it in hardness and
durability. The following formulae are from the highest authorities, or are
the results of actual analysis of the finest commercial samples:--

_Prep._ 1. Copper, 50 parts; nickel, 20 parts; zinc, 30 parts. Very
malleable, and takes a high polish.

2. Copper, 50 parts; nickel, 26 parts; zinc, 24 parts. Closely resembles
silver; an excellent sample.

3. Copper and zinc, of each 41 parts; nickel, 18 parts. Rather brittle.

4. (M. Gersdorff.) Copper, 50 parts; nickel and zinc, of each 25 parts.
Very white and malleable, and takes a high polish. Recommended as a
general substitute for silver.

5. (Gersdorff.) Copper, 60 parts; nickel and zinc, of each 20 parts. For
castings, as bells, candlesticks, &c.

6. (Gersdorff.) Copper, 60 parts; nickel, 25 parts; zinc, 20 parts. For
rolling and wire. Very tough and malleable.

7. (Sample made from the ore of Hilburghausen.) Copper, 40-1/2 parts;
nickel, 31-1/2 parts; iron, 2-1/2 parts; zinc, 25-1/2 parts. Equal to the
best Chinese sample.

8. (Pelouze.) Copper and nickel, equal parts. Recommended by M. Pelouze as
superior to any of the alloys containing zinc.

9. (Pelouze.) Copper, 2 parts; nickel, 1 part. Not so white as the last,
but more malleable.

10. (White Copper from China.)--_a._ Copper, 30 parts; nickel, 36 parts;
zinc, 34 parts.

_b._ (Said to be prepared from native ore.) Copper, 41 parts; nickel, 32
parts; iron, 2-1/2 parts; zinc, 24-1/2 parts. Silvery white, takes a high
polish, very sonorous, malleable both cold and at a dull-red heat, and may
be rolled into leaves or formed into wire.

11. (White metal spoon, sold as 'German Plate.') Copper, 55 parts; nickel,
24 parts; zinc, 16 parts; tin, 3 parts; iron, 2 parts.

_Anal._ This may be briefly described as follows:--_a._ 100 gr. of the
alloy is digested in nitric acid q. s., diluted with a little water. If
the sample is unequally attacked by the acid, and a white external shell
is observed which dissolves more slowly than the internal portion, it is
'plated' on those parts with silver. If this silver shell or casing has a
polished surface on both sides, the article has been 'electro-plated,' if
the contrary is the case, it has most probably been plated in the usual
way.

_b._ The solution being completed, heat is applied to expel the excess of
acid, and the remainder is largely diluted with distilled water; dilute
hydrochloric acid is now dropped in as long as it occasions a precipitate,
and the whole, after being moderately heated for a short time, and cooled,
is thrown upon a small paper filter; the precipitate on the filter is next
washed with distilled water, carefully dried, and ignited in a small
porcelain crucible, the filter itself being separately burnt on the cover
of the crucible, and the ashes added to its contents prior to ignition.
Every 143-1/2 gr. of the resulting fused chloride is equal to 108 gr. of
metallic silver.

_c._ The filtered liquid (see _b_) is next treated with a stream of
sulphuretted hydrogen, and the black precipitate is collected, washed, and
digested in strong nitric acid; when the solution is complete sulphuric
acid is dropped in to precipitate the lead (if any is present); if a
precipitate is formed, the whole is evaporated to dryness, and the excess
of sulphuric acid expelled by a rather strong heat applied towards the
end; the dry mass is now collected on a filter, washed with a mixture of
water and alcohol, dried, and exposed to slight ignition in a porcelain
crucible. Every 152 gr. of the resulting dry sulphate is equal to 104 gr.
of lead.

_d._ The liquor filtered from the sulphate of lead, or (in its absence)
the nitric solution of the precipitate produced by the sulphuretted
hydrogen (see _c_), is next treated with potassa, &c., as described under
the analysis of brass. Every 40 gr. of the dry protoxide thus obtained
represents 32 gr. of pure copper.

_e._ The liquor which was filtered from the precipitate produced by the
sulphuretted hydrogen (see _c_) is boiled until it loses its offensive
odour, and is then precipitated with carbonate of soda, in slight excess,
and again boiled for a few minutes; the precipitate (mixed oxides of
nickel and zinc) is collected, washed, and redissolved in dilute acetic or
nitric acid, in excess; a current of sulphuretted hydrogen is next passed
through the solution, the precipitate collected on a filter, washed,
redissolved in hydrochloric acid, and the solution again treated with
carbonate of soda; the last precipitate (oxide of zinc) is washed, dried,
and gently ignited. Every 40 gr. of this oxide is equivalent to 32 gr. of
metallic zinc.

_f._ The washings of the precipitated oxides and the liquid filtered from
the precipitate occasioned by the sulphuretted hydrogen (see _e_) are
mixed together, pure solution of ammonia added in considerable excess, and
the mixture agitated for some time; the undissolved portion of the
precipitate is then collected on a filter, washed with distilled water,
redissolved in dilute nitric acid, again precipitated with solution of
potassa, and this last precipitate (ferric oxide) washed, dried, ignited,
and weighed. Every 80 gr. represents 50 gr. of metallic iron.

_g._ The ammoniacal solution filtered from the precipitate of sesquioxide
of iron (see _f_) is precipitated with pure solution of potassa, boiled
for a few minutes, and, when cold, thrown on a filter; the precipitate is,
lastly, washed with hot water, dried, ignited, and weighed. Every 37-1/2
gr. of the oxide thus obtained is equal to 29-1/2 gr. of metallic nickel.

_Obs._ The manufacture of nickel or German silver has of late acquired an
importance which is second only to that of silver plate itself. The
superior quality of this alloy, and the graceful patterns which it is
often made to assume in the hands of the accomplished artist cannot fail
to have attracted the admiration of the majority of our readers. The value
of correct information regarding the preparation of this alloy, and of a
ready method of determining the composition of the most improved
commercial samples will, therefore, be fully appreciated by every
metallurgist who wishes to throw his wares into the arena of public
competition. Much that is vended under the name of GERMAN SILVER is little
better than the BRITANNIA METAL or PLATE PEWTER formerly so plentiful in
every establishment in this country. German silver has quite superseded
copper as the basis of 'electro-plated goods.'[332]

[Footnote 332: See ELECTROTYPE.]

The union of the metals in the above formulae is effected by heat with the
usual precautions. When iron is ordered, it is generally added under the
form of 'tin plate.' See ALLOY, BRASS, BRITANNIA METAL, BRONZE, &c.

=GER'MAN TIN'DER.= See AMADOU.

=GERMINA'TION.= The growth or vegetation of a seed by which a young plant
is produced. The conditions essential to germination are the presence of
warmth, air, and moisture. The most favorable temperature is between 60 deg.
and 85 deg. Fahr., according to the habitat of the respective plants. Below
40 deg. Fahr. most of the more perfect seeds either refuse to vegetate, or
vegetate slowly and feebly; and at or near the freezing-point none of them
undergo this change. At a temperature above 100 deg. Fahr. the young germ is
usually injured, and at about 125 deg., if it forms, it soon withers and dies.
See MALTING, SEED, &c.

=GERMS.= The 'germ theory of disease' may be briefly stated to be that
which supposes the cause of epidemic and contagious maladies to be due to
the agency of specific, inconceivably small germs,--different germs giving
rise to different diseases.

These disease germs gaining an entrance by means of air, water, or food
into the healthy body, and being possessed of extraordinary powers of
increase and subdivision, are supposed to set up the particular disease,
and at the same time to multiply to an incredible extent by feeding upon
the tissues best suited for their support. Further, they are conceived to
be thrown off into the atmosphere from the body of the patient, whence
they are conveyed as before described into other healthy animal organism,
in which, comporting themselves as in the previous case, they set up a
similar disease. See BACTERIA AS ORIGINATORS OF DISEASE.

=GHEE.= A sort of butter used by the natives of India. _Prep._ Milk is
boiled in large earthen pots for an hour or two, then allowed to cool, a
little curdled milk called 'dhye' being added, in order to make the whole
coagulate. After a lapse of some hours the contents of each to the depth
of 5 or 6 inches are removed and placed in a larger earthenware utensil,
in which they are churned by means of a piece of split bamboo for about
half an hour; then hot water is poured in, and the churning continued for
half an hour longer, after which time the butter is found to be formed.
When this becomes rancid, it is melted in an earthen vessel, and boiled
until all the water has evaporated; after which a little salt or
betel-leaf is put into it, and finally it is poured off into suitable
vessels in which it can be preserved from the air. Bottles are commonly
used for this purpose. See BUTTER.

=GHER'KINS.= _Syn._ GIR'KINS. Small cucumbers adapted for pickling. See
PICKLES.

=GILD'ING.= _Syn._ DORURE, Fr. The art or process of covering the surfaces
of bodies with a thin film of gold, for the purpose of increasing their
durability or improving their appearance. For the sake of brevity we shall
briefly notice the leading varieties of gilding, and their applications,
in alphabetical order.

GILDING, BURNISHED. This is distemper gilding to which a 'face' has been
given with the 'burnisher.' It is chiefly employed for the polished
portions of the frames of pictures and mirrors, the more prominent parts
of statuettes, &c.

GILDING, CHEMICAL. Those varieties in which the film of gold is formed on
the surface through the agency of chemical affinity, in opposition to
mechanical gilding, in which the gold is made to adhere by the
intervention of some glutinous substance.

GILDING, COLD. The articles (copper or brass) to be gilded, after being
softened, annealed, and polished in the usual manner, are rubbed with a
little gilding powder by means of a piece of cork moistened with a
solution of salt in water; after which the work is burnished with a piece
of hematite or polished steel. (See _below_.)

GILDING, DISTEMPER. This is applied to wood, plaster, marble, &c. It is
commonly performed in this country by giving the wood, first, a coating of
good size, and next, several successive coats of size thickened with
finely powdered whiting, Spanish white, or plaster of Paris until a good
face is produced; observing to let each coat become quite dry, and to rub
it perfectly smooth with fine glass paper, before the application of the
following one. When the proper 'face' is obtained, the surface is thinly
and evenly gone over with gold size, and when this is nearly dry, the gold
leaf is applied, and afterwards burnished with an agate or dog's tooth.
The process, as adopted by the Parisian artists, who greatly excel in this
species of gilding, is very complicated, and is divided into at least 17
distinct operations, each of which they declare to be essential to its
excellence.

GILDING, ELECTRO-. See ELECTROTYPE.

GILDING, GRECIAN. In this variety sal-ammoniac and corrosive sublimate,
equal parts, are dissolved in nitric acid, and a solution of gold made
with this menstruum; after slight concentration the liquid is applied to
the surface of silver, which immediately becomes black, but on being
heated exhibits a rich gilded surface.

GILDING, JAPANNER'S. The surface is covered with oil size thinned with
spirits of turpentine, and gold, in powder, is gently dabbed on with a
puff of wash leather. This gives the appearance of 'frosted gold.' A
coating of varnish is next given, followed by exposure to a gentle heat in
the 'stove.'

GILDING, LEAF. This term is commonly applied to the gilding of paper,
vellum, &c., by applying leaf gold to the surface, previously prepared
with a coating of gum water, size, or white of egg. It is usually
burnished with an agate or dog's tooth.

GILDING, MECHANICAL. See CHEMICAL GILDING (_above_).

GILDING, MERCURIAL. See WASH GILDING (_below_).

GILDING, OIL. This species of gilding may be divided into several
operations. The following are the abridged instructions of a Parisian
artist on the subject:--1. The surface is prepared by a coating of white
lead in drying oil.--2. Another coat is given, made with calcined white
lead or massicot, ground in linseed oil and turpentine. 3 or 4 coats of
this mixture are often given, at intervals of at least 23 hours, observing
to carefully smooth off each coat with pumice stone or shave grass before
the application of the following ones.--3. The 'Gold Colour,' or paint, is
next applied. It is usually very adhesive gold size, or the bottom of the
pot or dish in which painters wash their brushes. For this purpose it is
thoroughly ground and strained.--4. When the gold colour becomes partially
dry and sufficiently tenacious, the gold leaf is applied, and pressed on
with a wad of cotton-wool or a soft brush. It is now left for several days
to harden.--5. A coat of spirit varnish is next given, and the object is
cautiously passed over a chafing-dish of charcoal, observing to avoid
stopping the motion of the piece whilst doing so, as the work would then
become discoloured and blistered.--6. The work is 'finished off' with pale
oil varnish. For out-door gilding and common work the varnishing process
is generally omitted. This species of gilding is applied to woodwork,
plaster, metal, &c.

GILDING, VARNISH. This is a mere variety of oil gilding, applied to
equipages, furniture, mirror and picture frames, &c., the surface being
highly varnished and polished before it receives the size or gold colour;
and after the gilding has become quite dry, a coat of spirit varnish,
fumed with the chafing dish as above, is applied, followed by 2, 3, or
more coats of the best copal varnish, at intervals of 3 or 4 days each.
The whole is, lastly, carefully polished with tripoli and water.

GILDING, WASH, AMALGAM G., MERCURIAL G., WATER G. This consists in the
application of a thin coating of amalgam of gold to the metallic surface
(brass, bronze, or copper) to be gilded, and the subsequent volatilisation
of the mercury by heat. It is the usual method of gilding articles of
copper and its alloys, and possesses great beauty and durability when
skilfully executed. The occupation is, however, an unhealthy one, owing to
the continual exposure of the workman to the fumes of mercury. The furnace
invented by M. D'Arcet obviates this evil, as the whole of the volatilised
mercury is carried off, and again condensed for further use. It should,
therefore, be adopted by every water-gilder who studies economy and the
health of those in his employ.

The process of water gilding consists in several distinct operations, and
can only be successfully performed by those who have been schooled in the
art by an apprenticeship to the trade. It would, therefore, be waste of
space to enter into details here. Formulae for several of the articles
employed for the purpose will be found in the alphabetical places in this
work.

GILDING, WATER. See _above_.

Among the applications of the process of gilding that deserve a separate
notice are the following:--

The gold letters and figures on the covers of BOOKS are thus formed:--Gum
mastic, in fine powder, is dusted over the surface to be gilded; an iron
or brass tool bearing the design upon its face is then heated to a proper
temperature, and gently pressed upon a piece of leaf gold, which slightly
adheres to it; the two are then transferred to the cover, and the tool is
gently pressed on it, by which means the mastic softens and retains the
gold. The loose gold and powdered mastic are then dusted off with a brush.
Gold leaf will adhere to leather without the use of mastic, but not so
firmly as when it is employed.

The edges of the leaves of books and paper are first cut perfectly smooth,
and then washed over with a solution of isinglass in weak spirit, or with
a varnish made of Armenian bole, 4 parts, and powdered sugar-candy, 1
part, mixed up to a proper consistence with strained white of egg. The
coating is allowed to dry, and is then smoothed with a wet rag, after
which the gold leaf is applied and polished with the burnisher.

BRASS BUTTONS, formerly so much in demand, are covered by a rough species
of wash gilding. The buttons are polished in the lathe and thrown into a
pan with a little amalgam of gold, and as much aquafortis diluted with
water as will wet them all over. Here they are well stirred up, until they
assume a silvery appearance, when they are washed with clean water. They
are then submitted to a sufficient heat in a suitable apparatus, until the
mercury is volatilised. The buttons are next cooled, and well tossed and
rubbed about with a painter's brush; and are, lastly, burnished by washing
them well with beer or ale grounds.

Twelve dozen (1 gross) of buttons, of 1 inch in diameter, may be perfectly
gilded on both sides with only 5 gr. of gold. By an Act of Parliament,
which is still unrepealed, this is the smallest quantity of gold permitted
to be used for a gross of buttons of the above size.

GLASS, PORCELAIN, and EARTHENWARE, are gilded by blending powdered gold
with gum-water and a little borax, and applying the mixture by means of a
camel-hair pencil; the article is then heated in an oven or furnace, by
which means the gum is burnt, and the borax, vitrifying, cements the gold
to the surface. It is afterwards polished with a burnisher. Names, dates,
or any fancy device, may thus be permanently and easily fixed on glass,
china, earthenware, &c.

JAPANNED WORK is gilded by the method explained as 'Japanner's gilding'
(_above_).

LEATHER is gilded in the same way as the covers of books. (See _above_.)
For common work, silver leaf, or even tin foil, is applied to the surface,
previously covered with size or white of egg, and after being burnished
down and dried, is washed over with gold-coloured lacquer.

The LETTERS of sign-boards and the ornamental gilding for out-door work
are done by first covering the design with yellow paint, then with oil
gold-size, and when this is nearly dry applying the leaf gold, observing
to shield it properly from the wind, lest it be blown away or become
crumpled before being properly attached. The work is, lastly, varnished.

POLISHED METALS may be gilded by one or other of the methods already
noticed. Articles in silver, copper, brass, and bronze, are usually coated
by the process of wash or water gilding; or, directly, by the application
of gold leaf, as follows:--The piece or article is heated to a bluish
tint, and gold leaf pressed gently and carefully on it with the burnisher;
heat is again applied, and the process repeated with fresh leaves of gold
until the gilding has acquired the proper thickness and tone. The surface
is lastly polished with the burnisher, or is coloured in the usual manner
at the stove. This succeeds with iron, steel, silver, copper and its
alloys, &c. Another method for polished articles in iron and steel, which,
however, is less durable than the preceding, is to apply an ethereal
solution of gold to the surface with a camel-hair pencil. The ether flies
off and leaves the surface coated with gold, which is then polished as
before. In this way, any fancy device or writing may be executed on steel
or iron with extreme facility.

SILKS, SATINS, WOOLLENS, IVORY, BONE, &c., may be readily gilded by
immersing them in a solution of neutral terchloride of gold (1 of the
salt, and 3 to 6 of water), and then exposing them to the action of
hydrogen gas. The latter part of the process may readily be performed by
pouring some dilute sulphuric acid on zinc or iron filings, in a
wide-mouthed bottle, and placing it under a jar or similar vessel,
inverted, at the top of which the articles to be gilded are suspended.
Flowers or other ornamental designs may be produced by painting them on
the surface with a camel-hair pencil dipped in the solution. The design,
after a few minutes' exposure to the hydrogen, shines with all the
splendour of the purest gold, and will not tarnish on exposure to the air,
or in washing.

GILDED THREAD or GOLD THREAD is merely a thread of yellow silk covered
with a very thin flatted wire of gold, by means of a revolving wheel.

WIRE (copper, silver, or brass) is occasionally gilded, in coils, by a
similar process to that adopted for BUTTONS; but more frequently as
follows:--Rods (usually of silver) are covered with gold foil of a
thickness proportionate to the quality of the intended wire, and the
compound bar is then drawn into wire, in the usual way. 100 gr. of gold
was formerly the lowest legal quantity that could be employed for 1 lb. of
silver.

_Patents._ Among the varieties of chemical gilding may be mentioned

1. (Elkington's patent--GERMAN GILDING, Bonnet's GILDING PROCESS.) The
articles to be gilded, after being perfectly cleaned from scale or grease,
and receiving a proper 'face,' are suspended, by means of wires, in the
gilding liquid (boiling hot), and moved about therein for a period varying
from a few seconds to a minute, or longer; the precise time required
depending on the newness and strength of the liquid. When sufficiently
gilded, the articles are withdrawn from the 'solution of gold,' washed in
clean water, and dried; after which they undergo the usual operation of
'colouring,' &c. A dead gold appearance is produced by the application to
the articles of a weak solution of nitrate of mercury previously to the
immersion in the gilding liquor; or the deadening may be given by applying
a solution of the nitrate to the newly gilded surface, and then expelling
the mercury by heat.

The gilding liquor.--Take of fine gold, 5 oz. (troy); nitro-muriatic acid,
52 oz. (avoirdupois); dissolve by heat, and continue the heat until red or
yellow vapours cease to be evolved; decant the clear liquid into a
suitable vessel; add of distilled water, 4 galls.; pure bicarbonate of
potassa, 20 lbs.; and boil for 2 hours. The nitro-muriatic acid is made
with pure nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.45), 21 oz.; pure muriatic acid (sp. gr.
1.15), 17 oz.; and distilled water, 14 oz.

This process, though patented by Mr Elkington in England, was in reality
discovered and first practised by M. Bonnet, a foreigner. Articles thus
gilded do not bear friction and the operations of being put in colour
(_mise en couleur_) so well as those gilded by the mercurial process, or
by the methods of cold or leaf gilding as applied to polished metals.

2. (Talbot's patent.) By this process polished metallic articles are
gilded by simple immersion in a solution of gallic acid in water, ether,
or alcohol, to which a solution of gold has been previously added.
SILVERING and PLATINISING may be effected in the same manner, by using a
solution of either of these metals instead of one of gold.

[asterism] These and other chemical processes have been almost completely
superseded by the certain and economical process of ELECTRO-GILDING. See
ELECTROTYPE.

=Gilding Amalgam.= See AMALGAM.

=Gilding Liquor.= This name has been given to various solutions of gold,
and to other liquids employed in gilding. The former are noticed
elsewhere. Among the latter are the following:

DEADING AQUAFORTIS. From mercury, 1 part; aquafortis (sp. gr. 1.33), 3
parts; dissolve, and add of soft water, 7 parts. Used to produce a
dead-gold effect. It is applied (diluted) to the articles, before
spreading the amalgam over them, in water gilding; or before placing them
in the 'gilding liquor,' in the chemical processes.

MERCURIAL SOLUTION. From mercury, 10 parts, dissolved in aquafortis (sp.
gr. 1.33), 11 parts, and the solution diluted with 25 times its weight of
water. Used to moisten the scratch brush before drawing it over the
amalgam, in mercurial gilding; also to deaden the gilded surface, by
moistening the latter with it, and then exposing the piece to a heat
sufficiently high to drive off the mercury.

GILDER'S PICKLE. From alum and common salt, of each 1 oz.; nitre, 2 oz.;
dissolved in water, 1/2 pint. Used to impart a rich colour to gold
surfaces, especially of trinkets. Its application should not be too long
continued, as it dissolves a small portion of the gold. For common
purposes it is best used largely diluted with water.

VERMEIL, VERMEIL COATING, OR-MOLU C. From annotta and salt of tartar, of
each 1 oz.; dragon's blood, 1/2 oz.; water, 1 quart; simmer down to about
one fourth, add saffron, 20 gr., and when merely tepid, strain through
fine muslin into a bottle. Used to give lustre and fire to distemper
gilding. A little is floated over the surface with a very soft, flat,
camel-hair brush.

=Gilding Metal.= The metal employed as a base for gilding is usually
brass, or a mixture of brass and copper. The following proportions have
been recommended:--

  1. Copper, 6 parts; brass, 1 part.
  2. Copper, 4 parts; Bristol brass, 1 part.
  3. Copper, 13 parts; old Bristol brass, 3 parts; tin, 14 parts.

=Gilding Powder.= _Prep._ 1. Pure gold, 5 dr.; pure copper, 1 dr.; aqua
regia, 10 oz.; dissolve, moisten clean linen rags with the solution, dry
them, and burn them to ashes. The latter contain the gold in a state of
minute division, and must be carefully collected.

2. Grain gold, 1 dr.; rose copper, 15 gr.; aqua regia, 2 fl. oz.; proceed
as last. Used in 'Gold Gilding.'

3. See Gold (in powder).

=Gilding Shells.= See GOLD SHELLS.

=Gilding Size.= See GOLD SIZE.

=Gilding Wax.= _Syn._ GILDING VARNISH, GILDER'S WAX. _Prep._ 1. From
beeswax, 4 oz.; verdigris and sulphate of copper, of each 1 oz.; melted
together.

2. Beeswax, 4 oz.; verdigris, red ochre, and alum, of each 1 oz. Used to
give a red gold colour to water gilding.

=GIN.= _Syn._ GENE'VA. Corn spirit flavoured with either oil of juniper or
oil of turpentine.

Gin was originally and, for some time, wholly imported from Holland, and
was a rich, soft spirit, flavoured, chiefly, with juniper berries; on
which account it had obtained the name of 'GENEVA,' from 'GENIEVRE,' the
French for juniper. After a time the distillation of an imitation geneva
sprung up in this country, when the foreign spirit came to be called
'HOLLANDS,' or 'HOLLANDS GENEVA,' to distinguish it from the spirit of
home manufacture. The English monosyllable 'GIN' is a corruption of
geneva, the primary syllable of which, as in numerous other instances, was
seized on by the vulgar, and adopted as a short and convenient substitute
for the whole word.

The liquor at present known by the name of 'gin' in this country is a very
different article to that imported from Holland, and consists of plain
corn-spirit, flavoured with oil of turpentine and small quantities of
certain aromatics. The thousand and one receipts for this article, which
have from time to time been printed in books, produce a flavoured spirit
bearing no resemblance to the more esteemed samples of English gin; and,
if possible, the products are even more unlike genuine Hollands. Any
persons may easily satisfy himself of the truth of this assertion by
actual experiment on the small scale. The cause of this incongruity has
arisen chiefly from the writers not being practically acquainted with the
subject, and from the disinclination of well-informed practical men to
divulge, gratuitously, what they conceive to be valuable secrets. Hence
the utter failure of any attempts to produce either gin or Hollands from
the receipts usually published. The authors appear to have all imbibed a
juniper-berry mania--probably from the imbibition of their favourite
beverage. Oil of juniper, in the hands of these gentlemen, appears to be a
perfect aqua mirabilis, that readily converts whisky into gin, and imparts
the rich creamy flavour of 'Schiedam Hollands' to crude corn or molasses
spirit. But theory and experiment sometimes disagree. In practice, it is
found that the true flavour of foreign geneva cannot be imparted to spirit
by juniper alone, and that the English gin of the present day depends for
its flavour on no such a substance. The following formulae are merely given
as specimens; and it is proper to remark, that every distiller has his own
receipt for this notorious beverage. Hence it is that the gins of no two
distillers are of precisely the same flavour; and this difference is still
more marked when the distillers reside in parts of the country remote from
each other. Booth's, Smith's, and Nicholson's gins have each a
characteristic flavour, readily perceived by their respective votaries;
whilst the difference between 'Plymouth' or 'Bristol gin,' and the 'gin of
the metropolis,' is as remarkable as that between 'Barclay's XXX' and
'Guinness's bottled stout.' These variations in flavour generally depend
on the use of more or less flavouring matter, or of a spirit more or less
clean or free from taint; and, less frequently, on the addition of a small
quantity of some peculiar aromatic, which exercises a modifying influence
on the chief flavouring ingredient. In many cases the flavour has
originated from accident, but the consumers having become accustomed to,
and hence relishing, that particular 'palate,' it is found to be unwise or
commercially impossible to alter it. Any change in these matters is
therefore looked upon in every distillery as a dangerous innovation, which
would prove more prejudicial to the prosperity of its exchequer than the
repeal of the duty on French wines and brandy, or even a frightful
conflagration. The distillers, like the brewers, are thorough
conservatives in all matters connected with the flavour of their liquors.

In the preparation of gin, both sweetened and unsweetened, and indeed of
liquors generally, the greatest possible care must be taken to avoid an
excess of flavouring. The most esteemed samples are those that consist of
very pure spirit, slightly flavoured.

_Prep._ 1. Clean corn spirit, at proof, 80 galls.; newly rectified oil of
turpentine, 1-1/4 pint; mix well by violent agitation, add culinary salt,
14 lbs., dissolved in water, 40 galls.; again well agitate, and distil
over 100 galls., or until the faints begin to rise. _Product._ 100 galls.
of gin 22 u. p., besides 2 galls. contained in the faints. If 100 galls.
at 17 u. p. are required, 85 galls. of proof spirit, or its equivalent at
any other strength, must be employed.

2. Proof spirit (as above), 8 galls.; oil of turpentine, 1 fl. oz.; salt,
1-1/2 lb., dissolved in water, 4 galls.; draw over 10 galls., as before.
22 u. p.

3. Clean corn spirit, 80 galls.; oil of turpentine, 1 pint; pure oil of
juniper, 3 fl. oz.; salt, 21 lbs.; water, 35 galls.; draw over 100 galls.,
as before. 22 u. p.

4. To the last, before distillation, add, of oil of caraway, 1/2 fl. oz.;
oil of sweet fennel, 1/4 fl. oz.; cardamoms (ground), 8 oz.

5. To No. 3 add, of essential oil of almonds, 1 dr.; essence of lemon, 4
dr.

6. To No. 1, before distillation, add of creasote, 3 fl. dr.

7. To No. 3 add of creasote, 2 dr.

8. Proof spirit, 80 galls.; oil of turpentine, 3/4 pint; oil of juniper,
1/4 pint; creasote, 2 dr.; oranges and lemons, sliced, of each 9 in no.;
macerate for a week, and distil 100 galls. 22 u. p.

9. To No. 1 add of rectified fusel oil, 1/2 pint.

10. To No. 1 add of oil of juniper, 1/2 pint.

_Concluding Remarks._ The oil of turpentine for this purpose should be of
the best quality, and not that usually vended for painting, which always
contains resin and often fixed oil. Juniper berries, bitter almonds, and
the aromatic seeds, may be used instead of the essential oils; but the
latter are the most convenient. Turpentine conveys a plain-gin
flavour,--juniper berries or oil gives a Hollands flavour,--creasote
imparts a certain degree of smokiness, or whiskey flavour,--lemon and the
other aromatics, a creaminess, fulness, and richness. The flavour imparted
by cardamoms, when used judiciously, is peculiarly agreeable and
appropriate. That from caraways is also in general esteem. Cassia in
extremely small proportions also tells well. Fusel oil gives a whiskey-gin
flavour; and in conjunction with creasote or crude pyroligneous acid, a
full whiskey flavour. The only danger in the employment of all these
articles is using too much of them. When this misfortune happens, the
remedy is to add sufficient plain spirit to reduce the flavour to the
proper standard. The creaminess and smoothness so much admired in 'foreign
geneva' results chiefly from age. The English rectifier endeavours to
imitate this by the addition of a little sugar. A rich mellowness, that
combines well with gins turning on the 'Hollands flavour,' is given by a
very small quantity of garlic, and with Canadian balsam or Strasburg
turpentine. The peculiar piquancy, or the property of 'biting the palate,'
regarded as a proof of strength and quality by the ignorant gin-drinker,
is imparted to the liquor by the addition of a little caustic potassa.
Sliced horseradish gives piquancy as well as mellowness. Grains of
paradise, cayenne pepper, and sulphate of zinc, are also commonly added by
fraudulent dealers.

Although gin is always prepared on the large scale by distillation, it may
also be made by the simple solution or digestion of the flavouring
ingredients in the spirit; but it is, of course, better for distillation.
If made in the former way, no salt must be employed. The gin produced by
the above formulae is that denominated in the trade 'UNSWEETENED GIN,'
'GROG GIN,' &c.; but the gin usually sold in the metropolis is a sweetened
spirit, and hence is technically distinguished by the terms 'SWEETENED,'
or 'MADE UP,' The generality of London gin-drinkers prefer the latter
article, even when weaker and inferior, which it usually is, as the
addition of sugar permits adulteration and watering to an enormous extent
with absolute impunity. Sweetened spirit cannot be easily tested for its
strength, and is taken by the Excise at the strength which it is declared
to possess by the dealer. To ascertain whether gin is sweetened or not, a
little may be evaporated in a spoon, over a hot coal or a candle, when, if
it is pure, it will leave the spoon scarcely soiled; but if, on the
contrary, it has been sweetened, a small quantity of syrupy liquid, or
sugar, will be obtained, the sweetness of which may be easily recognised
by tasting it.

The whole of the casks and utensils employed for gin should be perfectly
clean, and properly prepared, so as not to give colour; as, if this spirit
acquires the palest coloured tint, its value is lessened, and if much
coloured it is rendered unsaleable. When gin has once become much stained,
the only remedy is to re-distil it; when it is only slightly stained, the
addition of a few lbs. of acetic acid (B. P.) to a pipe or butt, a
spoonful or two to a gallon, or a few drops to a decanterful, will usually
decolour it, either at once or as soon as it is mixed with water to make
grog. See ALCOHOLOMETRY, CASKS, DISTILLATION, HOLLANDS, SPIRITS, &c., and
_below_.

=Gin, Cor'dial.= This is gin sweetened with sugar, and slightly
aromatised.

_Prep._ Good gin (22 u. p.), 90 galls.; oil of almonds, 1 dr.; oils of
cassia, nutmeg, and lemon, of each 2 dr.; oils of juniper, caraway, and
coriander, of each 3 dr.; essences of orris root and cardamoms, of each 5
fl. oz.; orange-flower water, 3 pints; lump sugar, 56 to 60 lbs.;
dissolved in water, 4 galls. The essences are dissolved in 2 quarts spirit
of wine, and added gradually to the gin until the requisite flavour is
produced, when the sugar (dissolved) is mixed in, along with a sufficient
quantity of soft water, holding 4 oz. of alum in solution, to make up 100
galls. When the whole is perfectly mixed, 2 oz. of salt of tartar,
dissolved in 2 or 3 quarts of hot water, are added, and the liquor is
again well rummaged up; after which the cask is bunged up, and allowed to
repose. In a week, or less, it will have become brilliant, and may be
either 'racked,' or drawn from the same cask. _Product._ 100 galls., about
30 u. p.

=Gin, Sweetened.= _Prep._ From unsweetened gin (22 u. p.), 95 galls.; lump
sugar, 40 to 45 lbs., dissolved in clear water, 3 galls.; mix well, and
fine it down as above. _Product._ 100 galls., at 26 u. p. This, as well as
the last, is usually 'permitted' at 22 or 24 u. p., which is also done
when the gin has been further lowered with water so as to be even 30 or 35
u. p. See SPIRITS, and _above_.

=GIN'GER.= _Syn._ GINGER ROOT; ZINGIBERIS RADIX, ZINGIBER (B. P.), L. "The
scraped and dried rhizome" (rootstock or underground stem) of "_Zingiber
officinale_"--(B. P.). Ginger is an aromatic stimulant and stomachic,
very useful in flatulence and spasms of the stomach and bowels, and in
loss of appetite and dyspepsia, arising from debility, or occurring in old
or gouty subjects. A piece chewed an hour before dinner tends to provoke
the appetite; as a masticatory, it often relieves toothache, relaxation of
the uvula, tender gums, and paralytic affections of the tongue. Made into
a paste with warm water, and spread on paper, it forms a useful and simple
'headache-plaster,' which frequently gives relief when applied to the
forehead or temples. As a condiment and flavouring ingredient, it is
perhaps one of the most wholesome of the aromatic kinds, and is less acrid
than the peppers.--_Dose_, 10 gr. to 1/2 teaspoonful, stirred up in any
simple liquid.

_Pur., &c._ The best is that known in commerce as 'UNBLEACHED JAMAICA
GINGER,' which is an uncoated pale variety, occurring in large, bold,
fleshy pieces ('RACES'), which cut soft, bright, and pale-coloured. The
inferior varieties occur in smaller pieces, and are darker-coloured,
flinty, and shrivelled. The dealers frequently 'dress up' the common
dark-coloured gingers by washing them in water, drying them, and then
'rouncing' them in a bag with a little calcined whiting or magnesia
(WASHED GINGER); or they bleach them by dipping them into a solution of
chloride of lime, or by exposing them to the fumes of burning sulphur
(BLEACHED GINGER); or they dip them into a milk formed of quicklime or
whiting and water (WHITE-WASHED GINGER). The last has a chalk-white
surface, which cannot be mistaken for the natural one. POWDERED GINGER is
with difficulty obtained pure and good. The common adulterants are
wheat-flour, or East Indian arrow-root, and plantain-meal. The first may
be detected by the microscope, the others by the flavour and action of hot
water. See LOZENGES, &c.

=GINGERIN.= _Syn._ OLEORESINA ZINGIBERIS. _Prep._ (Pharm., U. S.) Put 1
lb. (Troy) of ginger in fine powder into a percolator, and pour on it 12
ounces (old measure) of pure ether. When this has been absorbed, add
rectified spirit until 12 ounces (old measure) have been obtained. Recover
the greater part of the ether by distillation over a water bath, and
expose the residue in a porcelain dish until the volatile part has
evaporated. Keep it in a stoppered bottle.

=GINSENG.= The root of the _Panax Schinseng_ (Ginseng) is greatly esteemed
in China, where it is regarded as a panacea for nearly all diseases, and
where it realises a high price in consequence. This opinion of its
therapeutic value is not shared by British and American practitioners, who
look upon it as a comparatively inert substance. An allied species, the
_Panax quinquefolium_, is sold in America, less for the sake of its very
feeble demulcent properties, than to supply the demand of those who have
acquired a taste for it. "The root has a somewhat bitter taste, and is
somewhat mucilaginous. It occurs in pieces usually about three or four
inches long, often partially divided, being joined together at the base;
when clean it has a semi-transparent appearance."[333]

[Footnote 333: 'Gardener's Chronicle.']

=Preserved Ginger.= _Syn._ CONDITUM ZINGIBERIS, L. An excellent stomachic
sweetmeat or preserve. It is chiefly imported from the West Indies and
China. See CANDYING, &c.

=A Factitious Preserved Ginger= is sometimes met with, prepared from the
stalks of lettuces just going to seed, using a concentrated syrup,
strongly flavoured with Jamaica ginger. See CANDY, &c.

=GIN'GER BEER.= See BEER.

=GIN'GERBREAD.= _Prep._ 1. (Dr Colquhoun.) Flour, 1 lb.; carbonate of
magnesia, 1/4 oz.; mix; add, of treacle, 1/2 lb.; moist sugar, 1/4 lb.;
melted butter, 2 oz.; tartaric acid (dissolved in a little water), 1 dr.;
make a stiff dough, then add of powdered ginger and cinnamon (cassia), of
each 1 dr.; grated nutmeg, 1 oz.; set it aside for half an hour or an hour
before putting it into the oven. _Obs._ It should not be kept longer than
two or three hours at the utmost, before being baked.

2. Flour and treacle, of each 1 lb.; butter, 1-1/2 oz.; carbonate of
magnesia, 1 oz.; add spices (ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg, allspice, cayenne,
corianders, &c.) to taste; mix as last. _Obs._ Fit for baking in from four
to six hours.

3. Flour, 2 lbs.; carbonate of magnesia, 1/2 oz.; mix; add, treacle, 1-1/2
lb.; butter, 2 oz.; spice, q. s.; tartaric acid, 1/4 oz.; mix quickly, and
make it into forms. _Obs._ Ripe for the oven in half an hour to one hour.

4. Instead of tartaric acid in the last formula, use cream of tartar
(dissolved in water), 2 oz. _Obs._ Ripens in 40 or 50 minutes.

5. Flour or fine pollard, 1 lb.; treacle, 3/4 lb.; salt of tartar, 1/2
oz., dissolved in water, q. s., butter, 1 oz.; spices, to palate. _Obs._
Takes several days to ripen; sometimes a fortnight.

6. (Extemporaneous.)--_a._ From flour, 1-1/4 lb.; moist sugar and treacle,
of each 1/2 lb.; butter, 2-1/2 oz.; baker's salt (carbonate of ammonia),
1/4 oz., dissolved in cold water, q. s.; ginger, 3 dr.; nutmeg, 2 dr.;
cassia, 1 dr.; cayenne pepper (best), 1/2 dr.

_b._ From flour, 6 lb.; powdered ginger, 2-1/2 oz.; caraway seeds, 1 oz.
(and other spices to palate); candied lemon and orange peels, of each 2
oz.; moist sugar and melted butter, of each 1/2 lb.; treacle, 4 lb.;
volatile salt, 2 oz.; water, q. s.; mix as above. May be baked at once.

_c._ From Jones's patent flour, 2 lbs.; treacle, 1 lb.; moist sugar, 3/4
lb.; butter, 2-1/2 oz.; spice, q. s.; mix as quickly as possible, and bake
it instantly. If the dough is expertly mixed up, the quality of the
product is fully equal, if not superior, to that of any of the preceding
formulae.

_Obs._ Gingerbread is either rolled out into thin sheets and cut into
cakes or nuts (GINGERBREAD NUTS) with the top of a wine-glass or canister,
or is formed into thick cakes, which are baked in 'batches' (ordinary
GINGERBREAD). Both varieties require a pretty brisk oven; the thinner
kinds (nuts, &c.), especially, must be baked as crisp as possible, without
being burnt. The varieties called LEMON GINGERBREAD, CARAWAY G., &c., have
a perceptible predominance of these flavouring ingredients. The addition
of a little alum, dissolved in water, makes the bread both lighter and
crisper, and causes it to ripen quicker, but at the same time lessens its
wholesomeness.

=GIN'GER CAN'DY.= See CANDYING.

=GIN'GER DROPS.= See DROPS (Confectionery).

=GLAIRE.= White of egg. See ALBUMEN and EGG.

=GLAN'DERS.= _Syn._ FARCINOMA, L. A contagious disease, generally confined
to the horse, ass, and mule, but communicable to man, in whom it assumes a
highly malignant and often fatal character. This disease appears under two
forms--1. SIMPLE ACUTE GLANDERS, marked by copious discharge of foul
mucous matter from the nostrils and adjacent parts; and--2. FARCY, FARCIN,
or FARCY GLANDERS, when it attacks the lymphatics of the skin, either
generally, producing a distended appearance of the vessels, like moles or
buttons (LEAD or BUTTON FARCY), or locally, when it takes the form of
dropsical accumulations in the legs (WATER FARCY).

_Treat._ Mr Youatt considers it useless to attempt the cure of glandered
horses; but that farcy in its earlier stages and milder forms may be often
successfully treated. "All the mercurials have been used with benefit in
farcy; but they must be discontinued as soon as the mouth is sufficiently
affected, or sickness, loss of appetite, and like symptoms, are produced."
(Blaine.) Feeding the animal entirely on green food appears to be the best
mode of treatment in both varieties. The buttons are generally removed
with caustic or a red-hot iron.

"Glanders is quite incurable, but by generous diet, good stabling, and
mineral tonics, life, except in extremely acute cases, may be prolonged
for many weeks. This, however, is not desirable; for it involves great
risk, not only to other horses, but also to the attendants." (Finlay Dun.)

=GLASS.= _Syn._ VITRUM, L. This well-known substance is essentially a
mixture of silicates with an excess of silica or silicic acid. It
generally contains the silicates of potassa, soda, lime, baryta, magnesia,
alumina, and lead, coloured by small portions of iron, manganese, cobalt,
uranium, copper, or gold. In its usual form it is brittle, transparent,
noncrystalline, insoluble, and fusible; but it sometimes exhibits other
properties.

The manufacture of glass is one of the highest beauty, and, considering
the comparative worthlessness of the materials of which it is made, and
the various purposes of a useful, ornamental, and scientific nature which
it subserves, it may be regarded as, perhaps, the most important in the
history of inventions. The principle of its production is very simple,
although great skill and experience are necessary to ensure its
excellence. Silica (commonly under the form of sand) is heated with
carbonate of potassa or of soda, and slaked lime or oxide of lead, until
the mixture fuses, and combination takes place. After a time the melted
mass becomes perfectly limpid and free from air-bubbles, when it is
allowed to cool until it assumes the peculiar tenacious condition proper
for working. The operation of fusion is conducted in large crucibles of
refractory fire-clay, which, in the case of 'lead-glass,' are covered with
a dome at the top, and have an opening at the side by which the materials
are introduced, and the melted glass withdrawn.

The manufacture of glass is only conducted on the large scale, and the
precise character and proportions of the ingredients used by the
glass-maker must necessarily greatly depend upon the nature of the raw
materials furnished by his locality, or otherwise at his command. The
attention of the manufacturer should be directed to the use of his
materials in such proportions as will furnish, in the melting-pot, the
proper quantities of the essential ingredients, as determined from the
known composition of the best commercial samples. The purity of the raw
materials and the accuracy of his proportions and quantities are proved or
disproved by the excellence of the product; and the cause of error (if
any) may be at once determined by carefully ascertaining the quality of
the ingredients employed, and the composition of the defective glass.

A writer (in 'Chem. Centr.,' 1872, 528) points out that very generally the
soda used in glass making, contains sulphate, and that when this is so a
poor glass is produced. The addition of .75-1 part of wood charcoal for
every 100 parts of true soda--improves the quality of the glass.

_Prep._ The following formulae exhibit the composition of the leading
commercial glasses, as shown by chemical analysis, together with the
proportions of the raw materials used in their production.

BOTTLE GLASS. Sp. gr. 2.700 to 2.735.--

_a._ Composition by analysis:--

1. Silica, 53.55%; lime, 29.22%; mixed alkali, 5.48%; alumina, 6.01%;
oxide of iron, 5.74%. Dark green.

2. Silica, 52%; baryta, 21.6%; soda, 26.1%; oxides of iron and manganese,
.3%. Pale green; very superior.

_b._ Raw materials used:--

1. Yellow sand, 20%; kelp, 8%; lixiviated wood-ashes, 30%; fresh
wood-ashes, 8%; pale clay, 16%; 'cullet' (broken glass), 18%. This is the
common mixture for coarse bottles, in Belgium, France, and Germany.

2. To the last add of black oxide of manganese, 2-1/2 to 3%. Has a rich
yellowish colour; used for Rhenish-wine bottles.

3. Pale sand, 51%; lixiviated wood-ashes, 33%; pearl-ashes (dried), 8%;
common salt, 7-1/2%; white arsenic, 1/2%; charcoal, q. s. Very pale green.

4. Siliceous sand (pale), 68-1/2%; potash (or its equiv.), 4%; lime,
23-1/2%; heavy spar, 2-1/2%; peroxide of manganese, 1-1/2%. This forms the
celebrated 'flask-glass' of St. Etienne.

GLASS, BROAD, SPREAD WINDOW GLASS. Sp. gr. 2.642.--

_a._ By analysis:--

Silica, 69.70%; lime, 13.30%; soda, 15.25%; oxide of iron (and loss),
1.75%.

_b._ Materials used:--

1. White sand, 50%; dried sulphate of soda, 22%; charcoal (in powder), 9%;
'cullet,' 41%; peroxide of manganese, a little. Pale.

2. White sand, 60%; potashes (good), 24%; common salt, 10%; nitre, 5%;
white arsenic, 1%; peroxide of manganese, a little (1/12 to 1/10%); pale
'cullet,' at will (10 to 30%). Very pale. This is the 'spread' or 'sheet
window-glass' in common use.

GLASS, CHEMICAL. Sp. gr. 2.390 to 2.396.--

_a._ By analysis:--

1. Silica, 72.80%; potassa, 16.80%; lime (with a trace of alumina), 9.68%;
magnesia, 40%; traces of oxide of manganese and iron (and loss) .32%. This
is the difficultly fusible 'Bohemian tube-glass,' so valuable in chemical
manipulations.

2. Silica, 69.3%; potassa, 15.8%; soda, 3%; lime, 7.6%; alumina, 1.2%;
magnesia, 2%; oxide of iron, .5%; oxide of manganese (and loss), .6%.
English chemical glass (without lead). More fusible than the last.

_b._ Materials used:--

1. Quartz (hyalin, in powder), 60%; calcined purified pearlash, 30%;
fresh-burnt lime (very pure), 9%; nitre (dried), 3/4%; arsenious acid or
peroxide of manganese, 1/4%. Said to be the proportions used in the
production of _a_, 1 (_above_).

2. (M. Peligot.) Quartz, 71-1/2%; carbonate of potassa (or its equiv.,
dry), 20%; quicklime, 8-1/2%; (manganese, a little). Said to be the
formula for the hardest and least fusible 'Bohemian tube-glass.' It is
very intractable and infusible, except at a very high temperature; but the
addition of an exceedingly small quantity of boracic acid, borax, or
arsenious acid, causes it to flow into a glass possessing great brilliancy
and hardness, and capable of being wrought at the highest heat of the
ordinary furnace.

GLASS, CROWN, WHITE WINDOW-GLASS. Sp. gr. 2.486 to 2.488.--

_a._ By analysis:--

1. Silica, 62.8%; potassa, 22.1%; lime, 15.5%; alumina (with traces of
oxide of iron and manganese), 2.6%. Crown-glass of Bohemia, according to
Dumas. Very beautiful.

2. Silica, 72.5%; soda, 17.75%; lime, 9.75%. English crown-glass;
excellent quality, but not so white as the last.

_b._ Materials used:--

1. Finest white siliceous sand, 64%; purified potashes (dry), 23%; lime,
12%; white arsenic, 3/4%; oxide of manganese, 1/4%. Said to be used in
Bohemia.

2. (Schweigger.) Pure sand, 57%; dry sulphate of soda, 28-1/2%; quicklime,
11-1/2%; powdered charcoal, 3 or 4%. Corresponds to _a_, 2, _above_
(nearly).

3. Pure sand, 40%; soda ash, 24%; lime, 5%; white 'cullet,' 31%, Rather
superior to the last.

CRYSTAL, CRYSTAL GLASS. The 'crystal glass' of England is flint glass' of
superior quality; that of Bohemia is noticed under TABLE GLASS.

GLASS, FLINT, CRYSTAL. Sp. gr. 3.000 to 3.620.--

_a._ By analysis:--

1. (Berthier.) Silica, 59.19%; oxide of lead, 28.68%; potassa, 12.13%;
oxides of iron and manganese, traces. Finest colourless English crystal.

2. (Brande; Faraday.) Silica, 52%; oxide of lead, 34%; potassa, 34%.
Crystal.

3. (Faraday.) Silica, 44.30%; oxide of lead, 43.05%; potassa, 11.75%;
alumina, .50%; oxides of iron and manganese, .12%; (loss 28%). Heaviest of
three samples of flint glass examined.

_b._ Materials used:--

1. Finest Lynn-sand (calcined, sifted, and washed), 51%; litharge
(purest), 28% (or red lead, 29%), refined pearlashes (calcined before
being weighed), 16%; nitre (purified), 4-3/4% arsenious acid and peroxide
of manganese, of each, 1/8%. Very fine crystal.

2. (M. Payen.) Fine sand, 46%; red lead, 31%; purified carbonate of
potash, 23%. French crystal.

3. (Geddes.) White Lynn-sand, 51%; red lead or litharge, 33%; refined
pearlashes, 13%; nitre, 3%; a very little arsenious acid and peroxide of
manganese. Ordinary English flint-glass. Crystal 'cullet' may be added at
will to the above. This glass was originally prepared from powdered
flints, a fact to which it owes its common name.

GLASS, OPTICAL. 1. (Crown glass.) Purest siliceous sand, 55%; carbonate of
soda (dry), 12%; chalk (dry), 11%; carbonate of baryta, 22%.

2. (Flint glass.)--

_a._ By analysis:--

Silica, 44.30%; oxide of lead, 43.05%; potassa, 11.75%. This is Guinand's
'dense optical glass.'

_b._ Materials used:--

1. Purest quartz, 42%; red lead (finest), 42%; purified potash, 14-3/4%;
purified nitre, 1-1/4%. These are the proportions used for the last.

2. (Korner.) Finest quartz (reduced to powder, treated with hydrochloric
acid, washed, and dried), 47-1/2%; red lead, 38-1/4%; cream of tartar,
14-1/2%. The above are used by opticians in the construction of achromatic
object-glasses.

GLASS, PLATE. Sp. gr. 2.488 to 2.600.--

_a._ By analysis:--

1. (Dumas.) Silica, 75.9%; soda, 17.5%; lime, 3.8%; alumina, 2.8%. French
mirror-glass.

2. (Mitscherlich.) Silica, 60%; potassa, 25%; lime, 12.5%; loss, 2.5%(?).
Finest Bohemian plate.

_b._ Materials used:--

1. Finest siliceous sand, 45%; dried carbonate of soda, 25%; lime, 5%;
nitre (purified), 2%; plate-glass cullet, 23%; peroxide of manganese and
cobalt azure, a very little. Ordinary English plate.

2. Whitish quartz sand, 60%; purified carbonate of soda (dried), 20%; lime
(slaked by exposure to the air), 9%; plate-glass cullet, 11% (or more).
Sometimes as much cullet as sand is used; but in all cases 1% to 1-1/2% of
its weight in carbonate of soda is added with it, besides that ordered in
the formula, to compensate for loss of alkali by remelting. Used at the
celebrated plate-glass works at Saint-Gobain, France. The product
possesses an amount of excellence which British manufacturers have yet
failed to equal.

GLASS, TABLE BOHEMIAN CRYSTAL. Sp. gr. 2.6 to 2.8.--

_a._ By analysis:--

1. (M. Berthier.) Silica, 71.7%; potassa, 12.7%; soda, 2.3%; lime, 10.3%;
alumina, .4%; oxides of iron and manganese (and loss), 2.6%. Very white,
hard, and beautiful table glass.

2. (Dumas.) Silica, 70%; potassa, 20%; lime, 4%; alumina, 5%; oxide of
iron, .6%; peroxide of manganese, .4%. A beautiful white wineglass.

_b._ Materials used:--

1. Finest sand, 50%; purified potashes, 25%; chalk, 10%; nitre, 2%;
crystal cullet, 27%; manganese, a little (say 1/16%). Used in England
recently for table glass.

2. Quartz (hyalin, in powder), 63%; purified potashes, 26%; slaked lime
(carefully sifted), 11%; manganese, a little; crystal cullet, at will.
Used in Bohemia.

3. (M. Perdonnet.) Powdered quartz, 44%; carbonate of potassa, 33%;
quicklime (in fine powder), 22%; nitre, 1%; and a very small quantity of
arsenious acid and peroxide of manganese. Said to be the formula used at
Neuwelt for the glass _a_, 1 (_above_).

_Qual., &c._ These are denoted by its hardness, transparency, homogeneity,
strength, and power of resisting the action of water, air, light, and the
stronger acids and alkalies. The power of glass to resist the action of
menstrua is readily tried by exposing it to boiling oil of vitriol, and
hot but dilute solution of caustic potassa. Neither of these tests should
cause the glass to lose its transparency or to become dim.

_Swallowed glass._ Glass and enamel, both in fragments and in powder, have
occasionally been swallowed, with different results. These bodies are
insoluble in the fluids of the body, and, consequently, any injurious
action they may exert upon the system whilst they are retained in it must
entirely depend upon mechanical attrition or irritation. As treatment, we
must administer an emetic, and assist its action by thick mucilaginous
liquids, and afterwards have recourse to antiphlogistics, if necessary.

_Anal._--_a._ A portion of the sample for examination is heated to dull
redness, and then suddenly thrown, whilst still hot, into a vessel of cold
water. It is next dried, and reduced to fine powder in an agate or
hardened-steel mortar.

_b._ 100 gr. of the prepared powder is thoroughly mixed with 200 gr. of
pure potassic hydrate, and the whole is exposed to heat in a silver or
platinum crucible or capsule until perfect fusion takes place; when cold,
the crucible and its contents are boiled in about half a pint of distilled
water; nitric acid is added to the resulting solution, in excess, and the
mixture, together with any sediment, is evaporated to dryness, after which
the heat is gradually increased to 400 deg. or 500 deg. Fahr.; the dry residuum is
next reduced to powder, and digested in water acidulated with nitric acid,
until exhausted of soluble matter; the insoluble portion is then carefully
dried, gently ignited and weighed. The weight in grains represents the
per-centage of silica in the sample examined.

_c._ The mixed liquid and washings of _b_ is next acidulated with nitric
acid, and treated to a stream of sulphuretted hydrogen, which, if it
produces a precipitate, is continued for some time; the precipitate is
collected on a very small filter, washed, and dried; the filter with the
precipitate next placed in a beaker glass, and strong fuming nitric acid
is cautiously added, drop by drop, until complete solution takes place;
after boiling the solution for a few minutes, diluting with distilled
water, and allowing it to cool, it is precipitated with sulphuric acid, in
excess; this precipitate (sulphate of lead) is washed, dried, slightly
ignited in a porcelain crucible, and weighed. The weight in grains,
multiplied by .7369, gives the per-centage of oxide of lead or litharge.

_d._ The filtered liquid from _c_ is evaporated to dryness, and
redissolved in water acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and treated with a
solution of ammonium chloride, and afterwards with ammonia, in excess; the
precipitate (alumina and oxide of iron) is collected, washed, and boiled
in a solution of potassium hydrate; the undissolved portion is collected
on a filter, washed with boiling water, ignited, and weighed. This gives
the per-centage of peroxide of iron.

_e._ The liquid filtered from the oxide of iron holds the alumina (if any)
in solution; a solution of carbonate of ammonium is dropped in; the
resulting precipitate is washed, dried, ignited, and weighed. This gives
the per-centage of alumina.

_f._ The filtrate from the alumina and oxide of iron (see _d_), after
being evaporated to dryness, is redissolved in a large quantity of
distilled water, and is treated with a solution of oxalic acid (a solution
of oxalate of ammonium is preferable when no baryta is present); the
precipitate is washed, dried, gently ignited, and weighed. The weight of
the resulting carbonate of calcium, in grains, multiplied by .56292, gives
the per-centage of lime required.

_g._ The filtrate from _f_ is now mixed with carbonate of potassium, in
considerable excess, and boiled for a long time; the resulting precipitate
(if any) is then collected on a filter, slightly washed with hot water,
dried, and exposed to a full red heat for some time (say 2 hours); the
residuum of the calcination is then weighed. This furnishes the
per-centage value of the sample in magnesia.

_h._ The filtrate from _f_ is treated with dilute sulphuric acid or the
solution of a sulphate, as long as a precipitate falls; the precipitate
(sulphate of barytum,) is washed, dried, gently ignited, and weighed. The
weight, in grains, multiplied by .6589, gives the per-centage of baryta in
the sample.

The above may be varied by gently concentrating the liquid filtered from
the precipitate of alumina and oxide of iron (see _d_), and precipitating
it with dilute sulphuric acid; the mixed precipitate is exhausted by
digestion in water holding chloride of ammonium in solution; the
undissolved residuum (sulphate of barytum,) is washed, dried, and
otherwise treated as before; whilst the solution with the washings is
treated with a solution of carbonate of ammonium; the precipitate is
carbonate of calcium, which is to be washed, &c., as directed under _f_.
The liquor, &c., filtered from the lime, is lastly tested for magnesia.
(See _g_.)

_i._ A second 100 gr. of the powdered glass (see _a_) is mixed with 200
gr. of fluor spar, also in powder; the compound is placed in a platinum or
leaden capsule, 500 gr. of strong sulphuric acid are added, and the whole
cautiously stirred together with a silver stirrer or spoon, care being
taken to avoid inhaling the fumes; the heat of a spirit lamp is next
applied, and at first is kept at about 212 deg. Fahr., but towards the
conclusion of the process is raised to 300 deg. Fahr., or even higher, and is
continued for at least 2 hours, or until fumes entirely cease to be
evolved; 5 or 6 fl. oz. of distilled water are next poured on the
residuary mass, and, after thorough agitation, the whole is thrown on a
filter, more water being at last poured on to wash out any remains of
soluble matter; to the filtrate, carbonate of ammonium is added in excess,
and after a time the earthy salts are removed by filtration; the filtered
liquor is now evaporated to dryness, and ignited to dull redness for 2 or
3 minutes; the residuum (sulphate of potassium or sodium, or of both),
after being weighed (the weight being carefully noted down), is
redissolved in distilled water; a solution of chloride of barium is then
added as long as it disturbs the liquor, and after a time the whole is
again filtered; the filtrate is concentrated by evaporation, and solution
of bichloride of platinum added in excess; the whole is now gently
evaporated to dryness, mixed with alcohol, collected on a filter,
carefully washed with weak alcohol, dried at a temperature under 212 deg.
Fahr., and weighed. The weight, in grains, multiplied by .1940, gives the
per-centage of potassa sought.

_k._ The weight of sulphate of potassium in the ignited residuum in _i_ is
calculated from that of the potassium last found (47 parts of the one
being equal to 87 parts of the other), and this weight is deducted from
the gross weight of the ignited sulphates; the remainder represents the
quantity of sulphate of sodium present. The weight of the latter, in
grains, multiplied by .4367, gives the per-centage of pure soda required.

_Concluding Remarks._ One of the chief points to which the skilful glass
manufacturer directs his attention, is the quality of the materials. Great
care is exercised in the selection of the sand for all the finer varieties
of glass. The usual practice is to test it before using it, by exposing it
to a very high temperature. The purest sand is that which is the whitest
and freest from iron, and which, consequently, suffers the least
alteration by this treatment. The alkalies (potash, soda) employed are
purified by solution and crystallisation. The red lead and litharge must
be pure and absolutely free from oxide of copper (a common contamination),
which gives a green tint to the glass. The former, which is the most
costly, is preferable to the finest crystal. Care must also be taken that
the lime, clay, &c., are respectively of proper purity; and that the
'cullet,' or broken glass, which is almost always remelted with the other
materials, is of proper quality, and of the same kind as that to which it
is added. Potassa produces a better glass than soda, although the latter
is now very generally employed, from its lower price. It is, however,
quite inadmissible as an ingredient in the manufacture of the better class
of crystal and plate glass, as, however pure it may be, it imparts to the
product a slight greenish tinge more or less destructive of its beauty.
When sulphate of soda (Glauber salt) is used as a source of soda, it is
gently calcined to dissipate its water of crystallisation, and requires
the addition of about 8% of charcoal to effect its reduction in the
melting-pot. Common salt is also employed as a source of soda in the same
manner. Sometimes native sulphide of lead (galena) is used to decompose
the sulphate of soda, and in lieu of part of the oxide of lead; in which
case about 5 parts of the sulphuret are taken for every 9 parts of the
calcined sulphate.

To anticipate the results of his processes, and to carry out with
certainty his various intentions, the glass manufacturer, perhaps more
than any other person, requires the aid of science and experience. All his
most essential operations depend on chemical principles. The products of
his furnaces are not formed by the mere mechanical admixture of their
several ingredients whilst in the state of fusion, but result from the
play of delicate affinities which only act under certain conditions, and
when the materials are presented to each other in uniform and definite
proportions. Chemically speaking, the glasses are mixed super-silicates of
the respective bases which enter into their composition (potassium,
calcium, lead, &c.), and, like all other compounds which are formed by
elective attraction, obey the common laws of combination, as developed by
Dalton, and now so successfully applied in almost every department of
industrial art. It has been shown by the most careful analysis, that in
all the more valuable and beautiful commercial glasses the relative
proportions of the materials are conformable to these laws, and that
several of them are true atomic compounds, as perfect in this respect as
the crystalline bodies commonly denominated salts. In some of the harder
glasses of Bohemia the number of atoms or equivalents of silica are to
each of the bases with which it is united, nearly as 5 to 1; whilst in a
softer glass of German manufacture the proportions of the two are found to
be as 4 to 1. The celebrated plate glass of St. Gobain is an atomic
compound formed of 1 equivalent of trisilicate of soda united to 1
equivalent of trisilicate of lime, with a small per-centage of alumina in
combination with silicic acid, also in atomic proportion. Glasses in which
the ingredients bear no atomic ratio to each other are never homogeneous,
but always more or less striated and of unequal colour and refractive
power. The absence of atomic proportion between the substances entering
into its composition appears to be the only reason why the best English
plate and mirror glass is so greatly inferior to that of France and
Germany, that comparison of the two becomes absurd. The only variety of
glass in the production of which the English manufacturer excels is flint
glass or crystal, and here he certainly surpasses all his numerous
competitors. The subject is doubtless involved in difficulty, owing to the
precise temperature necessary to effect the perfect combination of the
bases with the silicic acid, varying with the character of the compound,
and not being satisfactorily settled by observation or experience. The
modifying influence of temperature is shown by the fact that the lower the
heat employed in the process, the smaller the quantity of silica which
enters into the composition of the resulting glass; whilst at higher
temperatures a part of the base is dissipated in fumes, until such
proportions of base and acid result as are required to produce a permanent
atomic compound corresponding to the temperature employed. If the heat is
excessive or improperly continued, the loss of base produces an opposite
effect, and an opaque, semi-vitrified mass is formed, resembling
'Reaumur's porcelain.' The quality of the resulting glass depends on this
change being more or less complete. If the furnace yields the right
temperature, and the duration of the exposure to its action is neither too
short nor too prolonged, nature makes up for the unskilful conduct of the
operative, and removes the stumbling blocks which his ignorance had placed
in the way of his own attempts at excellence. The proceedings and their
results are accidental; but being once obtained, the first are repeated
without further trouble or inquiry. This accounts for the same mixture of
materials yielding products of different qualities at different times, and
in different works, which the operative contents himself with referring to
the 'going of the furnace.' The common plan in this country is to regulate
the proportions and firing by experience only, rather than by theory and
practice combined. Now, although the chemist has much yet to learn on the
precise constitution of the glasses, and although theory may not be able
to ensure unvarying success, it is nevertheless certain that, in all
cases, it can afford much valuable assistance in that direction. Indeed,
it has been asserted by one of the leading Continental chemists, that
ingredients that will yield the proper equivalent proportions in the
melting pot cannot produce a bad glass, if exposed to such a temperature
as to permit of perfect combination taking place.

It is found that those glasses which contain a predominance of alkali are
acted on by water, and when this is in great excess they are perfectly
soluble in that fluid. Ordinary flint glass is affected by long coction in
water, whilst crown glass, which contains less alkali, is unaltered by
that trial. Glass which contains any considerable quantity of lead is
acted on by sulphuretted hydrogen. This is the cause of the surface of
flint glass, under certain circumstances, becoming opaque and iridescent.
Glasses made of silica and alkali alone are incapable of permanently
resisting the action of water. The addition of lime or oxide of lead
appears to be necessary to give them this quality. Glasses that have a
slight greenish or bluish tint may be often whitened, or rendered
colourless, by exposure to light and air. This arises from the
peroxidation of the iron, to whose protoxide they owe their tint. Other
glasses become purpled by exposure, owing to the peroxidation of the
manganese.

Different colours are communicated to glass by the addition of metallic
oxides. Thus, oxide of manganese gives an amethyst; oxide of cobalt, a
blue; oxide of iron, a brown; black oxide of copper, a green; oxide of
gold, a purple; suboxide of copper, a ruby-red; oxide of tin, a white;
oxide of silver, a yellow, &c. These substances are either added to the
melted contents of the glass-pot, as in preparing artificial gems, &c., or
they are applied in a thin layer to the surface of the object, which is
then heated until fusion of the coloured compound occurs, as in enamelling
and painting on glass.

Glass is FORMED or FASHIONED into articles by the processes of blowing,
casting, drawing, rolling, or spreading. In the process of BLOWING GLASS
the workman begins by collecting a proper quantity of glass in a soft,
pasty state, at the end of his blow-pipe (an iron tube, five or six feet
in length, terminated by a mouth-piece of wood), which he then commences
blowing through, by which the lump is expanded into a kind of flask,
susceptible of having its form modified by the position in which it is
held, and the velocity of rotation continually given to the iron tube. If
an open-mouthed vessel is to be made, an iron rod, called a 'pontil' or
'puntil,' is dipped into the glass-pot and applied to the bottom of the
flask, to which it thus serves as a handle, the blow-pipe being removed by
the application of a cold iron to the neck. The vessel is now re-heated,
and the aperture enlarged, and the vessel otherwise altered in figure by
the aid of a few simple tools until completed. It is then detached, and
carried to the 'annealing oven,' where it undergoes slow and gradual
cooling during many hours. In this way bottles, flasks, carboys, and an
almost infinite variety of other articles, are formed. The large circular
tables of CROWN-GLASS are made by a joint process of BLOWING and
SPREADING. The globular flask at first produced, transferred from the
blow-pipe to the 'pontil,' is suddenly made to assume the form of a flat
disc by the centrifugal force of the rapid rotatory movement given to the
rod. SPREAD or BROAD GLASS is formed into sheets in a nearly similar
manner. PLATE-GLASS is cast upon a flat metal table, and, after very
careful annealing, is ground and polished by suitable machinery. TUBES are
made by rapidly drawing out a hollow cylinder; and from these a great
variety of useful small apparatus are constructed with the help of a lamp
and blowpipe, or, still better, the bellows-table of the barometer-maker.
GLASS BEADS are made from small tubes chopped into pieces of suitable
lengths, which are stirred first in a mixture of sand and wood-ashes, in
the cold, and afterwards in an iron pan over the fire until they assume a
rounded form. SMALL TUBES are bent in the flame of a spirit lamp or
gas-jet, and cut by a file, a scratch being made, and the two portions
pulled or broken asunder in a way easily learned by a few trials. LARGE
TUBES require the heat of a powerful blowpipe and lamp, or that of a
furnace.

The following hints respecting the MANAGEMENT OF GLASS may prove useful to
the inexperienced:--

ANNEALING. The process of annealing glass has been briefly referred to
before. The extreme brittleness of imperfectly annealed wrought glass may
generally be remedied on the small scale by immersing the articles in a
bath of oil, or a concentrated solution of chloride of calcium, or common
salt, and heating the whole gradually and cautiously to the boiling-point,
and letting it again cool--the slower the better. By this treatment the
glass will be enabled to bear any alterations of temperature between the
two extremes to which it has been exposed.

BLOWING. By the ingenious art of GLASS-BLOWING and GLASS-DRAWING, as
practised on the small scale, with a blowpipe lamp furnace, a variety of
articles of ornament and utility may be made, their number being limited
only by the ingenuity of the artist. The details of the various operations
are, however, too lengthy to describe here.

CLEANING. 1. Windows, looking-glasses, &c., may be quickly cleaned as
follows:--Dip a slightly moistened rag or flannel into whiting, fuller's
earth, wood-ashes, or rotten-stone, in impalpable powder, with which smear
the glass, and wipe it off with a dry, soft cloth. This does well when the
surface is very dirty. In other cases, a little thumb blue, whiting, or
chalk, in fine powder, tied up in muslin, may be dusted on the glass,
which should then be cleaned off with chamois leather. This gives a fine
polish.

2. The vessel to be cleansed, is filled, or, if large, rinsed, with a
moderately dilute solution of permanganate of potash, contact being
prolonged till a film of hydrated manganic oxide has been deposited; the
solution is then poured away, and the glass vessel rinsed with some strong
hydrochloric acid.

CUTTING. Glass may be easily cut with a common well-hardened steel file,
provided it be moistened with oil of turpentine, or plunged under water.
It may be also perforated with a common steel brad-awl in the same way.
GLASS VESSELS, as bottles and tubes, may be readily cut or shortened by
placing a heated iron ring over the spot, or a piece of loose string or
cotton dipped in oil of turpentine and set on fire, and immediately on the
withdrawal of either applying cold water to the part. Glass vessels or
tubes thus treated will generally crack round, and may be readily divided
into two parts. In this manner a common Florence oil-flask may be
converted into an evaporating dish and a funnel. By a little practice a
crack may be led in almost any direction, or a new one made, by the point
of a red-hot poker or a spring coal (an ignited crayon of prepared
charcoal). The parts may then be separated by a little force or a smart
rap, and the divided edges smoothed by the flame of a blowpipe, or by
grinding them with powdered emery and water on a flat stone. In this way
many broken articles in glass may be converted into others scarcely less
useful.

ETCHING ON GLASS has been already noticed under the head of Etching.

GILDING OF GLASS. Gold chloride is dissolved in boiling water; the
solution is filtered, and the filtrate so far diluted, that 200 cubic
centimetres contain 0.0648 gram of the metal, and it is then made alkaline
with soda. The reducing agent is alcohol saturated with marsh gas; this is
diluted with its own volume of water. 25 cubic centimetres of this
solution are mixed with the alkaline gold chloride solution, and this
mixture is poured between the perfectly well-cleaned plate to be gilded,
and another sheet of glass placed at a distance of 3 mm. under the first.
After two to three hours' rest the gilding is effected. The plate is
removed and washed. ('Dingler's Journal.')

GRINDING. This, on the large scale, like glass-cutting, forms a distinct
occupation. On the small scale, glass may be roughed or ground by friction
with powdered emery and water and a flat rubber of wood; care being taken
that the article, if a plate, is laid on a perfectly flat surface, or, if
hollow, is supported by a core of cement or plaster. The frosted
appearance of ground glass is given to the panes of windows by gently
dabbing the glass over with a piece of glazier's putty, stuck on the ends
of the fingers. When applied with a light and even touch, the resemblance
is considerable. Another method is to dab the glass over with thin white
paint, or flour paste, by means of a brush, but the effect is much
inferior to the above.

GLASS, PACKING. This subject will be considered under the general head of
PACKING.

WRITING ON GLASS may be performed by a piece of French chalk or crayons
prepared for the purpose; or even with a common pen held nearly
perpendicular. Indian ink, or, when the article will be exposed to damp,
shell-lac ink or varnish, thickened with a little Vermillion, or
lampblack, is best adapted to this purpose. Common ink is not sufficiently
opaque.

GLASS, TO PREVENT THE CRACKING OF, BY BOILING WATER. When new, all glass
and earthenware should be placed in cold water in a saucepan, and after
some hours the saucepan containing the vessel or vessels, should be placed
over the fire, until the water reaches the boiling point.

=Glass.= This term was applied by the older chemists to various substances
to which a vitreous appearance has been given by heat. Thus we have 'GLASS
OF ANTIMONY,' 'GLASS OF BORAX,' &c. It is now obsolete.

=Glass, Iridescent.= The inventor of the process by which this beautiful
variety of glass is made is M Clemandot.

The 'Chemical News' states that the principle observed in its manufacture
consists in submitting the glass articles to the action of dilute
hydrochloric, sulphuric, or other acid, under a pressure of from two to
six atmospheres. M Clemandot claims to be able to imitate the nacreous
films which are seen on ancient glass which has been exposed to combined
atmospheric influences for thousands of years.

=Glass, Pow'dered.= _Syn._ VITRUM PULVERISATUM, L. _Prep._ Heat the glass
red hot, throw it into cold water, dry, and powder it. Used to filter
acids, and glued upon paper as a polishing powder; also to wear down corns
upon the feet, after the feet have been well soaked, and dried.

=Glass, Sol'uble.= _Syn._ WATER GLASS; VITRUM SOLUBILE, L. An impure
alkaline silicate. _Prep._ Silica, 1 part; carbonate of potassium or of
sodium, 2 parts; fused together.

Carbonate of sodium (dry), 54 parts; carbonate of potassium (dry), 70
parts; silica, 192 parts; as last. Soluble in boiling water, yielding a
fine, transparent, semi-elastic varnish.

Carbonate of potassium (dry), 10 parts; powdered quartz (or sand free from
iron and alumina), 15 parts; charcoal 1 part; fused together. Soluble in 5
or 6 times its weight of boiling water; and the filtered solution,
evaporated to dryness, yields a transparent glass, permanent in the air.

M. F. Capitaine, who, acting upon a suggestion made by Liebig, some twenty
years since, has recently taken up the subject of the manufacture of
soluble glass, and silicate of potash, from _farine fossile_ (an
infusorial earth), has published an account of his researches in
'Dingler's Polytechnic Journal.'[334]

[Footnote 334: See 'The Journal of the Society of Arts' for January 11th,
1878.]

Although M. Capitaine does not think that the farine will be able to
compete in cheapness with flint (where this latter is abundant) for the
preparation of the alkaline silicates, he states that it possesses the
advantage over flint of being much more soluble, and of yielding a far
more neutral glass; added to which the production of the silicate is said
to be effected with much less trouble than when flint is employed. An
important condition is, that the farine must be first well calcined, since
if the least trace of organic matter be left in it, the resulting solution
will have a yellowish or brownish tint, which will make it unsaleable.

"The lyes being prepared partly with caustic soda, and partly with
carbonate of soda, had densities ranging from 1.22 to 1.24 which were
found to be most advantageous. A reservoir furnished with mechanical
agitators, was about two thirds filled with lye, and the necessary
quantity of calcined farine added, the stirring being kept up continually.
The proportion of farine is easily calculated on the datum, that one part
of hydrate of soda dissolves about 2.8 parts of chemically pure farine,
the quality of which varies but little. Lye of the density indicated
produces a rather light solution, which presents little resistance to the
agitators. If steam is afterwards introduced the solution becomes very
rapid, when the pressure reaches about three atmospheres, and at the end
of about three hours the silica is completely dissolved.

"For the preparation of silicate of potash for surgical purposes the
farine fossile is said to be peculiarly adapted. In this case the boiling
must be continued for one or two hours longer than in the case of soluble
glass, with an addition of 10 to 15 per cent. of farine."

_Uses. &c._ Soluble glass, in solution, has been used to render textile
fabrics less combustible, as a varnish to protect stone, and as a vehicle
in fresco-painting, The soda compound (silicate of sodium) is largely used
as a dung-substitute in calico-printing, and by soap manufacturers in
place of the resinates formerly in use. 10 or 12 tons are produced weekly
in the district of South Lancashire. The potassa compound (silicate of
potassium) has been recommended as a remedy for gouty concretions by Mr
Ure.--_Dose_, 10 to 15 gr., in 6 or 8 fl. oz. of water twice a day. See
DUNGING, VARNISH, &c.

=Glass, Toughened.= _Syn._ VERRE TREMPE. M. de la Bastie's process for
converting ordinary, into toughened, tempered, or hardened glass, may in
general terms be said to consist in heating the glass to a certain
temperature, and then plunging it into an oleaginous bath. For the
process, however, to be successful, the observance of a number of minute
details is essential; if these be neglected failure is certain to ensue.
Thus it is found, that if the glass be insufficiently heated it will, when
immersed in the bath, fail to be affected by it, and will consequently
experience no alteration in properties. Again, if overheated, it will then
get out of shape; or, further it may be heated to the right temperature,
and yet be spoilt as it is being transferred to the bath. Moreover, the
exact composition of the bath itself, and its temperature constitute very
important conditions, the most trifling departure from which may give rise
to unsatisfactory results. All these obstacles appear to have been
overcome by M. de la Bastie, who has designed plant in the shape of
furnaces and baths, by means of which the tempering process can be carried
out, without chance of failure. When the glass is brought to the required
temperature, all that is necessary is that they should be plunged into the
bath, and instantly withdrawn. The cost of the operation is stated to be
very small.

"The process as carried out at New York is thus described:--The glass
after being run from the furnaces and moulded as usual, instead of being
put into annealing pans, is immersed in a hot bath consisting of three
parts of flaxseed oil, and one part of tallow. The bath stands at about
320 deg.; and after remaining in this the ware is removed to a second, and
similar bath, by which it is cooled down to about 200 deg.. Finally the pieces
are immersed in a water bath, and then dipped into a quantity of ordinary
refined burning oil. They are then cleaned, ready for packing, with
plaster of Paris powder. The work is but in its infancy, and but one small
furnace is used in the experiments. Improvements will doubtless be made,
by which the cleaning can be done more rapidly than by the powdered
plaster, probably some chemical being used for the purpose. It is supposed
that the oil works into the pores of the hot glass, and thus toughens it.
Great care has to be exercised in the final cooling by water, as too long
a contact with the air in changing from one bath to another, makes the
ware crack. Articles cooled entirely in oil retain the oil on the surface,
but are thus rendered stronger than otherwise.

This new process is very much employed in the manufacture of lamp
chimneys, though they have the disadvantage of flying into small pieces,
and with violence when they do break, which sometimes does occur."[335]

[Footnote 335: Supplement to 'Ure's Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, &c.,
1878.]

The results so far obtained when glass is subjected to M. de la Bastie's
process are variable. In some cases the articles subjected to it possess
great toughness, and the glass bears a blow without experiencing any
fracture. In other instances, however, a slight fall or blow shivers it to
atoms. When the toughened glass under any circumstances breaks, it
possesses a disadvantage over ordinary broken glass, in distributing
itself into a great number of small, sharply angular fragments.

Another process for toughening glass, which has been patented by Herr F.
Siemens, consists in heating, and then pressing, and suddenly cooling the
glass to be hardened; but when the articles are such as are usually
moulded, the hardening and tempering are accomplished at the same time as
the pressing; thus the molten glass is run into suitable moulds, and while
still highly heated, is squeezed, the moulds effecting the necessary
cooling, a proceeding which renders the employment of the oleaginous bath
unnecessary. Mr Bauer's method for toughening glass consists in heating
ordinary glass plates so strongly that they begin to bend from softening,
and then plunging them into a liquid paraffin bath having a temperature of
200 deg..

Toughened glass is liable to rupture under circumstances that have not yet
been accounted for.

M. de la Bastie conceives that the fragile nature of glass is due to the
weakness of the cohesion of its particles, and that if this cohesive power
can be increased, the strength of the material will be improved in
proportion. M. de la Bastie first tried to obtain this end by forcibly
compressing the glass while in a plastic or fluid condition, but without
success; and it was only after various experiments that he was enabled to
harden the glass, by dipping it into oil or any other liquid that
permitted of being heated to a temperature considerably above that of
water.

=GLAZE.= _Syn._ GLAZING. Any coating or varnish applied to a surface to
render it smooth and glassy; any factitious, shining exterior. The
following applications of this term are the following:--

=Glaze.= In _cookery_, is commonly understood to be gravy or clarified
soups boiled until it gelatinises on cooling. It is used as a species of
varnish to cover various dishes for the table, and may be spiced and
flavoured according to the fancy of the cook. White of egg is generally
used as a glaze for pastry.

=Glaze.= In the _porcelain_ and _earthenware manufacture_, the vitreous
coating which is so essential to the beauty and utility of potter's ware.
Glazes are either white or coloured. The former, by the addition of the
colouring ingredients used for enamels, are converted into the latter.

_a._ For EARTHENWARE:--

_Prep._ 1. (With lead.) White lead (pure), 53 parts; quartz or ground
flints, 36 parts; Cornish stone, or felspar, 16 parts; white flint glass,
5 parts; reduce the whole to an impalpable powder. For common earthenware.

2. (Without lead.) Fine washed sand, 10 parts; purified potash, 8 parts;
nitre, 1 part; slaked lime, 2 parts; nitre, 4-3/4%; powder, mix, heat the
mixture in a blacklead crucible in a reverberatory furnace, till the mass
flows into a clear glass; let this cool, then reduce it to fine powder.
For glazing pharmaceutical and chemical vessels.

_b._ For PORCELAIN:--

_Prep._ (Rose.) Felspar, 27 parts; borax, 18 parts; finest siliceous sand,
4 parts; nitre, soda, and purest china clay (Cornish), 3 parts; mix, heat
to a 'frit,'[336] powder, and add of calcined borax, 3 parts.

[Footnote 336: A technical term for the half-fused mass formed by heating
together the materials of which glass is composed.]

_c._ For STONEWARE:--

1. (Ure.) White felspar, 26 parts; soda, 6 parts; nitre, 2 parts; borax, 1
part; 'frit' together as last. Of the product take 13 parts; red lead, 50
parts; white lead, 40 parts; flints, 12 parts; reduce the whole to powder
as before. For painted stoneware.

2. From common salt, which is thrown into the heated furnace containing
the ware. It is volatilised and decomposed by the joint agency of the
silica of the ware and of the vapour of water always present; hydrochloric
acid and soda are produced, the latter forming a silicate, which fuses
over the surface of the ware, and gives a thin but excellent glaze.
'SALT-GLAZED STONEWARE' is now generally used for large chemical vessels,
drain-pipes, &c.

_Obs._ Glazes must be reduced to very fine powder. For use, they are
ground with water to a very thin paste or smooth cream, into which the
articles, previously baked to the state called 'biscuit,' are then dipped;
they are afterwards exposed to a sufficient heat in the kiln to fuse the
glaze. Another method of applying them is to immerse the biscuit in water
for a minute or so, and then to sprinkle the dry powder over the moistened
surface.

=GLI'ADIN.= _Syn._ GLUTIN, VEGETABLE GELATIN. One of the proximate
principles of wheat gluten, soluble in alcohol.

=GLIADINPFLASTER= (A. L. Klose, Berlin). For rheumatism. A thin paper on
which is spread a solution of gelatin containing spirit and some acrid
substance, such as cantharides or euphorbium.--_Hager._

=GLOB'ULIN.= _Syn._ CRYSTALLIN. An albumenoid body existing in the
crystalline lens of the eye.

=GLOVE POW'DER.= _Prep._ 1. From Castile soap, dried by exposure to a warm
dry atmosphere for a few days, and then reduced to fine powder in a
mortar. Used to clean gloves.

2. Pipe-clay, coloured with yellow ochre, umber, or Irish slate q. s., and
afterwards scented with a little powdered orris root or cloves. Used to
colour gloves made of doe-skin and similar leather.

=GLOVES.= _Syn._ GANTS, Fr. Although gloves constitute a less costly
article of dress at the present day than they did during the Middle Ages,
the following information may nevertheless be sometimes found of value to
their wearers:--

GLOVE CLEANING. 1. (KID GLOVES.)--_a._ Damp them slightly, stretch them
gently over a wooden hand of appropriate size, and clean them with a
sponge dipped in benzol, recently rectified oil of turpentine, or
camphine; as soon as they are dry, withdraw them gently from the
stretcher, and suspend them in a current of air for a few days, or until
they cease to smell of the cleaning liquid used. The smell of benzol
passes off very quickly. Heat must be avoided. The cleaning liquid should
be used liberally, and the first dirty portion should be sponged off with
clean liquid.

_b._ By employing a saponaceous compound. See GANTEINE.

2. (DOE-SKIN and WASH-LEATHER GLOVES.)--_a._ Stretch them on a hand, or
lay them flat on a table, and rub into them a mixture of finely powdered
fuller's earth and alum; sweep it off with a brush, sprinkle them with a
mixture of dry bran and whiting, and, lastly, dust them well off. This
will not do if they are very dirty.

_b._ Wash them in lukewarm soft water, with a little Castile or curd soap,
ox-gall, or bran tea; then stretch them on wooden hands, or pull them into
shape without wringing them; next rub them with pipe-clay and yellow
ochre, or umber, or a mixture of them in any required shade made into a
paste with ale or beer; let them dry gradually, and, when about half dry,
rub them well, so as to smooth them and put them into shape; when they are
dry, brush out the superfluous colour, cover them with paper, and smooth
them with a warm (not hot) iron.

GLOVE DYEING. LEATHER GLOVES, if not greasy, may be dyed with any of the
ordinary dyes by brushing the latter over the gloves stretched out smooth.
The surface alone should be wetted, and a second or third coat may be
given after the former one has become dry. When the last coat has become
thoroughly dry, the superfluous colour should be well rubbed out, a smooth
surface given them by rubbing them with a polished stick or piece of
ivory, and the whole gone over with a sponge dipped in white of egg.

=Gloves, Cosmetic.= _Syn._ GANTS COSMETIQUES. These are mock kid or
lambskin gloves rubbed over, on the inside, with the following
composition:--Spermaceti cerate, 3 oz.; melt, add of balsam of Peru, 1/2
dr., stir for 5 minutes, and, after a few minutes' repose, pour off the
clear portion; to this add of oil of nutmeg, 15 drops; oil of cassia and
essence of ambergris, of each 6 drops; and stir until cold. Used by ladies
to soften the hands and to prevent or cure chilblains and chaps. They are
commonly worn all night in bed.

=GLUCI'NUM.= Gl. _Syn._ BERYL'LIUM. The metallic base of glucina. It was
first obtained by Woehler, in 1828, by a similar process to that adopted
for aluminum, a metal which it greatly resembles. See ALUMINUM.

=Gluci'num, Oxide of.= _Syn._ GLUCINA, BERYLLIA. A pulverent white
substance, found as silicate in the beryl, emerald, &c.

_Prep._ The beryl, in fine powder, 1 part; carbonate of potassium, 3
parts; expose the mixture to a strong red heat for half an hour, dissolve
the calcined mass in hydrochloric acid, and evaporate the solution to
dryness; redissolve the residuum in very dilute hydrochloric acid, and
precipitate with pure ammonia; wash the precipitate well, digest it with a
large quantity of carbonate of ammonium, filter, and boil the solution as
long as carbonate of glucinum subsides. By exposure to a red heat the
carbonic acid may be expelled, and the earth rendered anhydrous.

_Prop., &c._ Glucina closely resembles alumina, from which, however, it is
distinguished by its solubility when freshly precipitated in a cold
solution of carbonate of ammonia, from which it is again thrown by
boiling. Glucina is classed with the earths. The beryl contains 14% of
this substance.

=GLU'COSE.= See SUGAR (Grape).

=GLUE.= _Syn._ GLUTEN, GLUTINUM, L.; COLLE, COLLE FORTE, Fr. Inspissated
animal jelly, or gelatin, used as a cement.

_Prep._ Glue is principally prepared from the parings and waste-pieces of
hides and skins, the refuse of tanneries, and the tendons and other offal
of slaughter-houses. These substances, when intended for the glue-maker,
are steeped for 14 or 15 days in milk of lime, then drained, and dried by
exposure to the air. This constitutes what is termed the 'cleansing' or
'preparation,' and in this state the 'glue pieces,' as they are called,
may be kept for a long time, and transported to any distance without
suffering decomposition. Before conversion into glue, they are usually
again steeped in weak milk of lime, and next well washed and exposed to
the air for 24 to 30 hours. They are then placed in a copper boiler two
thirds filled with water, and furnished with a perforated false bottom, to
prevent them from burning, and as much is piled on as will fill the vessel
and rest on the top of it. Heat is next applied, and the whole gently
boiled or simmered together, until the liquor on cooling forms a firm
gelatinous mass. The clear portion is then run off into another vessel,
and a very small quantity of alum (dissolved) added; here it is kept hot
by a water bath, and allowed to repose for some hours to deposit its
impurities, after which it is run into the 'congealing boxes,' and placed
in a cool situation. The next morning the cold gelatinous masses are
turned out upon boards wetted with water, and are cut horizontally into
thin cakes with a stretched piece of brass wire, and then into smaller
cakes with a moistened flat knife. The latter are placed on nettings to
dry. The dry cakes of glue are next dipped one by one into hot water, and
slightly rubbed with a brush wetted with boiling water, to give them a
gloss; they are, lastly, stove-dried for sale. This furnishes the palest
and best glue.

As soon as the liquor of the first boiling has drained off, the
undissolved portion of skins, &c., left in the copper is treated with
fresh water, and the whole operation is repeated again and again, as long
as any gelatinous matter is extracted. In this way a second and other
inferior qualities of glue are obtained. The product from dried
glue-pieces is about 50%.

_Var._ These chiefly depend on the care with which the process is
conducted. HATMAKERS' GLUE is prepared from the tendons of the legs of
neat cattle and horses. It is brown, opaque, and soft; and grows moist in
damp weather, but it does not render felt brittle like the other
varieties. FISH GLUE is made in like manner from various membranous and
solid parts of fishes. PARCHMENT GLUE is prepared from shreds or shavings
of parchment, vellum, white leather, &c., dissolved by boiling them in
water. It is scentless, and nearly colourless.

_Qual._ The best glue is transparent, nearly colourless, and tasteless,
has very little smell, even when melted, and is extremely adhesive. The
presence of more than a trace of alum is objectionable; an undue quantity
may be easily detected by the usual tests. The strongest glue is that
obtained from skins, more especially from the hides of oxen and cows.
That obtained from the bones, cartilages, and tendons, is weaker.

=Glue, Liq'uid.= _Prep._ (Dumoulins.) Soft water, 1 quart; best pale glue,
2 lbs.; dissolve in a covered vessel by the heat of a water bath, cool,
and add, gradually, of nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.335), 7 oz.; when cold put
it into bottles. Very strong, and does not gelatinise. For the 'LIQUID
GLUE' sold in the shops, see CHINESE CEMENT.

=Glue, Marine.= _Prep._ 1. India rubber (cut small), 1 part; coal tar or
mineral naphtha, 12 parts; digest in a covered vessel with heat and
agitation, and when the solution is complete, add of powdered shell-lac,
20 parts; continue the heat and stirring until perfect liquefaction has
taken place, and pour the fused mass, whilst still hot, on slabs of
polished metal or stone, so as to form thin sheets. For use, it is heated
to its melting-point (248 deg. to 250 deg. Fahr.) in an iron vessel, and applied
in the liquid state with a brush. Employed in ship-building, &c.

2. Caoutchouc, 15 to 20 gr.; chloroform, 2 fl. oz.; dissolve, and add of
powdered mastic, 1/2 oz. It must be kept well corked and in a cool place,
to prevent loss by evaporation. Used for small, fine work.

=Glue, a New.= Ordinary glue is dissolved in nitric ether, and a little
bit of caoutchouc added. This solution forms a very strong glue, and does
not get thick or pasty. ('Dengler's Journal.')

=Glue, Port'able.= _Syn._ BANK-NOTE GLUE. MOUTH G., INDIAN G.; COLLE A
BOUCHE, Fr. _Prep._ From the best pale glue, 1 lb.; water, q. s.; dissolve
in a double glue-pot or water bath, and of pale-brown sugar, 1/2 lb.,
continue the heat until the mixture is complete, and pour it into moulds;
or pour it on a marble slab, and when cold cut it into small pieces and
dry them in the air. This glue is very useful to draughtsmen, architects,
&c., as it dissolves almost immediately in warm water, fastens paper, &c.,
without the process of damping, and may be softened for many purposes with
the tongue. When great strength not required, 4 oz. more of sugar may be
used.

=GLU'TEN.= _Syn._ GLUTIN. A peculiar substance found in the grain of
wheat. It is composed of true vegetable fibrin and a small quantity of
gliadin. It is prepared by washing paste made of the flour of wheat or rye
in successive waters until all starchy matter is removed. The paste may be
conveniently enclosed in a bag of fine linen during the washing.

_Prop., Uses._ Gluten is believed to be eminently nutritious. It is the
presence of gluten in wheaten flour that imparts to it its viscidity or
tenacity, and confers upon it its peculiar excellence for the manufacture
of MACARONI, VERMICELLI, and similar pastes. The superiority of wheaten
over other bread depends upon the greater tenacity of its dough, which
during the fermentation is puffed up by the evolved carbonic acid, and
retained in its vesicular texture so as to form a light loaf.

Gluten is greyish coloured, and extensible whilst fresh and moist, like
caoutchouc. It turns blue when mixed with guaiacum resin.

=Gluten Bread.= _Prep._ 1. From wheat flour which has been deprived of
about 2-3rds of its starch by washing it with water.

2. From gluten flour. Recommended in diabetes.

=Gluten Choc'olate.= (Gentile's.) A mixture of cocoa and gluten flour. As
a nutritious and appropriate food in diabetes.

=Gluten Flour.= _Prep._ 1. From the waste gluten of the starch works,
washed, dried, and ground.

2. (Gentile's.) From the last, mixed with about an equal weight of wheat
flour.

=GLYC'ERIN.= C_{3}H_{3}O_{3}. _Syn._ GLYCERIN, HYDRATED OXIDE OF GLYCERYL;
GLYCERINUM, L. A sweet syrupy liquid formed during the saponification of
oils and fats.

_Prep._ 1. Olive oil (or other suitable oil), protoxide of lead, and water
are heated together until an insoluble soap of lead (lead plaster) is
formed. The glycerin remains in the aqueous liquid. As this crude solution
of glycerin is produced in great quantities in the manufacture of lead
plaster, the operative chemist has only to purify it. This may be done as
follows:--

The water and washings from lead plaster are mixed together, filtered, and
submitted to the action of a stream of sulphuretted hydrogen to throw down
the lead; the supernatant liquor is decanted from the precipitate,
filtered, and evaporated to the consistence of a syrup in a water bath. To
render it quite pure it is diluted with water, decoloured with a little
animal charcoal, filtered, and again evaporated to the consistence of a
thin syrup, after which it is further evaporated in vacuo, or over
sulphuric acid, until it acquires the sp. gr. 1.265.

2. (M. Bruere-Perrin.) From the sweet liquor of the stearine works (a
product of the process of lime-saponification). The quantity of lime
present in the sample is first determined by means of oxalic acid, and the
proportion of sulphuric acid necessary for its saturation at once
calculated and added; the crude liquor is then concentrated in a
tinned-copper vessel, evaporation being promoted by brisk agitation, until
the sp. gr. sinks to 10 deg. Baume; it is next cooled and filtered, and
accurately neutralised (if it is required) with carbonate of potassa,
after which it is evaporated to the sp. gr. 24 deg. Baume; on cooling, it
deposits gelatinous sulphate of potassa; the whole is now filtered, the
deposit on the filter washed with a little very weak spirit and water, the
filtrate and washings mixed together and evaporated, as before, with
agitation, until the sp. gr. 28 deg. Baume, whilst hot (36 deg. cold), is
attained, when the whole is allowed to cool; the clear liquid is, lastly,
decanted and filtered. In this state it has an amber colour, but may be
rendered colourless and odourless by rediluting it with water, treating it
with animal charcoal, filtering, and again evaporating to a proper
consistence.

3. By saponifying olive oil with caustic alkali, decomposing the resulting
soap with dilute sulphuric or tartaric acid, evaporating the aqueous
portion to dryness (nearly), dissolving out the glycerin with cold
rectified spirit, and filtering and evaporating the solution as before.

4. The residuary liquor of a soap manufactory is evaporated, and treated
with alcohol to dissolve out the glycerin. The spirit is then evaporated
off, the glycerin diluted with water, and finally boiled repeatedly with
animal charcoal until all colour and odour are removed.

_Obs._ The products of the above processes are nearly pure, but that of
Price's patent process, described below, is to be preferred to any of
them.

5. (Commercial.) From sweet stearin-liquor, by precipitating the lime by a
stream of carbonic acid gas, or by a solution of carbonate of soda,
carefully avoiding adding the latter in excess; the liquor is then boiled
a little, filtered, evaporated to a syrupy consistence, and again
filtered. This is the common glycerin of the shops. It may be further
purified as above.

6. (PRICE'S GLYCERIN--Patent dated 1854.) Superheated steam of from 550 deg.
to 600 deg. Fahr.) is introduced into a distillatory apparatus containing palm
oil or other fatty body. The action of the steam effects the decomposition
of the fat, and glycerin and the fatty acids distil over together but no
longer in combination. In the receiver the condensed glycerin, from its
higher specific gravity, sinks below the fatty acids. Sufficient steam
must be supplied, and the temperature nicely regulated. The glycerin is
concentrated by evaporation, and if discoloured, it is redistilled. It is
usually prepared with sp. gr. 1.24, and then contains 94% of anhydrous
glycerin. It can, however, be concentrated to sp. gr. 1.26 when it
contains 98%.

_Prop._ Pure glycerin is a colourless, odourless, uncrystallisable liquid,
sweet to the taste, and of a syrupy consistence; it mixes with water in
all proportions; it is unctuous and emollient, and softens bodies, like
oil, but without greasing them; it does not evaporate or change in the air
at ordinary temperatures, and is not susceptible of rancidity or
spontaneous fermentation; mixed with yeast and kept in a warm place, it is
gradually converted into propionic acid; a strong heat decomposes it, with
the production of acrolein; it is neutral to test-paper, and possesses
neither basic nor acid properties; it is easily charged with the aroma of
the essential oils, and may be combined with soap, and many other
substances, without undergoing change. Sp. gr., 1.27 (see _above_).

MM. Champion and Pellet recommend the following methods for testing the
purity of glycerin, as being convenient in application, and giving
accurate results.

_Qualitative Test._ The glycerin diluted with twice its weight of water is
treated in the cold.

(1.) With tribasic acetate of lead. If an abundant precipitate be formed,
and rapidly deposited, the presence of a proportion of foreign matters may
be assumed which would make it unsuitable for use in various applications,
such as the manufacture of nitro-glycerin, &c. The crude glycerin obtained
in treating fats with sulphuric acid is frequently thus contaminated.
These foreign matters result from the action of sulphuric acid at a high
temperature (about 110 deg. C.) upon the fatty matter itself or on the
impurities it may contain.

(2.) Glycerin obtained by calcareous saponification, also may contain
oleate of lime. This may be detected with oxalate of ammonia, which throws
down the lime as a clearly perceptible precipitate.

The colour of glycerin is in no way an index of the purity of the product.
In all cases it is useful to be assured of the neutrality of the glycerin.

The preceding tests are suited for glycerins more or less impure, but not
adulterated. According to the authors' experiments the tribasic acetate of
lead separates all the foreign substances due to normal impurity of the
product or alteration in the glycerin during its manufacture. Any addition
of glucose may be detected by Fehlings' solution.

_Quantitative Test._ This test should comprehend the determination of the
water, the foreign organic matter, the lime, and the glycerin.

In the following table the authors have given the density of various
mixtures of water and glycerin, comparatively with the degrees Baume, and
also the proportions of water corresponding to the densities. They state,
that these determinations have been verified by means of pure anhydrous
glycerin, prepared by keeping glycerin for several hours at a temperature
of 160 deg. C, and terminating the operation _in vacuo_. The density found was
in accord with that given by Berthelot, namely, 1.264.

_Estimation of Organic Matter._ Fifty grams of glycerin diluted with water
are treated with an excess of tribasic acetate of lead, and the
precipitate collected on two tared filters, and the lead compound weighed.
The whole is then calcined, the residue treated with nitric acid, and then
with sulphuric acid, and from the sulphate of lead is calculated the
quantity of oxide of lead, that was in combination with organic matters,
and consequently the proportion of the latter, which rarely exceeds 1 to
1.5 per cent.

Lime may be estimated in the usual manner by oxalate of ammonia.


   Hydrometer | Areometer | Water,   | Hydrometer | Areometer | Water,
   Weight of  | Degrees,  | per Cent.| Weight of  | Degrees,  | per Cent.
   Litre.     | Baume.    |          | Litre.     | Baume.    |
  -----------------------------------|------------------------------------
    1264.0        31.2        0.0    |  1235.0        28.6       11.0
    1262.5        31.0        0.5    |  1233.5        28.4       11.5
    1261.2        30.9        1.0    |  1232.2        28.3       12.0
    1260.0        30.8        1.5    |  1230.7        28.2       12.5
    1258.5        30.7        2.0    |  1229.5        28.0       13.0
    1257.2        30.6        2.5    |  1228.0        27.8       13.5
    1256.0        30.4        3.0    |  1227.0        27.7       14.0
    1254.5        30.3        3.5    |  1225.5        27.6       14.5
    1253.2        30.2        4.0    |  1224.2        27.4       15.0
    1252.0        30.1        4.5    |  1223.0        27.3       15.5
    1250.5        30.0        5.0    |  1221.7        27.2       16.0
    1249.0        29.9        5.5    |  1220.2        27.0       16.5
    1248.0        29.8        6.0    |  1219.0        26.9       17.0
    1246.5        29.7        6.5    |  1217.7        26.8       17.5
    1245.5        29.6        7.0    |  1216.5        26.7       18.0
    1244.0        29.5        7.5    |  1215.0        26.5       18.5
    1242.7        29.3        8.0    |  1213.7        26.4       19.0
    1241.2        29.2        8.5    |  1212.5        26.3       19.5
    1240.0        29.0        9.0    |  1211.2        26.2       20.0
    1239.0        28.9        9.5    |  1210.0        26.0       20.5
    1237.5        28.8       10.0    |  1208.5        25.9       21.9
    1236.2        28.7       10.5    |


The authors consider that industrially the tribasic acetate of lead might
be used for the removal of organic matter from crude glycerin.

After separation of the precipitate, excess of the lead salt could be
removed by a current of sulphuretted hydrogen, and during the
concentration of the glycerin, the acetic acid set free would be
volatilized with injury to the product. The lead salt might be regenerated
by calcination, and again converted into acetate.[337]

[Footnote 337: 'Moniteur Scientifique,' Quesneville [3], vol. iii, p.
1033.]

The following quantitative test which it is said will detect upon
concentration of the fluids, one-tenth per cent. of glycerin in beer; one
per cent. in sherry, one per cent. in milk, and five per cent. in treacle,
is based upon a fact observed by Iles, viz. that borax when treated with
glycerin, gives to a Bunsen flame the green colour characteristic of
boracic acid. The method of its application as given by Messrs Senier and
Lowe is as follows:--The suspected solution is rendered alkaline by dilute
soda, and a borax bead placed in it for a short time. The bead is then
held in a Bunsen flame, and if the solution contains one per cent. of
glycerin a distinct reaction is observed. Erythrite and glycol give the
same colour.

If a small quantity of glycerin from which the fatty acids have not been
removed, be poured into the palm, and rubbed between the hands, a peculiar
fetid, mouse-like odour will be perceived.

_Uses, &c._ Glycerin is extensively employed as an excipient for medicines
(see GLYCEROLES), also, either alone, or in lotions, baths, &c., as a
soothing emollient, and is added to poultices and dressings instead of
oil, to prevent their hardening. Diluted with water, it often succeeds in
allaying itching and irritation of the skin when all other means fail. As
a cosmetic, either made into a lotion or added to soap (glycerin soap), or
used in small quantities (along with the water employed in washing), it
imparts a healthy clearness and a sensation of softness and coolness to
the skin, which is very agreeable and refreshing. It is the best remedy
known for chapped nipples, hands, lips, &c.; all of which may be prevented
by its use as an article of the toilet. Glycerin is sometimes used as a
sweetening agent, as a substitute for syrup.

Glycerin is employed for a great variety of purposes other than medicinal;
such, for example, as for:--Keeping clay moist for the modeller, for
preventing mustard from drying up, for keeping snuff damp, for the
preservation of fruit, for sweetening liqueurs, wine, beer, and malt
extracts. It is also used as a lubricant for some kinds of machinery, more
especially for watch and chronometer works, because it is unaffected by
contact with the air, does not thicken at a low temperature, and is
without action on such metals as copper, brass, &c. Glycerin is also an
ingredient in copying inks. It renders printing ink soluble in water;
indeed it is an excellent solvent for many substances, including the
Tar-colours (aniline blue, cyanine, aniline violet, and alizarine), and
arsenious acid. It is also added to the pulp of paper in order to render
it soft and pliable. It is said that leather driving-belts made as they
usually are of weakly tanned leather, when kept in glycerin for
twenty-four hours are not so liable to fray. A solution of glycerin in
water is now largely used instead of water alone for the purpose of
filling gas metres, as such a solution does not freeze in winter nor
evaporate in summer. It has also been used for the compasses on board
screw-steamers, in order to protect the inner compass-box, against the
vibrations caused by the motion of the propeller. It is also employed for
the preservation of anatomical preparations, and for mounting microscopic
specimens; as well as for rendering wooden casks impervious to petroleum
or other oils; as well as for the preparation of artificial oil of
mustard, or sulpho-cyan-allyl, which is made by treating glycerin with
iodide of phosphorus, whereby iodide of allyl is formed, which on being
dissolved in alcohol, and next distilled with sulpho-cyanide of potassium,
yields sulpho-cyan-allyl. When treated with concentrated nitric acid,
glycerin yields nitro-glycerin.[338]

[Footnote 338: Wagner's 'Chemical Technology.']

Even the above long list does not exhaust the many useful purposes to
which glycerin is now applied.

=Glycerin Cream for Chilblains.= Equal parts of glycerin, soft soap, and
cherry-laurel water, mixed together.

=Glycerin Cream with Camphor.= Glycerin, 2 parts; camphor, 1 part;
rectified spirit, 1 part. Mix. For chilblains.

=Glycerin Jelly for Microscopic Mounting.= ('Ed. Pharm. Journal.') Soak
any quantity of good clean gelatine in cold water for three or four hours.
Pour off the superfluous water, and melt the gelatine at a gentle heat;
when melted filter through flannel, and to the filtrate add an equal
quantity of Price's gelatin.

The above forms a good firm jelly, requiring little trouble in securing
the cover.

=Glycerin Ointment.= Glycerin, 8 parts; spermaceti, 4 parts; white wax, 1
part; oil of almonds (fixed), 16 parts. Add the glycerin to the melted
ingredients, and stir briskly till cold. For chaps and excoriations.

=GLYCEROLE.= A pharmaceutical preparation, in which glycerin is employed
as the excipient.

=Glycerole of Belladonna.= _Syn._ GLYCERINUM BELLADONNAE. _Prep._ (Par.
Codex.) Extract of belladonna, 1 oz., glycerole of starch, 10 oz. (by
weight); rub together until perfectly smooth. Glyceroles of hemlock,
henbane, and opium are ordered by the Paris Codex to be prepared in the
same manner.

=Glycerole of Borax.= (B. P.) _Syn._ GLYCERINUM BORACIS, L. 1 of borax in
4-1/2 of glycerin.

=Glycerole of Carbolic Acid.= (B. P.) _Syn._ GLYCERINUM ACIDI CARBOLICI,
L. 1 of acid in 4-1/2 of glycerin.

=Glycerole of Gallic Acid.= (B. P.) _Syn._ GLYCERINUM ACIDI GALLICI, L. 1
of acid in 4-1/2 of glycerin.

=Glycerole of Iodine.= _Syn._ GLYCERINUM CUM IODINIO. _Prep._ (Par.
Codex.) Dissolve 5 parts of iodide of potassium and 1 part of iodine in
their own weight of water, and add to 40 parts of glycerin (by weight).
Applied in skin diseases.

=Glycerole of Iodide of Potassium.= _Syn._ GLYCERINUM POTASSII IODIDI.
_Prep._ (Par. Codex.) Iodide of potassium, 2 parts, glycerole of starch,
15 parts (by weight); dissolve the iodine in its own weight of water, and
add to this glycerole of starch.

=Glycerole of Starch.= (B. P.) _Syn._ GLYCERINUM AMYLI, L. 1 of starch in
8-1/2 of glycerin.

=Glycerole of Tannic Acid.= (B. P.) _Syn._ GLYCERINUM ACIDI TANNICI, L. 1
of acid in 4-1/2 of glycerin.

=Glycerole of Tar.= _Syn._ GLYCERINUM PICIS LIQUIDAE. _Prep._ (Par. Codex.)
Purified tar, 1 oz. (by weight), glycerole of starch, 3 oz. (by weight).

=GLYCOARNICIN.= A radical cure for gangrene and tubercle (Zeller). 40
grammes clarified honey, with 35 grammes of a tincture of fresh arnica
herb, made with weak brandy. (Hager.)

=GLYCOBLASTOL= (Professor Kletzinsky, Vienna). An extract of the pericarps
of cayenne pepper, made with glycerine, diluted with a little water, and
perfumed with a trace of pleasant-smelling oil containing a suspicion of
patchouli. (Hager.)

=GLYCOCINE.= _Syn._ GLYCOLL. SUGAR OF GELATIN. (C_{2}H_{5}NO_{2}). This is
one of the products of the decomposition of gelatin when boiled with
dilute sulphuric acid; after the acid is removed by means of barium
carbonate, the glycocine may be procured in crystals by evaporating the
solution.

It may also be obtained by heating gelatin with a solution of potash or of
soda. It is, however, most easily separated in a state of purity by
boiling hippuric acid for half an hour with hydrochloric acid; as the
liquid cools benzoic acid is separated in abundance, and glycocine remains
in combination with hydrochloric acid; on the addition of absolute
alcohol, after the solution has been concentrated by evaporation and
super-saturated with ammonia, pure glycocine is deposited in minute
crystals.

Pure glycocine has a sweet taste, inferior to that of cane sugar. It is
soluble in about 400 parts of cold water, less soluble in rectified
spirit, and insoluble in absolute alcohol and in ether. It is not
susceptible of the alcoholic fermentation.

=GLYCYR'RHIZIN.= _Syn._ LIQUORICE SUGAR. An uncrystallisable variety of
sugar obtained from the root of common liquorice (_Glycyrrhiza glabra_).
It is yellow, transparent, soluble in both water and alcohol, and is not
susceptible of the vinous fermentation.

=GLYSTER.= See Enema.

=GNATS and MOS'QUITOES.= Smoke and strong fumes of any kind will drive
away these insects. If you only burn a piece of brown paper in an enclosed
space where they are, they soon after 'settle,' and appear to become so
stupefied as to remain inactive for some time after. In those parts of
the New World where mosquitoes abound, tobacco smoke is commonly had
recourse to in-doors, and large fires made of brush-wood or under-wood
out-of-doors. Old travellers, when compelled to bivouac during the season
in which they are troublesome, are very careful to keep close on the 'lee'
of these fires.

=GOA POWDER.= See ARAROBA.

=GOITRE.= _Syn._ DERBYSHIRE NECK; BRONCHOCELE, TRACHEOCELE; HERNIA
BRONCHIALIS, L. A tumour on the fore part of the neck. It sometimes occurs
in Derbyshire, and is endemic in the Alps and several other mountainous
districts. Iodine and the iodides appear to be the only substances capable
of curing or even arresting the progress of this disease.

There seems little doubt that goitre arises from drinking water rendered
hard by the presence of magnesian and lime salts.

The disease called cretinism, which is a peculiar form of idiocy, is in
some countries more particularly frequently associated with goitre. Both
these maladies prevail in Wurtemberg, Saxony, Silesia, the Tyrol,
Carynthia, Galicia, Austria, and Switzerland. In England, goitre seems
principally confined to the magnesian limestone district extending from
Nottingham to the Tyne; it also prevails in a smaller degree in
Derbyshire, Norfolk, Cambridge, and Somersetshire, where a few scattered
cases of cretinism are to be met with. Goitre is very much more general
than is usually supposed in France. In Asia, it is to be found amongst the
inhabitants of Chinese Tartary, Thibet, and Ceylon, and in India amongst
the dwellers in the valleys and extensive plains that lie at the foot of
the Himalayan mountains.

The disease is likewise known to exist in many parts of Africa; goitre is
also far from uncommon in certain districts of North America; whilst in
South America it is met with amongst the people inhabiting the plateaus of
New Grenada, which comprise localities differing so greatly in climatic
conditions, as deep and humid valleys, and arid plains almost or entirely
destitute of verdure.

Goitre is a disease that may be very rapidly and readily set up. Bally
says he has known certain waters in Switzerland produce it even in eight
or ten days; and the French medical journals contain many similar
instances of its early development.

=GOLD.= Au. _Syn._ AURUM; OR, Fr.; GOLD, Ger.) Gold is the most valuable
and, probably, the longest known of all the metals. From the remotest
period it has been esteemed for its beauty and permanence, and has been
taken as the standard measure of value amongst all civilised nations. An
account of the uses of gold in the arts, and its influence on society in
all ages, as a symbol of wealth and an article of ornament and utility,
would embrace the whole history of mankind. At the present day it alike
contributes to the conveniences, comforts, and luxuries of life; as often
exciting the baser passions of the human heart as promoting the cause of
benevolence and virtue.

Gold is found almost invariably in the metallic state. It occurs as gold
dust in the sands of various rivers, and in the alluvial soil of
auriferous districts, from both of which it is obtained by the simple
process of washing. Traces of it are constantly found in the iron and
other pyrites of the more ancient rocks. Sometimes it occurs beautifully
crystallised in the cubic form, associated with quartz, oxide of iron, and
other substances, in regular veins. In the gold fields of California and
Australia lumps of nearly pure gold have been discovered in abundance
during the last few years. In the former country a mass of gold weighing
28 pounds was found, whilst in our own colonies one weighing 106 pounds
was dug out of a quartz rock, near Bathurst. The latter contained upwards
of 91% of pure gold, and nearly 8-1/2% of silver; being as pure as the
English sovereign, or, in trade language, '22 carats fine.'

_Prep._ This consists merely in the separation of the gold and its
subsequent purification. Formerly, the auriferous sulphides, if very poor,
were first roasted, then fused into 'mattes' and again roasted; they were
next melted with lead, and the alloy thus obtained was refined by
cupellation. When the ores were very rich, the preliminary calcination and
fusion were omitted, and the alloy of lead at once formed. This method (by
fusion) does not answer well with auriferous copper pyrites or ores very
poor in gold. At the present time the method of amalgamation is
principally followed. When a 'vein-stone' is to be wrought for gold, it is
reduced to powder (on the small scale by hand, on the large scale in
stamping mills), and is shaken in a suitable apparatus with water and
mercury; an amalgam of gold is formed, which is then separated from the
mixture, and its mercury removed by distillation. The gold is next cast
into 'ingots.'

_Refining._--Gold obtained by the first method usually contains a little
copper and silver, and frequently tin or iron. Tin may be removed by
adding a little corrosive sublimate or nitre to the gold melted in a
crucible. The process by amalgamation commonly leaves no other alloy than
silver. This metal is removed either in the 'dry way,' by fusing the gold
with sulphur or sulphide of antimony; or in the 'wet way,' by 'quartation'
and 'parting.' At the Royal Mint, "when gold ingots contain a certain
quantity of silver" (say 2% or 3%), "instead of leaving it, as formerly,
to constitute a part of the standard alloy, it pays to extract it, and to
substitute copper in its place. To get the silver out of the said ingots,
they are melted with about 3 parts of silver--the resulting alloy is
granulated and boiled with sulphuric acid--the gold remains untouched, and
all the silver is dissolved and converted into sulphate.... The sulphate
of silver is then decomposed by the immersion of copper plates; the
silver is precipitated in a fine, crystalline powder, washed, pressed into
masses, and melted, and so affords PURE SILVER, which is afterwards made
standard by alloying it with copper, and is used for coinage. The
resulting sulphate of copper (which exists in the solution) is then
crystallised, and sold." (Brande.) "By first exhausting the gold with
nitric acid, and then boiling it in sulphuric acid, some two or three
thousandth part of silver which escaped the action of the nitric acid is
dissolved out, and perfectly pure gold is obtained." (Ure.)

By a foreign invention, patented in 1851 by Mr W. E. Newton, the
operations of 'separations' and 'refining' are conducted by one process.
The argentiferous substance, whether in the state of ore or bullion, is
reduced to a granulated or spongy state, by fusion along with zinc, or
some other metal cheaper than silver, and the zinc is subsequently
removed, by digesting the resulting granulated, laminated, or pulverulent
alloy, in dilute sulphuric acid, or other acid. The zinc, &c., is
recovered by the usual means. This process, carefully conducted, produces
metal of great ductility and purity, containing 99% to 99-1/2% of pure
gold.

Chemically pure gold is obtained by dissolving the metal in
nitro-hydrochloric acid, adding a solution of protosulphate of iron, and
collecting and washing the precipitate. In this state it is a brown
powder, which acquires a metallic lustre by friction or heat.

_Prop._ The most marked properties of gold are its rich yellow colour, its
ductility, malleability, insolubility in all menstrua except 'aqua regia'
(nitro-hydrochloric acid), aqueous chlorine, and hydrofluoric acid, and
its very slight affinity for oxygen. It melts at a bright red heat (2316 deg.
Fahr.--Daniell), and the fused metal has a brilliant green colour. It
forms compounds with chlorine, iodine, oxygen, sulphur, &c. Sp. gr. of
native gold, 13.3 to 17.7; of pure gold, 19.3 (average); its greatest
density is 19.5.

_Tests._ Metallic gold is characterised by its yellow colour, insolubility
in nitric acid, and its ready solubility in aqua regia, forming a rich
yellow or amber-coloured liquid, which stains the skin purple. Solutions
of gold exhibit the following reactions:--Protosulphate of iron gives a
brown precipitate, which acquires a metallic lustre when
rubbed;--Protochloride of tin (preferably containing a little perchloride)
gives a violet, purple, or blackish precipitate, insoluble in hydrochloric
acid;--Sulphuretted hydrogen and hydrosulphide, of ammonia give a black
precipitate, insoluble in simple acids;--Ammonia gives a reddish-yellow
precipitate ('fulminating gold'), with tolerably concentrated solutions,
either at once or on boiling the liquid;--Liquor of potassa gives a
reddish-yellow precipitate with neutral solutions of gold, insoluble in
excess.

_Estim._ 1. In the dry way;--

The quantity of gold in an ALLOY is usually estimated by 'assaying' the
sample. Before proceeding to the assay, it is necessary to form some
estimate of the quantity of other metals (copper or silver, or both) in
the specimen to be examined, in order to employ the proper proportion of
lead in the 'cupellation.' The experienced assayer commonly does this by
the 'assay of the touch,' and, in certain cases, by a rough preliminary
assay. The quantity of lead employed may be about 16 times the weight of
the copper present in the sample, and when the alloy contains silver an
additional allowance of lead, equal to 1/10th of its weight, is made on
that account. When no silver is present, or it is not required to be
estimated, a much larger proportion of lead may be employed. The weight
taken for the assay ('assay pound') is usually 12 or 6 gr. The alloy and
dose of lead being accurately weighed and separately wrapped in small
pieces of paper, the assay may be at once proceeded with.

[Greek: a]. CUPELLATION. This operation, the most important of the whole,
has been already described. Unlike silver, gold will bear the highest heat
of the furnace without 'vegetating,' 'fuming,' or being absorbed by the
cupel. The loss of weight gives the amount of copper in the alloy.

[Greek: b]. QUARTATION. The cupelled sample is fused with three times its
weight of pure silver (called the 'witness'), by which the gold is reduced
to one fourth of the mass, or less, and in this state may be easily
removed.

[Greek: g]. PARTING. The alloy, after quartation, is hammered or rolled
out into a thin strip or leaf, curled into a spiral form, and boiled for a
quarter of an hour, in a small flask, with about 2-1/2 to 3 oz. of nitric
acid (sp. gr. 1.3); and the fluid being poured off, it is again boiled in
a similar manner with 1-1/2 to 2 oz. more of nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.2),
after which the gold is carefully collected, washed in pure water, and
dried. When the operation of 'parting' is skilfully conducted, and the
acid not too strong, the metal preserves its spiral form; otherwise, it
falls into the state of flakes or powder. The second boiling or digestion
is technically termed the 'reprise.' The loss of weight by 'parting,'
after deducting that of the 'witness,' corresponds to the quantity of
silver originally in the specimen.

[Greek: d]. ANNEALING. This consists in putting the pure gold obtained by
the last process into a small porous crucible or cupel, and heating it to
redness in the muffle.

[Greek: e]. WEIGHING. This must be done with the utmost accuracy. The
weight, in grains troy, doubled or quadrupled, as the case may be, gives
the number of carats fine of the alloy examined, without calculation.

According to the 'OLD FRENCH METHOD' of assaying gold, the following
quantities are taken:--For the assay pound, 12 gr.; fine silver, 30 gr.;
lead, 108 gr. These having been cupelled together, the (perfect) button
is rolled into a leaf (1-1/2 x 5 inches), twisted on a quill, and
submitted to parting with 2-1/2 oz. and 1-1/2 oz. of nitric acid, sp. gr.
1.16 (20 deg. Baume). The remainder of the process is similar to that above
described. Two assays are made in the same manner, with a third on pure
gold or gold of a known fineness; and no conclusion is drawn, unless the
assay of the latter comes out accurately, and that of the first two
correspond to each other.

For alloys containing platinum, which usually consist of copper, silver,
platinum, and gold, the method of assaying is as follows:--The alloy is
'cupelled' in the usual way, the loss of weight expresses the amount of
copper; and the button, made into a riband and treated with sulphuric
acid, indicates, by the portion dissolved, that also of the silver
present. By submitting the residuum to quartation, the platinum becomes
soluble in nitric acid. The loss after digestion in this menstruum
expresses the weight of that metal, and the weight of the portion now
remaining is that of the pure gold. Gold containing palladium may be
assayed in the same manner.

2. In the wet way:

The richness in gold of any substance, whether liquid or solid, when the
quantity is small (and indeed in all other cases), is most simply and
economically performed by the common method of chemical analysis. The gold
may be thrown down from its solution by adding a solution of protosulphate
of iron; the precipitate, after being washed, dried, and gently heated,
may be weighed as pure gold.

_Pois., &c._ The soluble preparations of gold (chlorides) are violent
poisons. The symptoms resemble those occasioned by corrosive sublimate,
but are somewhat less violent. Metallic gold in a minute state of division
is also capable of producing very unpleasant consequences, and even
endangering life. The antidote is iron filings or a solution of sulphate
of iron, given conjointly with an emetic.

_Uses._ The numerous applications of gold in the arts and the daily
transactions of life need only be alluded to here. In _medicine_, gold has
been given in the form of powder, in scrofula and syphilis, by Chrestein,
Niel, and others, with apparent advantage.--_Dose_, 1/4 gr. to 1 gr., 3 or
4 times a day, in pills, or as a friction on the tongue and gums. An
ointment made of 1 gr. of powdered gold and 30 gr. of lard has been
applied by Niel to the skin deprived of the epidermis (endermically) in
the above diseases.

The more important chemical compounds containing gold, the alloys and
commercial forms of the metal, together with certain factitious substances
popularly called 'gold', are noticed in alphabetical order _below_:--

=Gold, Alloys and Preparations of:--=

=Gold, Dutch.= MANNHEIM GOLD, MOSAIC G., OR-MOLU, PINCHBECK, PRINCE'S
METAL, RED BRASS, SIMILOR, TOMBAC. These names are applied to several
varieties of fine gold-coloured brass, differing slightly in tint and in
the proportions of copper and zinc. The terms tombac, prince's metal,
similor, and Mannheim gold, are used by some authors to designate alloys
consisting of about 85% of copper and 15% of zinc; whereas, according to
other authors, prince's metal and Mannheim gold are synonymous, and are
composed of 75% copper and 25% zinc; according to another author, similor
consists of about 71-1/2% copper and 28-1/2% zinc, and Mannheim gold of
80% copper and 20% zinc; and, again, according to another author, similor
and Mannheim gold are synonymous, and are applied to alloys of copper
containing from 10 to 12% zinc and from 6 to 8% tin. Seeing that such
inextricable confusion exists in the employment of the terms above
mentioned, it is desirable to discard them altogether. At the celebrated
works of Hegermuehl, near Potsdam, the proportions copper, 11 parts, to
zinc, 2 parts, are employed to produce a metal which is afterwards rolled
into sheets for the purpose of making Dutch leaf-gold. This alloy has a
very rich, deep gold colour. Its malleability is so remarkable that it may
be beaten out into leaves not exceeding 1/52900 inch in thickness.

=Gold, Facti''tious.= _Prep._ From copper, 16 parts; platinum, 7 parts;
zinc, 1 part; fused together. This alloy resembles in colour gold of 16
carats fine, or 2/3, and will resist the action of nitric acid, unless
very concentrated and boiling.

=Gold, Grain.= _Syn._ AURUM GRANULATUM, L. _Prep._ From cupelled gold, 1
part; silver, 3 parts; melted together, and poured in a small stream into
water; the silver being afterwards dissolved out by digestion in boiling
nitric acid, and the grains, after being well washed in water, heated to
redness in a crucible or cupel. Used to make preparations of gold.

=Gold, Jew'eller's.= This term is applied to alloys of gold used for
trinkets and inferior articles of jewelry, ranging from 3 or 4 carats fine
upwards; or which are too inferior to receive the 'Hall mark'. The lowest
alloy of this class is formed of copper, 16 parts; silver, 1 to 1-1/2
part; gold, 2 to 3 parts; melted together. This is worth only from 8_s._
6_d._ to 9_s._ 6_d._ the oz.

It has recently been found that gold of the quality of 12 carats, or less,
if alloyed with zinc instead of the proper quantity of silver, presents a
colour very nearly equal to that of a metal at least 2-1/2 to 3 carats
higher, or of 8_s._ or 10_s._ an ounce more value; and the consequence has
been that a large quantity of jewellery has been made of gold alloyed in
this manner; and the same has been purchased by some shopkeepers, very
much to their own loss as well as that of the public; inasmuch as a
galvanic action is produced, after a time, upon gold so alloyed, by means
of which the metal is split into several pieces, and the articles rendered
perfectly useless.

=Gold, Leaf.= _Syn._ GOLD-LEAF. Gold reduced to leaves by hammering it
between thin animal membrane. Its preparation constitutes the trade of the
goldbeater. These leaves are only 1/28200 of an inch in thickness. Gilt
silver is hammered in the same way, but the leaves are thicker. The latter
is called party gold. Both are used by artists and gilders, and by
druggists to gild pills, &c.

=Gold, Powdered.= _Syn._ DIVIDED GOLD, GILDING POWDER, GOLD BRONZE, GOLD
COLOUR; AURI PULVIS. _Prep._ Gold, 1 part; mercury, 7 parts; form an
amalgam, and expose it to heat until all the mercury is volatilised; or
the mercury may be dissolved out with hot nitric acid. In either case the
residuum is to be powdered, washed, and dried. If the quantity operated on
is considerable, the process should be so conducted as to save the
mercury.

From gold leaf and honey ground together, as the last, by means of a stone
and muller. This is the plan commonly adopted in the small way by artists.

From a solution of gold in aqua regia precipitated by protosulphate of
iron, the resulting powder being washed, dried, and gently heated, This
gives pure gold.

_Uses, &c._ Powdered gold is employed in gilding by japanners and by
artists. It is either sold in powder (gold in powder), or made up into
shells (gold in shells). Its use in medicine has been already noticed.

=Gold, Standard.= The standard gold of this country is an alloy of pure
gold, 11 parts, with pure copper, 1 part. Formerly the alloy consisted
partly of silver, as found in some of the older coins now in circulation.
It is often spoken of as 22 carats fine.

=Gold, Chlorides of:=

1. =Monochloride.= AuCl. _Syn._ AUROUS CHLORIDE, PROTOCHLORIDE OF GOLD. A
yellowish-white mass, formed when a solution of trichloride of gold is
evaporated to dryness, and the residuum is exposed to a heat of about 440 deg.
Fahr., until fumes of chlorine cease to be evolved. It is insoluble in
water, which decomposes it, slowly when cold, but rapidly by the aid of
heat, into metallic gold and the trichloride.

2. =Trichloride.= AuCl_{3}. _Syn._ AURIC CHLORIDE, TERCHLORIDE OF GOLD,
TRICHLORIDE OF GOLD, AURI CHLORIDUM. _Prep._ Gold, 1 part, dissolved by
aid of heat in nitro-hydrochloric acid, 8 parts, and evaporated down to
near dryness, and allowed to crystallise.

_Prop._ Orange-red crystalline needles, or ruby-red prismatic crystals;
deliquescent; soluble in water, ether, and alcohol, forming a deep-yellow
solution; at the heat of 500 deg. Fahr. it suffers decomposition, chlorine
being given off and pure gold left behind. It is reduced by ferrous
sulphate, oxalic, sulphurous, formic and phosphorous acids, as well as by
most of the metals, to metallic gold. It combines with several of the
metallic chlorides, forming a series of double salts, which are mostly
yellow when in crystals, and red when deprived of water.

_Uses, &c._ It has been employed by Duportal, Chrestien, Niel, Cullerier,
Legrand, and others, as a substitute for mercury, in scrofula,
bronchocele, chronic skin diseases, &c.; also as a caustic.--_Dose_, 1/20
gr., dissolved in distilled water, or made into a pill with starch; or, in
frictions on the gums, in quantities of 1/16 to 1/10 gr. Its most
important use, however, is as a reagent in photography, large quantities
being manufactured for use as a chief agent in toning photographic prints.

To some extent it is also used for electro-gilding, and mixed with excess
of bicarbonate of potassium, it forms a good yielding solution for small
articles of copper. These are to be first cleaned with dilute nitric acid,
and then boiled for some time in the mixture.

The above is the salt generally referred to under the name of the
'chloride of gold,' or in commerce occasionally as the 'muriate of gold.'

=Gold, Chloride of, and Sodium.= AuCl_{3}. NaCl. 2Aq. _Syn._ AUROCHLORIDE
OF SODIUM; SODII AUROCHLORIDUM. _Prep._ Auric chloride, 85 parts; chloride
of sodium, 16 parts; dissolve in a little distilled water, evaporate until
a pellicle forms, then put it aside to crystallise. It forms beautiful
orange-coloured rhombic prisms.

_Dose, &c._ 1/20 to 1/12 gr., made into a pill with starch or lycopodium,
in the same cases in which the terchloride is ordered. Mixed with 2 or 3
times its weight of orris powder, it has been used in frictions on the
tongue and gums, and an ointment made with 1 gr. of the salt, mixed with
36 gr. of lard, has been applied to the skin deprived of the epidermis by
a blister.

=Gold, Cyanide of.= AuCy_{3}. _Syn._ AURIC CYANIDE. _Prep._ Add a solution
of pure cyanide of potassium to a solution of pure auric chloride as long
as a precipitate forms, carefully avoiding any excess; wash, and dry the
precipitate.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ The salt is a pale-yellow powder, insoluble in water,
but very soluble in a solution of cyanide of potassium, forming the double
cyanide of gold and potassium so largely used in the electrotype process.
Cyanide of gold is employed to a certain extent in medicine.--_Dose_, 1/12
to 1/10 gr., made into a pill, in the usual cases in which gold is
administered. The first formula is essentially similar to that of the
French Codex.

=Gold, Extraction of, by Sodium Amalgam.= (Crookes' Method, Patented.) In
the extraction of gold by amalgamation serious difficulties are often
occurring through the 'flouring' or 'sickening' of the mercury employed,
and the prevention of the amalgamation by a coating of tarnish on the
gold. So much is this the case that losses of from 30 to 60 per cent. of
the gold are usually incurred, and, in many cases a still more serious
loss of mercury.

When certain minerals, as tellurium compounds, pyrites, &c., occur in the
gold ore, the mercury is apt, on trituration, to become subdivided into
excessively minute globules, which, owing to their tarnished condition,
refuse to unite, and are consequently washed away, it being almost
impossible to separate them from the heavier portions of the ore. This is
technically called 'flouring,' 'granulating,' &c. Besides this, certain of
these minerals affect the mercury in another way, that is, by 'sickening'
it, or causing it to lose its bright surface and fluidity, and prevents
its amalgamating with the gold. Besides the inconvenience and loss thus
caused, a further loss of gold takes place from the inability of the
ordinary mercury to touch or amalgamate tarnished gold, unless it is
ground with it, for a more lengthy period than is found practicable in
most cases.

Mr Crookes, F.R.S., has, by means of the addition of a certain proportion
of sodium, in the form of an amalgam, to the mercury, effectually
prevented this serious loss of gold and mercury. By adding certain
quantities of amalgams B and C, an amount which, differing from each ore,
is ascertained by experiment, the 'flouring' and 'sickening' of the
mercury is effectually prevented, the mercury remaining throughout in the
best condition. The addition of about one tenth per-centage of amalgam A,
at intervals of some hours, increases most powerfully the affinity of the
mercury for the precious metals, and secures a more thorough amalgamation.

This invention has met with general approval, and experiments conducted at
many mines show its great practical value, giving an increase of from 5 to
30 per cent. in the yield of gold, and, in fact, with many pyrites that
yielded no gold to the ordinary amalgamation process, gave a considerable
yield of gold to the sodium amalgamation process. This has led to its use
in most mines, both silver and gold, in America.

=Gold, Iodide of.= AuL_{3}. _Syn._ AURIC IODIDE, TRI-IODIDE OF GOLD, GOLD
TERIODIDE, AURI IODUM. _Prep._ Add a solution of trichloride of gold to
one of iodide of potassium. The resulting precipitate is at first
redissolved on agitation, a soluble double iodide being formed;
subsequently the iodide of gold is precipitated, leaving the supernatant
liquor free of colour.

_Prop., Uses, &c._ A dark-green powder, easily soluble in hydriodic acid.
It is occasionally employed as a medicine, and, like other preparations of
gold, is of an alterative character.--_Dose._ About 1/16th of a grain.

=Gold, Oxides of=:--

1. =Monoxide.= Au_{2}O. _Syn._ AUROUS OXIDE, PROTOXIDE OF GOLD. _Prep._
Formed by treating the aurous chloride with strong potassium hydrate.
Green powder, somewhat soluble in potassium hydrate solution, and readily
decomposing into metallic gold and auric oxide.

2. =Trioxide.= Au_{2}O_{3}. _Syn._ AURIC OXIDE, OXIDE OF GOLD, PEROXIDE OF
GOLD, AURIC ACID, AURI OXIDUM. _Prep._ Magnesic oxide, 4 parts; auric
chloride, 1 part; water, 40 parts; mix, boil, and wash the precipitate
with water, dilute nitric acid, and again with water. It must be dried in
the shade.

Reddish-yellow powder, easily decomposed by heat; readily soluble in
hydrochloric and hydrobromic acids and strong nitric acid, but insoluble
in water and the other acids. Forms unstable salts with the alkalies.

_Uses, &c._ Trioxide of gold has been given in scrofula, &c., in doses of
1/12 to 1/2 gr., or 1 gr., in scrofula, syphilis, &c., made into a pill
with extract of mezereon.

=Gold, Ammoni'uret of*.= _Syn._ AURATE OF AMMONIA, BERTHOLLET'S
FULMINATING GOLD; AURUM AMMONIATUM, AMMONIAE AURAS, L. _Prep._ By adding
ammonia to a solution of gold in aqua regia (trichloride), as long as a
reddish-yellow precipitate (fulminating gold) forms; the latter must be
collected, washed, and dried with the greatest possible caution.

_Obs._ Ammonia fails to precipitate trioxide of gold from solutions which
are not tolerably concentrated, and in those containing free acid or
ammoniacal salts the precipitate only forms upon boiling the solution.
Before adding the ammonia, it is, therefore, proper to drive off the
excess of acid, if any, by the application of heat. See FULMINATING
COMPOUNDS.

=Gold, Sul'phide of.= Au_{2}S_{3}. _Syn._ SULPHURET OF GOLD, TERSULPHURET
OF G.; AURI SULPHURETUM, L. _Prep._ Transmit a current of sulphuretted
hydrogen gas through a solution of terchloride of gold in water; or add
hydrosulphuret of ammonia to the same solution; collect the precipitate,
wash it with cold distilled water, and dry it in the shade.

=GOLD DETER'GENT.= _Prep._ (Upton.) Take quicklime, 1 oz.; sprinkle it
with a little hot water to slake it, then gradually add boiling water, 1
pint, so as to form a milk. Next dissolve pearlash, 2 oz., in boiling
water, 1-1/2 pint; mix the two solutions, cover up the vessel, agitate
occasionally for an hour, allow it to settle, decant the clear, put it
into flat half-pint bottles, and well cork them down.

_Use._ To clean gilding, &c., either alone or diluted with water. It is
applied with a soft sponge, and then washed off with clean water. It is
essentially a weak solution of potassa, and may be extemporaneously
prepared by diluting solution of potassa (Ph. L.) with about 5 times its
volume.

=GOLD SHELLS.= Gold leaf or powdered gold ground up with gum-water, and
spread upon the insides of shells. Used by artists.

=GOLD SIZE.= _Syn._ GILDING SIZE, GILDER'S S., GOLD COLOUR. _Prep._ 1.
(OIL SIZE.) Drying or boiled oil thickened with yellow ochre or calcined
red ochre, and carefully reduced to the utmost smoothness by grinding. It
is thinned with oil of turpentine. Improves by age. Used for oil gilding.

2. (WATER SIZE.) Parchment or isinglass size, mixed with finely ground
yellow ochre. Used in burnished or distemper gilding.

=GOLD-BEAT'ER'S SKIN= is prepared from the peritoneal membrane of the
caecum of the ox. It is used to separate the leaves of gold whilst under
the hammer, as a nearly invisible defensive dressing for cuts, as a fabric
for court plaster, &c.

=GOLDEN SEAL.= See HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.

=GONG METAL.= See BELL METAL.

=GONIOM'ETRY.= The art of measuring the angles of crystals, by means of a
GONIOMETER; a most important matter in _chemistry_ and _mineralogy_. The
only accurate and simple instrument of this kind is the REFLECTING
GONIOMETER invented by Dr Wollaston. Facility in using this instrument is
readily acquired by a few trials.

=GOOSE.= This bird, the _Anser domesticus_, is a favourite article of food
almost everywhere, and may fairly claim a similar position amongst poultry
to that occupied by "good Sir Loin" among joints of meat. The vulgar
inuendos occasionally heard to its prejudice should be directed against
the cook rather than the bird, as it is only when it is unskilfully
dressed and too highly seasoned that it is apt to disagree with that
"irascible member of the interior," a delicate or overloaded stomach.
Undue susceptibility in that quarter may, however, be generally allayed by
an oblation, in the shape of a little '_eau de vie_,' used as sauce or
gravy. Formerly, almost miraculous virtues were attributed to this bird.
Its flesh was said to promote longevity, to cure hydrophobia, and to be
aphrodisiac. The fat (GOOSE GREASE; ADEPS ANSERIS), mixed with honey, was
supposed to be "good against the bitings of a mad dog." At the present day
it is occasionally used in clysters, and, when scented, as a pomade to
make the hair grow, for which purpose it is said to be superior to bear's
grease. In quantity it is an emetic of very easy action. The large
feathers of the wings (quills) are used for writing. The small feathers
form the common stuffing of our beds.

=GOOSE'BERRY.= The fruit or berry of _Ribes grossularis_. Unripe fruit,
cold and acidulous; ripe fruit, wholesome and slightly laxative; but the
seeds and skins should not be eaten, as they are very indigestible; the
juice of the green fruit is made into wine (ENGLISH CHAMPAGNE); the seeds,
washed and roasted, were formerly used as a substitute for coffee
(GOOSEBERRY COFFEE). Gooseberries are preserved by simply bottling them,
and keeping them in a very cold place. See CHEESE, FOOL, FRUIT, &c.

=GOULARD.= _Syn._ GOULARD'S EXTRACT. See SOLUTION OF DIACETATE OF LEAD.

=GOUT.= _Syn._ ARTHRITIS, L. A painful disease that chiefly attacks the
male sex, particularly those of a corpulent habit and robust frame.
Persons who live temperately and take much exercise are seldom troubled
with gout. Indolence, inactivity, luxurious habits of life, and free
living, are the chief exciting causes of this disease; but excessive
study, grief, watchfulness, exposure to cold, and the too free use of
acidulous liquors, also occasionally bring it on. In some persons it is an
hereditary disease.

_Symp._ Gout is generally preceded by unusual chilliness of the feet and
legs, and a numbness or a sensation of prickling along the lower
extremities; the appetite fails, flatulency, indigestion, torpor, and
languor ensue, and extreme lassitude and fatigue follow the least bodily
exercise; the bowels become costive, and the urine pallid. The fits
usually come on in the night; the patient is awakened by the severity of
the pain, generally in the first joint of the great toe, or occasionally
in the heel, whole foot, or calf of the leg. The pain resembles that of a
dislocated joint, accompanied by a sensation resembling the effusion of
cold water; the pain increases, rigors and febrile symptoms ensue,
accompanied with local throbbing and inflammation. Sometimes both feet and
legs are attacked; at others, only one. Towards morning the patient
generally falls asleep, and sinks into a state of copious perspiration,
from which he awakes comparatively recovered. This constitutes what is
called a 'fit of gout.' These fits or paroxysms are apt to return at
intervals, commonly every evening, with more or less violence; and when
frequent, the disease usually extends its action, the joints become
affected, and concretions of a chalky nature (chalk stones, gout stones)
are formed upon them, and they become stiff and nearly immovable.

_Treat._ A plain or vegetable diet, moderate exercise, and the use of warm
laxatives, gentle tonics, diaphoretics, and diuretics, are among the best
preventives. The moderate use of alkaline remedies, as potassa and
magnesia, has also been recommended. To relieve the fit of gout, or to
check it at its commencement, the affusion of cold water will be often
found effective. The use of the '_eau medicinale_', or the '_vinum
colchici_' of the Pharmacop[oe]ia, may also be had recourse to; a due dose
of which taken at bedtime will frequently carry off the paroxysm, and
nearly always mitigate the symptoms. The effect of the above remedies do
not greatly differ from each other. The action of both medicines is
accompanied with great languor, and a deadly nausea or sickness, which
terminates in vomiting or a discharge from the bowels, or both. These
symptoms have often reached an alarming extent, and in some constitutions
follow even a moderate dose. This method of cure should not, therefore, be
unadvisedly and incautiously adopted.

Another remedy which has been recommended for gout is lemon juice, but
experience has proved that this agent is not to be depended on. The dose
proposed by Dr O. Rees, who originated this treatment, was 2 or 3 fl. oz.,
twice or thrice a day.

To ensure the efficacy of lemon juice, it must be expressed from the
fruit into the glass shortly before being taken. That purchased at the
shops is generally stale and disagreeable, and is often worse than
useless. In some cases it is advisable to take the juice undiluted, but
the more common practice is to mix it with about an equal quantity of
water. See RHEUMATISM, COLCHICUM, DRAUGHT (Anti-arthritic), LEMON JUICE,
VINEGAR OF COLCHICUM, WINE OF COLCHICUM, &c.

=Gout Cor'dial.= _Prep._ Rhubarb, senna, coriander seed, sweet-fennel
seed, and cochineal, of each 2 oz.; liquorice root and saffron, of each 1
oz.; raisins, 2-1/2 lbs.; rectified spirit of wine, 2 gals.; digest for 14
days, press, and filter. Used in gout and rheumatism. Aromatic and
slightly laxative.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 table-spoonfuls.

=Gout Med'icine.= (Duncan's.) A mixture of wine of colchicum, wine of
opium, and tincture of saffron.

=Gout Rem'edy.= (Alexander's.) According to Dr Paris, this
contains--aniseed, cumin seed, ginger, hermodactyles, pepper, and
scammony.

=Gout Specific.= (Murray's.) A mixture of iodide of potassium, sulphate of
magnesia, and wine of colchicum, disguised with an aromatic tincture.

=GOUTTES AMERES.= [Fr.] See DROPS (Bitter).

=GRAD'UATOR.= See VINEGAR.

=GRAFTING COM'POST.= Clay tempered with water, to which a little linseed
oil is sometimes added. Used to cover the joint formed by the scion and
stock in grafting.

=GRAINS OF HEALTH, Dr Franck's--Gesundheitspillen--Grains de Sante, ou
Grains de Vie=, du Docteur Franck. Silvered pills, containing 1 part
gamboge and 4 parts aloes. (Hager.)

=GRAINS OF PAR'ADISE.= _Syn._ GUINEA GRAINS, MELEGUETTA PEPPER. The seeds
of the _Ammomum meleguetta_. Grains of paradise are hot, acrid, and
aromatic, and in general properties similar to the other peppers. In some
parts of the world they are used as a condiment. They are principally
employed in these countries to impart a false strength to wine, beer,
spirits, and vinegar.

=GRANIL'LA.= A small inferior variety of cochineal (which _see_).

=GRANULA'TION.= The act or process of forming, or breaking into, grains or
small masses.

The granulation of MEDICINES has of late years received considerable
attention from both foreign and British pharmaceutists. In France,
granulated powders (POUDRES GRANULEES) are coming into general use in
place of impalpable powders, the most unpleasant of all forms of medicine.
The French process consists in enveloping the particles of medicines in
syrup by means of heat and constant stirring. Mr Banner, of Liverpool, has
lately introduced a method of granulating medicines far preferable to that
of the French pharmaceutists. The powder to be granulated is placed in a
mortar, and mucilage of gum acacia is gradually added until a crumbly mass
is made; this is then rubbed through a wire sieve (about 12 meshes to the
inch), and the granules produced are spread out on paper, and left to dry
spontaneously, or they are placed in a copper pan, and kept in constant
motion over a stove until dry; when perfectly dry, they are placed in a
mortar, and sufficient quantity of strong tincture of tolu (3 dr. to 1
oz.) is added to them, until by constant stirring they all appear glossy
and shining; they are then dried again by a gentle heat, being kept in
constant motion. The granules thus formed keep well, are tasteless, and
are much more elegant and agreeable preparations than pills or ordinary
powders. Many saline substances are granulated by the simple process of
dissolving the salt in water, and evaporating to dryness with constant
stirring.

METALS are granulated (reduced to drops, grains, or coarse powder) by
pouring them, in the melted state, into water. In many cases they are
allowed to run through the holes of a species of colander or sieve to
produce minute division; and in order to render the drops spherical, they
are allowed to fall from a sufficient height to permit of their acquiring
the solid state before striking the water. Lead shot is made in this way.
Shot towers are often upwards of 100 feet in height. See COPPER,
GUNPOWDER, POWDER, ZINC, &c.

=GRAPES.= _Syn._ UVAE, L. The fruit of _Vitis vinifera_, or the common
grape vine. Ripe grapes are cooling and antiseptic, and in large
quantities diuretic and laxative. They are very useful in bilious
affections and dyspepsia, and in all febrile, putrid, and inflammatory
complaints. The skin and seed, which are indigestible, should be rejected.
"Grapes which contain a large quantity of sugar are, if taken without the
husks, the safest and most nutritive of summer fruits." (Cullen.) "The
subjects of pulmonary affections, who pass the summer in Switzerland, may
try the effects of a course of grapes, '_cure de raisins_,' a remedy held
in high estimation in several parts of the Continent." (Sir J. Clark.)

Grapes, in bunches are preserved by wrapping them in silver paper, and
packing them in dry bran. Each bunch is suspended by the stem with the
fingers of one hand, whilst the bran is poured round it with the other;
the jar being occasionally gently shaken as the process of packing
proceeds. Some paper is then laid over the top of the jar, the mouth or
cover of which is, lastly, tied firmly over with bladder, to exclude the
air and moisture. See FRUIT, &c.

=GRAPH'ITE.= See PLUMBAGO.

=GRATE.= A frame of iron bars used for burning coal as fuel. In the
construction of a grate it is desirable to make the perpendicular height
of the fuel as great as is consistent with safety. A stratum of burning
coal will radiate considerably more heat into an apartment if placed
vertically than if arranged horizontally; besides which a great saving of
fuel will be effected in proportion to the heat radiated. Hence the faulty
construction of the old-fashioned wide grates. The fuel should also be so
divided in a fireplace as to be easy of ignition, and so placed as to give
free access of air to all its parts, as the smoke is then more likely to
be burnt.

=GRAV'EL.= A collection of small pebbles commonly mixed with sand or clay,
or both. Gravel for garden walks is chosen for its fine colour and binding
properties. The gravel of Kensington and Wimbledon is esteemed the finest
in the world. Gravel walks when once in order, may be rendered nearly
equal to asphalt by pouring over them tar or a mixture of tar and pitch,
absorption being promoted, if required, by the application of a hot iron.

=Gravel.= In _pathology_, a term popularly applied to calculous matter
formed in the kidneys, and passing off in the urine; and sometimes to
distinct calculi or concretions in the bladder itself.

An attack of gravel, as commonly understood, is accompanied by a deposit
of red, gritty, sand-like particles in the urine, which do not dissolve
when the urine is heated. The deposit consists of uric acid. Pains in the
loins are a common accompaniment of gravel, and there is also sometimes
pain in passing water.

_Treat._ Give twenty minims of solution of potash (of the B. P.) three
times a day in barley water; or twenty grains of bicarbonate of soda, also
three times a day. If the attack be attended with much pain a brisk dose
of Gregory's powder should be additionally taken every morning. Vichy
Water will also be found a useful remedy. See CALCULUS.

=GRAVIM'ETER.= See HYDROMETER.

=GRAV'ITY.= _Syn._ GRAVITATION. The attractive force by which bodies fall
towards the centre of the earth. Weight is the measure of gravity. The
determination of the relative weight of bodies with reference to a given
standard, is explained under SPECIFIC GRAVITY.

=GRA'VY.= The juice or liquid matter that drains from dressed meat after
it is placed on the dish for serving. The common practice among cooks is
to pour a spoonful or two of boiling water or broth over the joint, to
increase the quantity. The natural gravy that oozes from the meat after it
is cut is the richest and most wholesome. Made gravies are prepared by
adding spice and flavouring to the foregoing, or to strong meat soup.

The gravy for roast meat is usually made by sprinkling a little salt on
the joint after it is placed in the dish, and then pouring some boiling
water over it; this washes off some of the brown, and makes a coloured
liquid in the dish.

Another method for making gravy for roast meat is the following:--Take any
bones, scraps of cold meat, or trimmings of the joint, put them in a half
pint of water, with a little salt and half an onion, let them stew all the
time the meat is roasting; colour with a little burnt sugar. When the meat
is done, pour the dripping from it carefully into a basin, leaving the
gravy at the bottom of the tin; strain the gravy you have made into this,
let it boil, and pour round (not over) the meat. If the gravy is liked
thick, put a dessert-spoonful of flour, mixed into a smooth paste, with
two of cold water, into the saucepan five minutes before you strain it.
See SAUCE.

=GRAY.= _Syn._ GREY; GRIS, Fr. A mixture of black and white. Delicate
grays result from mixture of the three elementary colours, red, yellow,
and blue, in which the blue preponderates to a greater or less extent.

=GRAY DYE.= _Syn._ TEINTE GRISE. Gray is dyed with the same materials as
black, but both the bath and mordaunt are used in a more diluted state.
COTTON goods may be worked in sumach and then in copperas; this gives
rather a bluish grey, which may be modified to any particular hue by the
addition of suitable colouring matter. To make it yellowish, a small
amount of fustic and alum are employed; to make it 'fuller,' peachwood and
Lima-wood with alum are used. The methods of obtaining grey on SILK and
WOOL are very numerous; they are similar in principle to the above, all
depending on the blending of the three primary colours, or on the
modification of weak blacks. See BLACK DYE.

=GREASE.= A general term applied to soft animal fats; as BEAR'S GREASE,
GOOSE GREASE, &c.

=Grease.= An inflammatory affection of the heels of horses, which produces
dryness, scurfiness and stiffness. The _treatment_ consists of emollient
poultices, accompanied with physic and diuretic balls, to subdue the
inflammation, followed by mild astringent lotions or ointments.

=GREAVES.= _Syn._ GRAVES. The sediment of melted tallow, consisting
chiefly of animal membranes mixed with fat, made up into cakes. Used as a
coarse food for dogs.

=GRE'CIAN WATER.= See HAIR DYES.

=GREEN.= _Syn._ VIRIDIS, L.; VERT, Fr. Of the colour of the leaves of
growing plants; _subst._ a green colour.

=GREEN DYE.= _Syn._ TEINTE VERTE, Fr. All the green dyes in use, with the
practically unimportant exception of Chinese green and oxide of chromium
green, are compounded of blue and yellow. The goods, in practice, are
generally dyed blue first, observing to regulate the shade according to
that of the intended green; they are then dried, rinsed, and passed
through a yellow bath, with the like precautions, until the proper shade
is obtained. See BLUE DYE, YELLOW DYE, &c.

=GREEN PIG'MENTS.= Several of the green pigments of commerce are obtained
from copper. Oxide of chromium furnishes some which are very beautiful.
Many are formed by the mere mechanical admixture of blue and yellow
pigments. The bright blues and yellows, when mixed in this way, produce
the liveliest greens; orange, or red and blue, and the yellowish browns
and blue, the more dingy greens. In this way are produced all the
extemporaneous greens of the artist. Nickel and titanium also furnish
green colours, but these are not in common use. The following list
embraces all the best-known and most useful green pigments:--

=Green Arsen'ical.= Arsenite and aceto-arsenite of copper. See GREEN,
SCHEELE'S and SCHWEINFURT (_below_).

=Green, Barth's.= From yellow lake, Prussian blue, and clay, ground
together.

=Green, Bice.= Same as mountain green.

=Green, Bremen.= This is properly green verditer, but other preparations
are frequently sold under the name.

=Green, Brighton.= A mixture of impure acetate of copper and chalk,
prepared as follows:--

To sulphate of copper, 7 lbs., add sugar of lead, 3 lbs.; each separately
dissolved in water, 5 pints; mix the solutions, stir in of whiting, 24
lbs., set the resulting paste on chalk stones, and when dry grind it to
powder.

=Green, Brunswick.= This is probably a crude chloride of copper, but a
mixture of carbonate of copper and alumina or chalk is now commonly sold
under the name in the shops.

_Prep._ 1. A saturated solution of sal ammoniac, 3 parts, is poured over
copper filings or shreds, 2 parts, contained in a vessel capable of being
closed up, and the mixture is kept in a warm place for some weeks, when
the newly formed green pigment is separated from the unoxidised copper, by
washing the mixture on a sieve; it is then edulcorated with water, and
slowly dried in the shade. Colour very deep and rich. The lighter shades
are produced by the addition of sulphate of baryta.

2. A solution of crude carbonate of ammonia or bone spirit is added to a
mixed solution of alum and blue vitriol, as long as it affects the liquor;
in a short time the precipitate is collected, washed and dried. The
various shades of green are produced by using different quantities of
alum, which pales and cheapens it.

=Green, Chrome.= The superb green pigment used by enamellers under this
name is the green oxide or sesquioxide of chromium. A hydrated oxide of
chromium forms the emerald green of Pannetier; it is prepared by melting
in a crucible equivalent quantities of anhydrous boracic acid and
bichromate of potassium, and treating the fused mass with water. The
hydrated oxide thus produced is washed and finely triturated.

The chrome green of the oil and colour shops is a mixture of chrome yellow
and Prussian green.

=Green, Cop'per.= Green bice or mountain green, Brunswick green, emerald
green, verditer, and several other well-known pigments, may be thus named.

=Green, Em'erald.= This term is commonly applied to the aceto-arsenite of
copper, as prepared in England. It is the same compound, chemically
speaking, as Schweinfurt green (which _see_).

_Prep._ A pulp is formed with verdigris, 1 part, and boiling water q. s.,
and after being passed through a sieve, to remove lumps, is added
gradually to a boiling solution of arsenious acid, 1 part, in water, 10
parts, the mixture being constantly stirred until the precipitate becomes
a heavy, granular powder, when it is collected on a calico filter, and
dried on chalk stones.

=Green, Frise.= _Syn._ FRIEZLAND GREEN. This resembles Brunswick green.

=Green, Gellart's.= A mixture of cobalt blue and flowers of zinc with some
yellow pigment.

=Green, Impe'rial.= Schweinfurt green (see _below_).

=Green, Iris.= A pigment prepared by grinding the juice of the petals of
the blue flag with quicklime. It is very fugitive.

=Green Lake.= See LAKE.

=Green, Min'eral.= This is the same as mountain green.

=Green, Mitis.= Another of the many synonyms of Schweinfurt green.

=Green, Mountain.= This pigment is properly the native green carbonate or
bicarbonate of copper (malachite) ground to powder, either with or without
the addition of a little orpiment or chrome yellow. That of the shops is
commonly prepared by adding a solution of carbonate of soda, or of
potassa, to a hot mixed solution of sulphate of copper and alum. Green
verditer is commonly sold for this article. According to Watts, mountain
green is the same as Neuwieder green.

=Green, Neuwieder.= Schweinfurt green mixed with gypsum or sulphate of
baryta.

=Green, Prussian.= The sediment of the process of making Prussian blue
from bullock's blood or horns, before it has had the hydrochloric acid
added to it. It is also prepared by pouring liquid chloride upon freshly
precipitated Prussian blue. As now sold, this pigment is generally a
mixture of Prussian blue and gamboge.

=Green, Rinman's.= This resembles that of Gellert.

=Green, Sap.= A very fugitive pigment, prepared from the juice of
buckthorn berries. The berries are allowed to ferment for a week or eight
days in a wooden tub. The juice is then pressed out, strained, a little
alum added, and the whole evaporated to a proper consistence; it is next
run into pigs' bladders, and hung up in a dry situation to harden. An
inferior article is made from the juice of black alder, and of evergreen
privet. It is a common practice to add 3/4 pint of lime water and 1/2 oz.
of gum Arabic to every pint of either of the above juices.

=Green, Scheele's.= This is arsenite of copper.

_Prep._ 1. White arsenic (in powder), 1 part; commercial potash, 2 parts;
boiling water, 35 parts; dissolve, filter, and add the solution gradually,
whilst still warm, to a filtered solution of sulphate of copper (cryst.),
2 parts, as long as a precipitate falls; lastly, wash the newly formed
pigment with warm water, and dry it.

2. (Ure.) Powdered arsenious acid, 11 oz.; carbonate of potassa, 1-1/2
lb.; boiling water, 1 gall.; dissolve, filter, and add the solution, as
before, to another solution of crystallised sulphate of copper, 2 lbs., in
water, 3 galls. _Prod._ 1-1/2 lb. A very fine grass-green colour.

=Green, Schweinfurt.= This splendid green pigment is the aceto-arsenite of
copper.

_Prep._ 1. Acetate of copper and arsenious acid, equal parts, are each
dissolved separately in the least possible quantity of boiling water, and
the solutions mixed whilst still as hot as possible; an olive-green
precipitate falls, which, by being boiled in the liquor 5 or 6 minutes,
changes to a dense granular powder of a superb green colour.

2. Instead of boiling the solution containing the precipitate, it is
allowed to cool and stand for several hours, or until the powder assumes a
granular and beautiful tint. Very rich.

3. (Kastner.) Arsenious acid, 8 lbs., is dissolved in water as before, and
added to verdigris, 9 or 10 lbs., diffused through water q. s., at 120 deg.
Fahr., the pap of the other being first passed through a sieve; the mixed
ingredients are then set aside till the mutual reaction produces the
proper shade.

4. (Dr Ure.) Sulphate of copper, 50 lbs., and lime, 10 lbs., are dissolved
in good vinegar, 20 galls., and a boiling hot solution of white arsenic,
50 lbs., is conveyed as quickly as possible into the liquor; the mixture
is stirred several times, and then allowed to subside, after which it is
collected on a filter, dried and powdered. The supernatant liquor is
employed the next time for dissolving the arsenic.

5. See GREEN, EMERALD (_above_).

_Obs._ This is a very fine, permanent green pigment. "A great deal of
needless alarm has been excited about its supposed deleterious effects. It
is extensively employed for staining wall-papers, and persons inhabiting
rooms thus papered are said to have had their health seriously deranged by
the arsenical fumes evolved from it. Now, it is utterly impossible that
arsenic could volatilise from such a compound at ordinary temperatures; it
does not decompose at any temperature below redness." (Watts.) [It is,
however, probable that the air of such apartments is sometimes charged
with the poisonous pigment through its becoming mechanically detached from
the paper. To breathe an atmosphere so impregnated would be dangerous. The
use of papers coloured with Scheele's green, especially of the kind called
'flock,' should, therefore, be carefully avoided.--ED.]

=Verd'igris.= See COPPER (Acetates) and VERDIGRIS.

=Green, Verd'iter.= This is essentially a mixture of oxide and carbonate
of copper in uncertain proportions, with chalk. Factitious green bice and
mountain green have a like composition. See VERDITER.

=Green, Verona.= The mineral called green earth.

=Green, Vienna.= The same as Schweinfurt green.

=GREEN SICKNESS.= See CHLOROSIS.

=GREEK FIRE.= This compound, so much used in ancient warfare, is believed
to have had naphtha for its chief ingredient. According to some
authorities, it was a mixture of asphalt, nitre, and sulphur.

=GREGORY'S SALT.= The crude hydrochlorate of morphia, prepared by
Gregory's process. It is a double hydrochlorate of morphia and codeia.

=GRINDELIA ROBUSTA.= A perennial plant belonging to the natural order
_Compositae_; a native of California, in which state it is largely used
against poisoning by the "poison oak" (the _Rhus toxicodendron_). Of late
years it is said to have been in American medical practice used with
excellent effect in asthma and kindred diseases. Dr Q. C. Smith, writing
to the 'Pacific Medical and Surgical Journal' for April, 1875, states one
patient to whom pills made of the solid extract were administered, had
suffered from severe and frequent attacks of asthma since childhood, and
had found no relief from various remedies. Dr Smith gave his patient the
extract of the grindelia in pills of three grains each, one three times a
day for two or three days, then a pill at bedtime only, for eight or ten
days longer. Under this mode of treatment the attacks are said to have
been much less severe, and less frequent; the patient not only gaining in
strength and general health in the meantime, but having experienced an
immunity from attack for four months. The parts of the plant used are the
selected leaves and tops.

=GRIND'ING.= The operation of reducing substances to powder by attrition
or friction. In the laboratory, the term is chiefly applied to powdering
by means of a mill or by mechanical power, in opposition to simple
pounding or trituration in a mortar or with a slab and muller. All the
principal powders, paints, &c., sold by the druggist, drysalter, and
colourman, are reduced in the drug or colour mill. Recently machinery has
even been applied to the common mortar. An ingenious and very useful
contrivance of this kind is the 'mechanical mortar' of Mr H. Goodhall, of
Derby.

=GRIND'STONES. (Artificial).= Washed siliceous sand, 3 or 4 parts;
shell-lac, 1 part; melt together, and form the mass into the proper shape
whilst warm, with strong pressure. The fineness of the sand must depend on
the work the stone is intended for. The same composition is formed upon
pieces of wood, as corn rubbers, and for the purpose of sharpening knives,
and cutting stones, shells, &c. See EMERY.

=GROATS.= _Syn._ GRITS; GRUTELLUM, AVENA DECORTICATA, AVENAE SEMINA, AVENA
(Ph. L.), L. Common oats, deprived of their exterior integuments or husks.
This is generally effected in a mill, which, at the same time, cuts them
into two or three pieces. When crushed flat, they are denominated EMBDEN
GROATS.

=GROUT.= Mortar reduced to a thin paste with water, used to fill up the
joints of masonry and brickwork. A finer kind is used to 'finish off' the
best ceilings.

=GRUEL.= _Syn._ OATMEAL GRUEL, WATER G.; DECOCTUM AVENAE, L. Oatmeal or
groats boiled with water to a proper consistence, and strained. It is
variously flavoured to suit the palate; but the addition of a little white
sugar, and finely powdered Jamaica ginger, with or without a glass of
wine, is the least likely to offend the stomach. Nutmegs, cinnamon, &c.,
frequently disagree with invalids. Sometimes milk or butter is added.
Embden groats require less boiling than the common groats. Of oatmeal, the
Scotch is commonly said to be the best.

The following directions for making gruel from oatmeal are given by Dr A.
T. Thomson: "Oatmeal, 2 oz.; cold water, 1-1/2 pint; rub the meal in a
basin, with the back of a spoon, in some of the water, pouring off the
fluid after the grosser particles have subsided, but whilst the milkiness
remains; repeat this with fresh water, unite the washings, and boil until
a soft, thick mucilage is formed."

=GUA'IACIN.= _Syn._ GUAIACIC ACID, PURE GUAIACUM RESIN. A substance having
the nature of an acid, discovered by Trommsdorff in the wood and bark of
_Guaiacum officinale_.

_Prep._ The tincture of guaiacum is treated with hydrate of lime, and the
guaiacate of lime thus formed is decomposed with dilute sulphuric acid; it
is purified by dissolving it in alcohol.

_Prop., &c._ Insoluble in water; soluble in alcohol and ether; it unites
with the caustic alkalies, forming alkaline guaiacates (guaiacum soaps);
air and light turn it green; gluten, mucilage of gum Arabic, &c., turn it
blue; nitric acid and chlorine turn it successively green, blue, and
brown; tincture of guaiacin, added to hydrocyanic acid and sulphate of
copper, produces an intense blue colour. (Pagenstecher.) A delicate
photographic paper may be formed by washing unsized paper with an
alcoholic solution of guaiacum resin, and afterwards with one of neutral
acetate of lead. (Johnston.)

=GUA'IACUM.= _Syn._ GUAIAC, GUM GUAIACUM, GUAIACUM RESIN; GUAIACUM (Ph.
L.), (GUAIAC RESIN, GUAIACA RESINA, B. P.). The resin prepared by means of
fire from the wood of _Guaiacum officinale_, by natural exudation, by
incision, or by heat. (B. P.) This substance is often adulterated. When
pure, its "fresh fracture is red, slowly passing to green; the tincture
slowly strikes a lively blue colour on the inner surface of a thin paring
of raw potato." (B. P.) Adulteration with resin may be generally
discovered by the odour evolved when the guaiacum is heated. An alcoholic
tincture of guaiacum, rendered milky with water, recovers its transparency
on the addition of caustic potassa in excess; but this is not the case
when resin is present.

Guaiacum is stimulant, sudorific, and alterative.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 gr.,
either in powder or pills; in chronic rheumatism, gout, obstinate chronic
skin disease, scrofula, syphilis, &c. It forms the active ingredient of
the once celebrated 'CHELSEA PENSIONER,' and the 'GOUT SPECIFIC' of Mr
Emerigon. The latter was made by digesting 2 oz. of guaiacum resin in 48
fl. oz. of rum, for seven or eight days. The dose of this was a
table-spoonful every morning, fasting, for a twelvemonth. Its other
properties are similar to those of GUAIACIN, but are less marked. Sp. gr.
1.20 to 1.22.

=Guaiacum Wood.= _Syn._ LIGNUM VITAE, GUAIACI LIGNUM (Ph. L.), L. The wood
of _Guaiacum officinale_. This is employed under the form of shavings,
raspings, and sawdust, in decoctions only. See DECOCTION and BALSAM.

=GUA'NO.= _Syn._ HUANHO, Peruv. This substance, now so extensively used in
agriculture, is the partially decomposed excrement of certain aquatic
birds, chiefly the common penguin, which congregate in countless numbers
on the barren and uninhabited islets and rocks on the western coasts of
South America and the coasts of Africa. It abounds in ammonia and the
phosphates, and is undoubtedly the richest natural manure known. Under
judicious application the increase of the crops of grain, turnips,
potatoes, and grass consequent upon its use is said to be about 33%.
"Guano is peculiarly adapted to horticultural and floricultural
improvement, by its relative cleanliness and facility of application."
(Ure.)

"According to Denham Smith,[339] South American guano, as imported,
presents itself in three distinct states, the three varieties being not
unfrequently mixed together in the same bag; the first variety is damp and
pulverulent; the second exists as large concretions, presenting various
aspects when broken; the third is heavy and crystalline, and is termed
'stone' by the labourers. These three varieties differ widely in
composition, as the following comprehensive analysis, by Smith, will
show:--

[Footnote 339: 'Proceedings of the Chem. Soc.,' vol. ii.]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |              _Soluble in Water._                             |
  +-----------------------------+------------+---------+---------+
  |                             |    I.      |   II.   |   III.  |
  |                             |Pulverulent.|Concrete.| Saline. |
  |                             +------------+---------+---------+
  |Water                        |   222.00   |  250.00 |   97.00 |
  |Chloride of ammonium         |    25.50   |    --   |   30.30 |
  |Sulphate of potash           |    80.00   |    --   |    --   |
  |    "       soda             |   traces   |  258.44 |  191.77 |
  |Oxalate of ammonia           |    74.00   |   93.90 |    --   |
  |    "      soda              |     --     |    --   |  105.63 |
  |Phosphate of ammonia         |    63.30   |   61.24 |    --   |
  |    "        potash          |     --     |   77.32 |   49.47 |
  |    "        soda            |     1.20   |    --   |    3.60 |
  |Chloride of sodium           |     --     |   29.22 |  286.31 |
  |    "       potassium        |     --     |    --   |   41.63 |
  |Organic matter               |    15.00   |    6.68 |   25.53 |
  |Urate of ammonia             |   154.18   |    --   |    --   |
  |Uric acid                    |    25.16   |    --   |    --   |
  |Ammonia phosphate of magnesia|     5.64   |    7.84 |    1.33 |
  |Animal matter                |    11.80   |    8.60 |    7.56 |
  |                                                              |
  |              _Insoluble in Water._                           |
  +-----------------------------+------------+---------+---------+
  |                             |    I.      |   II.   |   III.  |
  |                             |Pulverulent.|Concrete.| Saline. |
  |                             +------------+---------+---------+
  |Oxalate of lime              |    25.60   |  109.58 |    --   |
  |Phosphate of lime            |   199.30   |   62.70 |  132.23 |
  |    "        magnesia        |    20.30   |    8.74 |   25.80 |
  |Oxide of iron                |     --     |    --   |    1.56 |
  |Humus and organic matters    |    60.92   |    8.00 |   18.36 |
  |Sand                         |    15.60   |    7.20 |    4.20 |
  |Loss                         |      .50   |   10.54 |    7.78 |
  |                             +------------+---------+---------+
  |                             |  1000.00   | 1000.00 | 1000.00 |
  +-----------------------------+------------+---------+---------+

"Several of the South American guano beds are now exhausted, but new
varieties are constantly being introduced; and although the qualities are
continually varying, guanos, on the whole, may be divided into two
classes, the one characterised by the abundance of ammonia, the other by
that of phosphates, the Peruvian and Angamos being characteristic of the
former, and the Saldanha Bay and Bolivian of the latter. In selecting a
guano, the following points (Anderson) ought to be attended to by the
farmer:--

"1st. The guano should be light coloured and dry, colouring very slightly
when squeezed together, and not gritty.

"2nd. It should not have too powerful an ammoniacal smell, and should
contain lumps which, when broken, appear of a paler colour than the
powder.

"3rd. A bushel should not weigh more than from 56 to 60 pounds.

"These characters are, however, imitated with great skill, so that they
cannot be implicitly relied upon, and they are applicable to Peruvian
guano only."[340]

[Footnote 340: The above particulars are from an elaborate paper by Dr H.
M. Noad, in the 'Chemist and Druggist,' vol. ii.]

_Purity, Adulteration._ Guano, owing to its high price, is very commonly
adulterated, or is in an advanced stage of decomposition when sold. Much
of what is vended under the name is altogether a fictitious article. These
artificial mixtures are made to look so like genuine guano, that the mere
practical man, who goes only by their appearance, is very often deceived
by them, and, owing to the failure of his crops in consequence, is led to
distrust the efficacy of guano as a manure. A sample of pretended guano
examined by Johnstone was found to contain, in the state in which it was
sold, more than half its weight of gypsum, the rest being peat or coal
ashes, with a little common salt, crude sulphate of ammonia, and either
dried urine or the refuse of the glue manufactories, to give it a smell.
"I could not satisfy myself that it contained a particle of real
guano."[341] Vessels which sail hence for the guano stations are now very
commonly ballasted with rough gypsum or plaster of Paris. This substance
is mixed with the guano as it is loaded, and enables the importers to
deliver from the vessel a "nice-looking, light-coloured article."
Purchasers of guano are very desirous of having it delivered from the
vessel, as they believe they thus obtain it pure. The favourite material
for the adulteration of guano, at the present moment, is a variety of
umber, which is brought from Anglesea in large quantities. The rate of
admixture is said to be about 15 cwt. of umber to about 5 cwt. of Peruvian
guano, from which an excellent-looking article is manufactured, which is
sold under the name of 'African guano.'

[Footnote 341: 'Elem. of Agric. Chem.']

Pure guano has a pale-brown colour, a more or less offensive odour, and
the average sp. gr. of 1.63 to 1.64. If the sp. gr. exceed 1.75, it is
either damaged or adulterated; and if it is less than 1.62, it contains an
undue quantity of moisture. The best is neutral to test-paper, and
sometimes has even an acid reaction; but that of commerce has generally an
alkaline reaction, owing to the presence of free ammonia, and, in
consequence, turns turmeric paper brown, and gives white fumes when a
glass rod dipped in hydrochloric acid is held over it. Triturated with
quicksilver or caustic potassa, good guano evolves a powerful odour of
ammonia; digested in water, fully one half of it is dissolved; dried by
the heat of boiling water, it does not lose more than from 7 to 9% in
weight; and burned upon a red-hot shovel, it leaves a white ash, not a red
or dark-coloured one. (See directions for selecting guano given _above_,
also _below_.)

_Analysis_ or _assay_. The quantitative analysis of guano, so as to
exhibit the names and proportions of all its numerous component
substances, is an extremely tedious and difficult matter in the hands of
persons unaccustomed to chemical manipulations. As, however, its value to
the agriculturist depends chiefly on its richness in ammonia, potassa, and
phosphoric acid, the analysis of guano for practical purposes may be
reduced to an assay for these articles. Indeed, the presence of ammonia
(the most valuable of them), in the proper quantity, may be fairly taken
as evidence of the presence of the rest. The following methods of testing
guano are both simple and accurate, and are so arranged as to permit its
per-centage richness in one or more of its leading constituents to be
determined without much trouble or expense.

1. _a._ 100 gr. of the sample for examination (fairly selected) are
crushed to a powder, and placed on a small, weighed, and perfectly dry
paper filter, and then desiccated, by exposure for 2 or 3 hours to the
heat of boiling water. The loss in weight, taken in grains, after
deducting 9, indicates the quantity per cent. of water or moisture which
the sample contains in excess of that present in good or pure guano.[342]

[Footnote 342: According to Dr Noad, the proportion of water in genuine
guanos ranges from 7 to 20%.]

_b._ The paper filter, with its contents, is next suspended for some time
over concentrated sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) contained in a
wide-mouthed bottle or jar, by means of a thread attached to the cork or
stopper, care being taken to exclude the external air. The exposure in
this way is continued until the guano ceases to diminish in weight, which
is ascertained by weighing it at intervals after the first 3 or 4 hours.
When this point is arrived at, the filter and its contents are very
carefully weighed. The difference between its present weight and its
original weight (before the desiccation in _a_), taken in grains, gives
the gross quantity of water per cent.

_c._ The dried guano from _b_ is next placed in a weighed, smooth crucible
or capsule, and exposed to a low red heat until all the organic matter is
completely destroyed, and the whole is reduced to a white ash, which is
weighed as soon as it has become cold. This weight, in grains, gives the
gross weight per cent. of non-volatile matter (fixed alkaline and earthy
chlorides, phosphates, and sulphates); the total loss of weight by
combustion denotes the gross per-centage of combustible and volatile
matter (urea, uric acid, ammoniacal salts, and organic matter). The latter
should not be less than 55 to 60%.

[Illustration]

2. _a._ A second 100 gr. of the guano, selected as before, is distilled
along with about 75 gr. of fresh-slaked quicklime, and a little water, in
a small matrass connected with a tubular, triple bulb-condenser,
containing cold distilled water, and immersed in a basin of ice-cold
water. (See _engr._) The condenser is charged by plunging one of its
extremities into the water, and sucking at the other, until the liquid
reaches the level indicated in the margin. A very gentle heat only,
cautiously increased, need be employed. After the process is over, the
strength of the solution of ammonia found in the condenser is tested,
either by taking its density in a small specific-gravity bottle, or by
determining its saturating power in the manner described under
ALKALIMETRY. This furnishes the per-centage of ready formed ammonia
sufficiently accurate for all ordinary purposes, provided proper care is
taken.

When extreme accuracy is required, the condenser is charged with a weighed
quantity of dilute hydrochloric acid of a known strength, instead of
water, and after the process is over, this is tested as before. The
quantity of ammoniacal test-liquor (see ALKALIMETRY) now taken to saturate
it, deducted from what it would have taken before the exposure in the
condenser, gives the per-centage sought.

[Illustration]

Another method, giving very accurate results, is to use a rather strong
hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. about 1.13) for the condenser; after the
operation is over, the contents of the latter are poured into a glass or
porcelain capsule, a solution of bichloride of platinum is added, in
excess, and the whole is then gently evaporated to dryness; the residuum
is rubbed to powder, and exhausted with a mixture of two measures of
alcohol and one measure of ether; the undissolved portion is next dried at
a heat not exceeding 212 deg. Fahr., and weighed. The weight, in grains, of
the ammonia chloride of platinum thus obtained, multiplied by .0763, gives
the per-centage of ready-formed ammonia, as before. When hydrochloric acid
is used for the condenser, a simple U-tube and beaker glass may be
employed, if a bulb-condenser is not at hand. (See _engr._) The advantages
resulting from the use of acid instead of water for the condenser is, that
with the former no ammonia can possibly escape being absorbed, whilst
little care is required to keep the condenser cool.

[Illustration]

_b._ 25 gr. of the guano are next weighed, and after being slightly
moistened with a little dilute hydrochloric acid, are thoroughly dried by
the heat of boiling water; the dried sample is then mixed in a warm
unglazed porcelain mortar with 10 times its weight of a mixture of 2 parts
of quicklime to 1 part of hydrate of soda (both quite dry). This mixture
is introduced into a combustion tube of hard Bohemian glass, about 16 or
18 inches long, and 3/4 of an inch in diameter (see _engr._) The mortar is
rubbed out with a little of the soda-lime mixture, which is also
introduced into the tube with that already put there; a little plug of
ignited asbestos is then loosely placed over the whole, and the tube is
immediately connected with a tubular bulb-condenser, containing moderately
strong hydrochloric acid, great care being taken that the joints are made
air-tight, which may be determined by the operator sucking a few bubbles
out of the apparatus. If, after suction, the liquid remains at a higher
level in the furthest bulb (_b_), it is a sign that the connection is
sound. This being done, heat is applied to the combustion-tube, by means
of spirit-lamps; or, more conveniently, by means of the furnace now
usually employed in organic analysis (see _engr._) The tube is next
gradually surrounded with red-hot charcoal, by shifting by degrees the
screen (_c_), and adding more charcoal, so as to gradually expel the
ammonia. The disengagement of gas should take place uninterruptedly, but
not too rapidly, in order that the acid may not ascend into the
combustion-tube and spoil the experiment. The non-condensable volatile
matters which pass off furnish a key to the progress of the operation. The
heat is at length increased to a full red. When gas ceases to be evolved,
and the mixture in the tube has become quite white, the experiment is at
an end. The point (_a_) of the combustion-tube is broken off, and the
ammonia which remains in the tube is expelled by sucking gently at the
extremity (_b_) of the bulb-condenser. The latter is then disconnected
with the apparatus, and emptied into a glass or porcelain capsule, in
order to be tested, as directed under 2, _a_. The quantity of ammonia, in
grains, thus found, multiplied by 4, gives the WHOLE QUANTITY of AMMONIA
per cent., both actual and potential, producible from the sample of guano
examined.

[Illustration]

_c._ The quantity of ready-formed ammonia (see 2, _a_) deducted from the
quantity last found (see 2, _b_) gives the quantity of LATENT or POTENTIAL
AMMONIA that will be slowly developed by the decomposition of the guano
in the soil, and become available for the food of plants. This is the most
valuable product of this substance as a manure, and can only be obtained
in quantity from well-preserved, dry guano.

3. _a._ A third quantity of 100 gr. of the guano, selected as before, is
triturated and digested for some time with 12 times its weight of hot
distilled water, and the whole being thrown on a filter, the undissolved
portion is washed with a little warm distilled water; the solution and
'washings' are then mixed together, and acidulated with nitric acid; a
solution of pernitrate of iron is next added, and afterwards solution of
ammonia, in excess; the liquid is next heated for a short time, and the
bulky reddish-brown precipitate is collected, washed with hot water,
dried, ignited, and weighed. The weight, in grains, less the weight of the
peroxide of iron in the pernitrate consumed, gives the weight of
PHOSPHORIC ACID present in the soluble phosphates contained in the sample.
The pernitrate of iron is made by direct solution in hot strong nitric
acid, of twice as much pure iron wire as there is phosphoric acid
suspected to be present in the liquid. A slight excess will not alter the
result. The number of grains of metallic iron used to form the solution,
multiplied by 1.4286, gives the weight of the peroxide of iron which is to
be deducted from the gross weight of the precipitate.

_b._ The filtrate and 'washings' left from 3 _a_ are mixed, and treated
with a little oxalate of ammonia to throw down any lime, and then
carefully evaporated to dryness and ignited; the residuum of the ignition,
when cold, after being carefully weighed, is treated with the smallest
portion of water that will dissolve it; the solution is acidified with
hydrochloric acid, and a solution of bichloride of platinum added, in
excess; some strong alcohol is next poured in, the precipitate carefully
collected on a filter, washed with rectified spirit, dried at 212 deg. Fahr.,
and weighed. The weight, in grains, multiplied by .1940, gives the
per-centage of POTASSA sought.

_c._ The weight of the potassa multiplied by 1.852, and deducted from the
weight of the ignited residuum in 3 _b_ already found (see _above_), gives
the quantity of CHLORIDE OF SODIUM or COMMON SALT (nearly).

4. _a._ The insoluble residuum from 3 _a_, dried, and ignited, or the ash
from 1 _c_, is digested for 10 or 12 hours in 600 times its weight of
water (to which a little common salt or sal-ammoniac may be added), after
which the whole is thrown upon a filter; a solution of chloride of barium
is then added to the filtrate as long as a precipitate (if any) forms; the
latter is collected, washed, dried, ignited, and weighed. The weight, in
grains, multiplied by .5843, denotes the quantity of GYPSUM or SULPHATE OF
LIME which has been used to adulterate the sample.

_b._ The insoluble residuum last left on the filter is digested for some
time in warm dilute hydrochloric acid; the whole is then thrown upon a
filter, and the undissolved portion (SILICA or SAND, with, perhaps, a
trace of ALUMINA) is washed, dried, ignited, and weighed. It should not
weigh more than 3 to 3-1/2 gr. (3 to 3-1/2%).

_c._ The filtrate and 'washings' from _b_ are next mixed together; the
mixed liquid is acidified with dilute sulphuric acid and heated until all
the hydrochloric acid is expelled, and the whole reduced to a soft pasty
mass; rectified spirit is now poured in, and after active stirring for
some time, the mixture is thrown on a filter, and the solid portion washed
with a little more rectified spirit; it is then dried, ignited, and
weighed. The weight, in grains, multiplied by .7650, gives the quantity of
PHOSPHATE OF LIME per cent. required.

_d._ The filtrate from _c_ is diluted with water, and after being boiled
for a few minutes, ammonia is added in slight excess, followed by a
solution of sulphate of magnesia (previously mixed with as much
sal-ammoniac as will prevent ammonia producing a precipitate in it),
slowly dropped in as long as it disturbs the liquor; the whole is now
allowed to rest for 10 or 12 hours, when the precipitate is collected on a
filter, and washed with water alkalised with ammonia, as long as the
filtering liquid is rendered turbid by chloride of barium; it is next
dried, submitted to intense ignition for some time in a covered platinum
crucible, and, when cold, carefully weighed. The weight, in grains,
multiplied by .6429, indicates the per-centage of PHOSPHORIC ACID in the
insoluble phosphates (phosphates of lime, magnesia, &c.) in the sample
examined.

5. A fourth 100 gr, of guano is weighed, and exhausted by trituration and
digestion with hot water (see 3 _a_); the solution is evaporated to
dryness by a gentle heat, and the residuum of the evaporation, after being
weighed, is powdered and enclosed in a stout phial with 8 times its volume
of alcohol, sp. gr. .825 (63 o. p.); the plant is next securely corked and
guarded, and exposed for some time, with agitation, to the heat of 212 deg.
Fahr., the whole is then allowed to cool, the contents of the phial
filtered, the undissolved portion washed with hot alcohol, and both the
filtrate and the 'washings' gently evaporated to dryness, and weighed.
This gives the richness of the sample in UREA, one of the most valuable
constituents of the best guano. Its presence is "a certain proof of its
entire soundness." (Ure.)

6. _a._ Another 100 gr. of the guano is taken, and, after being exhausted
with water, is dried at 212 deg. Fahr., and weighed; it is then digested with
heat in 20 times its weight of borax-water (containing 1% of borax), or in
a solution of caustic potassa, and after a time the whole is thrown on a
weighed filter, washed with a little cold distilled water, dried by a heat
not higher than that of boiling water, and again carefully weighed. The
loss, in grains, indicates the proportion per cent. of URIC ACID.

The accuracy of the result may be verified by adding dilute hydrochloric
acid, in slight excess, to the filtrate, collecting the bulky, crystalline
precipitate of uric acid which forms, washing it carefully with a little
rectified spirit, drying it, and weighing it, as before. This weight,
which in general is a very little under that denoted above, is the more
accurate of the two. The precipitate is shown to be uric acid by its
assuming a rich crimson colour when treated with a little nitric acid,
which turns to a rich purple (_murexide_) when it is moistened with
ammonia water.

_b._ The quantity of uric acid last obtained, multiplied by 1.1012, gives
the per-centage of URATE OF AMMONIA.

_Obs._ Amongst the numerous constituents of guano, none are so valuable in
an agricultural point of view as the three substances referred to in the
last two sections. Indeed, almost all the ammonia furnished by this
substance to the soil, after the latter, manured with it, has been exposed
to the air and rain, is derived from the slow decomposition of urea, or
urate of ammonia. It is these substances from which the store of latent,
or, as Dr Ure terms it, potential ammonia, is derived. The ammonia
existing in the guano under the form of carbonate, or of soluble salts
(ready formed ammonia), is either soon dissipated in air or is washed away
by heavy rains, and, therefore, forms the least valuable and durable
portion of this manure. It may be even added artificially, a matter almost
impossible with the former. An assay, therefore, for the latent ammonia,
or the urea, or the urate of ammonia, any one of them singly, at once
furnishes us, as we have already hinted, with evidence of the quality of
the guano examined, without the expense and trouble of a complete analysis
of this substance. Urea and uric acid are only to be found in the very
best samples of guano, and their presence is a positive proof of entire
soundness and superior quality. The other valuable portions of guano are
potassa and phosphoric acid (phosphate of lime chiefly); the rest are of
little importance. (See 2 _c_, _above_.)

=GUARANA= (Grimault & Co., Paris). 12 migrain powders, each weighing 1.75
grammes, consisting of guarana, but perhaps also containing an admixture
of cocoa seeds, neither prepared nor roasted. (Hager.)

=GUARANA'.= _Syn._ PAULLINIA, BRAZILIAN COCOA. An alimentary and medicinal
substance prepared from the seeds of _Paullinia sorbilis_, a Brazilian
tree. The dried seeds, deprived of their aril, are pounded and kneaded
into a mass, which is afterwards made into oblong or rounded cakes
(GUARANA BREAD). These cakes are used as we use chocolate--mixed with
water and sugar, and drank as a beverage. In Brazil this beverage is
largely consumed, both on account of its nutritive qualities, and for its
stomachic, febrifugal, and aphrodisiac effects. See CHOCOLATE, &c., also
_below_.

=GUARANINE'.= A crystalline substance discovered by M. Martius in guarana.
It appears to be identical with caffeine, the active principle of coffee
and tea.

=GUD'GEON.= The _Cyprinus gobeo_ (Linn.), a small fresh-water fish, common
almost everywhere. The white is considered the best. It was formerly used
in medicine.

=GUM.= _Syn._ GUMMI, L. The general term for an important class of
vegetable products. Gums are more or less soluble in cold water, but
insoluble in alcohol, ether, and oils. They are obtained from certain
plants in amorphous masses; most of them exude spontaneously, or on
puncturing the bark. The most perfect type of this class is the substance
called GUM ARABIC, or GUM ACACIA. The gums are employed as demulcents in
medicines, and are used as cements, and for giving stiffness and gloss to
textile fabrics. Among the vulgar the term is often incorrectly applied to
the resins and gum resins.

=Gum Acacia.= _Syn._ GUM ARABIC; ACACIAE GUMMI (B. P.); G. ARABICUM, G.
ACACIA, ACACIA (Ph. L.), L. "From various species" (of _Acacia_) "yielding
gum" (Ph. L. & E.), chiefly _Acacia arabica_ and _A. vera_. "Whitish or
yellowish, transparent or cracked on the surface, and opaque; brittle; it
dissolves freely in water." (Ph. L.) It is scentless, and may be bleached
by exposure to the sun and air, at the temperature of boiling water. Sp.
gr. 1.355. (Ure.) The pure soluble principle of gum Arabic is termed
ARABIN (which _see_). BARBARY or MOROCCO GUM, GUM SENEGAL, and EAST INDIA
GUM, are inferior commercial varieties of the same substance from other
species of _Acacia_ (see _below_).

Powdered gum Arabic (PULVIS ACACIAE) is frequently adulterated with flour
or farina, or with Senegal or other inferior gums. The first may be
detected by agitating a little of the powder with cold water; the pure gum
dissolves rapidly, whilst the starch or flour falls to the bottom of the
vessel. Or, a little of the powder may be mixed with boiling water, and
when cold, tested with tincture of iodine; if it contains starch or flour,
the paste will assume a blue colour. If it contains cherry-tree gum or
tragacanth, it will be only partly soluble in cold water, and the paste
will be partly coloured, and more or less interspersed with gelatinous
clots.

For the detection of dextrin in gum Arabic Hager finds that when some of
the adulterated article is placed in a glass dish, with vertical sides,
and a solution of ferric chloride, density 1.48, diluted with an equal
volume of water, is poured over it until the grains are just covered, in
the course of a minute or so that particles of gum Arabic will adhere to
the bottom of the vessel, whilst the grains of dextrin do not.

Much of the white gum Arabic of the shops is formed by bleaching gum
Senegal, by what is called 'Picciotto's process.' The gum is dissolved in
water, and sulphurous acid gas passed through the solution. The liquid is
afterwards boiled to expel the sulphurous acid, a little of which,
however, still remains behind. To obtain the gum in a still whiter state,
carbonate of baryta is added, and after agitation the mixture is filtered;
it is afterwards shaken with gelatinous alumina, again filtered, and
evaporated. The product (BLEACHED GUM) is very white, but lacks the
peculiar toughness and adhesiveness of the best gum acacia.

=Gum, Barbary.= _Syn._ MOROCCO GUM. An inferior product, consisting of a
mixture of several Acacia gums. It is exported from Mogador.

=Gum, Bassora.= A solution of yellowish gum brought from the neighbourhood
of Bassora. It differs from most gums in being nearly insoluble in water.
The plant yielding it is believed to be a species of _Mimosa_. It contains
the principle BASSORIN, which also exists in gum tragacanth.

=Gum, Bleached.= See GUM ARABIC (_above_).

=Gum, Brit'ish.= _Syn._ DEXTRIN, STARCH GUM. Starch converted by the
action of acids, diastase, or heat, into a soluble substance resembling
gum.

_Prep._ 1. Malt (crushed small), 1 lb.; warm water, 2 galls.; mix, heat
the whole to 145 deg. Fahr., add of potato starch 5 lbs., raise the heat to
160 deg. or 165 deg. Fahr., and mash for about 25 minutes, or until the liquid
becomes thin and clear; it must then be instantly run off, and raised to
the boiling point to prevent the formation of sugar; after boiling for 3
or 4 minutes the whole must be filtered, and evaporated to dryness by a
steam heat.

2. By exposing dry potato starch, in a stove, to a heat of about 400 deg.
Fahr. Yellow and inferior.

3. (M. Payen.) Dry starch, 1 ton, is moistened uniformly with concentrated
nitric acid, 4-1/2 lbs. (diluted with), water, q. s., and the paste or
dough is made up into small bricks or loaves, and dried in a stove; it is
next reduced to coarse powder, and exposed in a stove-room for some time
to a current of air at 160 deg. to 165 deg. Fahr.; it is next ground, sifted, and
exposed, as before, to a heat of about 228 deg. Fahr.; it is, lastly, ground,
and passed through the 'bolting machine.' Very white and superior. This
process has been patented in France by M. Henze.

4. (Pinel.) Water, 100 galls., nitric acid, 1/2 gall., and hydrochloric
acid, 1/2 pint, are mixed together, and so much potato starch is mixed as
will form a thin paste; in two hours the liquid is drained off, and the
solid matter is made up into lumps, which are dried by a gentle heat in a
stove-room; they are next coarsely pulverised, and the powder is exposed
on three successive days to the respective temperatures of 100 deg., 150 deg., and
190 deg. Fahr.; the whole is then sifted, and, lastly, exposed to a heat
ranging from 300 deg. to 350 deg. Fahr. Darker coloured than the last. To give it
the appearance of gum Arabic, it is made into a paste with water
containing 1% of nitric acid, and after being spread on copper plates in
layers 3/4 to 1 inch thick, it is exposed to a stove heat ranging from
240 deg. to 300 deg. Fahr.

_Prop., &c._ White; insipid; transparent; friable; soluble in cold water,
and in dilute spirit; insoluble in alcohol and ether; its solution yields
a precipitate with acetate of lead. Iodine commonly turns commercial
dextrin blue, but does not affect the colour of pure dextrin. It is
distinguished from ordinary gum by its right-handed polarization of light,
and by yielding oxalic but not mucic acid, when treated with nitric acid.

Dextrin is nutritive, emollient, and agglutinant. In France it is largely
employed by the pastry-cooks and confectioners, and in medicine as a
substitute for gum. The French surgeons also commonly employ it as a
'stiffening' for the splints used for fractured limbs. In this country it
is chiefly used as a fine dressing for muslins, silk, and other textile
fabrics, and in calico printing. Recently it has been made up into
tear-like masses, and sold for gum Arabic, to which, however, it is vastly
inferior as an agglutinant. See DEXTRIN.

=Gum, Cherry-tree.= _Syn._ FRUIT-TREE GUM, PLUM-TREE G.; GUMMI CERASI, G.
PRUNI, L. An exudation from the stems of cherry, plum, and some other of
the _Rosaceae_. It is only partly soluble in water. It contains CERASIN
(which _see_).

=Gum, East India.= This product, which consists of inferior kinds of gum
acacia, is chiefly exported from Bombay, having been previously conveyed
there from the coast of Arabia. It varies greatly in quality. Some samples
are quite unfitted for making gum-water.

=Gum, Insoluble.= See BASSORA GUM, CHERRY-TREE GUM, and GUM TRAGACANTH.

=Gum, Seed.= _Syn._ GUMMI SEMINUM, L. A species of soluble gum extracted
from the seed of the flax (linseed), quince, &c.

=Gum, Senegal.= This product, which is largely exported from Portendie,
Sierra Leone, and the French settlements on the Senegal, ranks next in
quality to gum acacia, and for many purposes, as calico-printing for
instance, it answers equally well. The transparent and light-coloured
pieces are frequently picked out and sold as gum Arabic.

=Gum Trag'acanth.= _Syn._ TRAGACANTH, GUM DRAGON; GUMMI TRAGACANTHA, G.
DRACONIS, TRAGACANTHA (Ph. L.), L. The gummy exudation of the _Astragalus
verus_, hardened by the air. When digested in water, it swells
considerably, a portion is dissolved, and the whole combines to form a
thick mucilage. It is totally soluble in boiling water, when some change
is supposed to take place in it; a great portion, however, afterwards
separates. Sp. gr. 1.384. It is chiefly employed in calico-printing, and
by shoemakers and lozenge-makers; by the latter to give toughness to the
saccharine mass.

Powdered tragacanth is often adulterated with flour of starch, and not
unfrequently with the commoner varieties of gum Arabic. According to M.
Planche, a mixture of pulverised tragacanth and gum Arabic forms, with
water, a thinner mucilage than the same quantity of either of these gums
alone. This fraud may be detected as follows:--Make a mucilage of the
suspected gum, and add thereto a few drops (2 or 3 to the dr.) of
alcoholic tincture of guaiacum, taking care to stir it all the while. If
the sample contains any gum Arabic, the mixture, in the course of a few
minutes, assumes a fine blue colour, whilst it does not change colour if
the gum tragacanth is pure, 5% of gum arabic can be thus detected. When
the quantity is very small, one to four hours may elapse before the colour
is developed. Starch and flour are detected in the manner noticed under
GUM ARABIC.

=Gum, Turkey.= Various qualities of gum acacia are sold under this name.

=GUM RES'INS.= _Syn._ GUMMI RESINAE, L. Vegetable products in which the
properties of gum and resin are combined. They are partly soluble in
water, and partly in alcohol. Many of them form a species of emulsion when
triturated with the former fluid. The principal gum resins are AMMONIACUM,
ASSAF[OE]TIDA, BDELLIUM, GALBANUM, GAMBOGE, MYRRH, OLIBANUM, OPOPONAX,
SAGAPENUM, and SCAMMONY.

=GUN BAR'RELS.= See BROWNING.

=GUN COT'TON.= See PYROXYLIN.

=GUN MET'AL.= An alloy containing 90.5% of copper and 9.5% of tin, used
for casting pieces of ordnance (erroneously termed 'brass guns'), also
those parts of machinery which are subjected to considerable friction. See
ALLOYS, BRONZE, STEREO-METAL, &c.

=GUN'POWDER.= This substance is a mechanical mixture of saltpetre,
charcoal, and sulphur. It is seldom prepared on the small scale.

_Prep._ The saltpetre having been trebly refined, by boiling, skimming,
filtering, and crystallising, is melted into cakes, which are then brushed
to remove any adhering grit or dirt, broken into pieces with a mallet,
ground to a fine powder in a mill, and sifted through a fine bolting sieve
of brass wire. The charcoal is that of the alder or willow, and is
carefully burnt, as already described, and is then reduced to powder. The
sulphur is refined by distillation, and ground to the same fineness as the
charcoal and saltpetre. The ingredients are weighed out in the proper
proportions, and mixed together in a machine consisting of a wooden drum,
having a shaft passing through its centre, to which numerous 'flyers' in
the shape of knife-blades are attached, the drum and flyers revolving in a
contrary direction. When mixed, the charge is carried to the
'incorporating mill,' where it is ground under vertical iron
'mill-stones,' with a small quantity of distilled water, until the
ingredients are thoroughly incorporated. The product of this operation is
then pressed into a hard cake, which is next broken into pieces,
granulated by means of sieves, and after being 'glazed' by friction, and
the dust separated, is dried, with proper precautions, in a stove heated
to about 130 deg. by steam pipes.

The proportions of saltpetre, charcoal, and sulphur, used for different
kinds of powder, differ very slightly. In 'sporting powders' the
proportion of saltpetre is generally from 1 to 3% greater than in the
Government powders. In 'miners' powders' it is about 10% less, an excess
of sulphur being used. The following are the proportions adopted by
European powers:

           Saltpetre.    Charcoal.    Sulphur.
  England     75           15          10
  France      75           12.5        12.5
  Austria     75           15          10
  Prussia     75           13.5        11.5
  Russia      73.78        13.59       12.63
  Spain       76.47        10.78       12.75
  Sweden      76           15           9
                (Capt. Jervis-White Jervis.)

_Obs._ The quality of gunpowder is best estimated by actual trial of its
power and cleanliness in use. It should be dry, hard, and free from dust;
the grains should be of a uniform size, and glossy, and the colour a
dark-grey or brownish-grey, not perfectly black. A very little placed on a
piece of paper and fired should instantly explode with a flash, and
neither leave an appreciable residue on the paper nor burn it. Dried by
the heat of boiling water, or in vacuo, it should not lose more than 1/2
to 1% of its weight. Damp powder rapidly 'fouls' the gun. Gunpowder,
containing more than 7% of water, does not recover its strength by simply
drying it. The sp. gr. ranges between 1.795 and 1.800.

Karolyi succeeded in analysing the gases of gunpowder which had been fired
in conditions closely resembling those which occur in artillery practice.
For this purpose he enclosed a charge of powder in an iron cylinder of
such strength that it just burst when the powder was fired by means of the
electric spark. This charged cylinder was suspended in a hollow spherical
bomb, from which the air was exhausted before firing.

After the explosion had been produced, the gases and the solid residue of
the powder were submitted to analysis. The results obtained were the
following:[343]

[Footnote 343: 'Phil. Mag.,' 1863.]

        1. _Composition of the Powder used._

                       Ordnance Powder.   Small Arms Powder.
             Nitre          73.78            77.15
             Sulphur        12.80             8.63
            {Carbon         10.88            11.78
  Charcoal. {Hydrogen        0.38             0.42
            {Oxygen          1.82             1.79
            {Ash             0.31             0.28

                            99.97           100.05

        2. _Products of Combustion by Weight._

                                 Ordnance Powder.  Small Arms Powder.
           { Nitrogen                   9.77 }         { 10.06 }
           { Carbonic anhydride        17.39 }         { 21.79 }
  Gaseous. { Carbonic oxide             2.64 }         {  1.47 }
           { Hydrogen                   0.11 }  30.58  {  0.14 } 34.18
           { Sulph. hydrogen            0.27 }         {  0.23 }
           { Marsh gas                  0.40 }         {  0.49 }

           { Ammonic sesquicarbonate   2.68 }         {  2.66 }
           { Potassic sulphate         36.95 }         { 36.17 }
           {  "       carbonate        19.40 }         { 20.78 }
  Solid.   {  "       hyposulphite      2.85 }  69.25  {  1.77 } 65.14
           {  "       sulphide          0.11 }         {  0.00 }
           {Charcoal                    2.57 }         {  2.60 }
           {Sulphur                     4.69 }         {  1.16 }
           Loss.                        0.17              0.68

                                      100.00            100.00

        3. _Products of Combustion by Volume in 100 of Gas._

                        Ordnance Powder. Small Arms Powder.
  Nitrogen                    37.58 }       { 35.33 }
  Carbonic anhydride          42.74 }       { 48.90 }
  Carbonic oxide              10.19 }       {  5.18 }
  Hydrogen                     5.93 }  100  {  6.90 } 100
  Sulphuretted hydrogen        0.86 }       {  0.67 }
  Marsh gas                    2.70 }       {  3.02 }

It will be seen from the above figures that in addition to the generation
of a considerable amount of carbonic anhydride (carbonic acid) by the
combustion of gunpowder, there is liberated at the same time a large
quantity of solid matter, in the form of sulphate and carbonate of potash,
sulphide of potassium, sulphur, charcoal, &c. This will explain why the
air of mines is so prejudicial to the health of the miner, particularly
when he is engaged in blasting operations, these being carried on in a
more or less confined space. See AIR, VITIATED.

=Gunpowder, Schultze.= The subjoined account of Schultze gunpowder is a
transcription of a report communicated to the editor of the 'Field'
newspaper by Mr F. Toms, A.I.C., F.C.S. After referring to a previous
communication on the same subject Mr Toms proceeds as follows:--I have
carried out some further experiments, with the aid (by Dr Frankland's kind
permission) of apparatus more suited to my requirements than that
previously at my disposal; and I now proceed to lay before you the results
of these experiments, and the conclusions to which they have led me,
respecting the powders formerly received and the new Schultze powder, with
a sample of which you have since favoured me.

The main constituent of the Schultze gunpowder, as you are aware, is wood
fibre, which, having first been purified, is then subjected to the action
of strong nitric acid (intensified by mixture with sulphuric acid), and
thus is converted into a kind of nitro-cellulose or pyroxylin, the
ordinary form of which is gun-cotton. The wood fibre undergoes no change
in appearance by this treatment; but a change takes place in its chemical
composition, which may thus be exemplified:

       CELLULOSE                 NITRO-CELLULOSE
  (unconverted cotton or   (cotton or wood fibre treated
       wood fibre).              with nitric acid).
  Carbon          6 parts               6 parts.
  Oxygen          5  "                  5  "
  Hydrogen       10  "                  7  "  or more.
  Nitroxyl (NO_{2}) none                3  "  or less.

It will thus be seen that the sole difference between gun-cotton or
Schultze powder and ordinary cotton or wood fibre is, that some of the
hydrogen is abstracted and has its place supplied by nitroxyl--a substance
contained in nitric acid, and composed of one part of nitrogen united with
two parts of oxygen. Under the most favorable circumstances, it is
possible to replace _three_ of the ten parts of hydrogen by three of the
nitroxyl, when the substance produced is explosive, and is called from
its composition _tri_-nitro-cellulose. This is the purest form of
gun-cotton. If weaker acid is used, less hydrogen is displaced, and the
product is called _di_-nitro-cellulose or _mono_-nitro-cellulose,
according as it contains _two_ or only _one_ part of nitroxyl. These
derivatives are either feebly explosive or not explosive at all. Such are
the compounds known as photographic collodion and soluble gun cotton--the
latter name distinguishing it from pure gun-cotton, which is not soluble
in a mixture of ether and alcohol.

The Schultze powder contains both the explosive and the non-explosive
varieties of nitro-cellulose.

If the wood fibre, after being carefully purified according to the method
described in Schultze's patent of 1864, were thoroughly desiccated and
allowed to cool out of contact with air, and then dipped in acid of the
strength mentioned in the specification, there seems no theoretical
reason why an explosive powder containing at least 90% of true
tri-nitro-cellulose should not be produced. As, however, I find on
experiment that nothing like that per-centage is arrived at, I can only
conclude that, in order to moderate the violence of the explosion, the
Schultze Company secure the formation of a large per-centage of "soluble"
or less explosive nitro-compounds by merely air-drying their wood.

If this supposition be generally true, it seems probable that the sample
of Schultze powder supplied by Messrs Blissett may owe its extra explosive
force to exceptional care being taken, during the interval between the
drying and the dipping, to prevent the absorption of moisture--with the
addition, perhaps, of an increased length of exposure to the action of the
acid.

That some such variation of the ordinary procedure was carried out seems
evident from the different proportions of soluble and insoluble gun-cotton
in the specimens of Schuitze powder supplied by Messrs Blissett and Messrs
Bland; for it was found that on the washed wood fibre from each being
submitted to the action of a mixture of alcohol and ether, about one half
of the former powder and two thirds of the latter were dissolved out. This
shows that while the "Blissett" specimen contained about one half its
weight of insoluble or explosive nitro-cellulose, the "Bland" contained
only about one third--a difference which confirms the result obtained by
analysis as stated below.

The _soluble_ gun-cotton, ordinarily non-explosive, may, however, be
rendered explosive by saturating it with bodies rich in oxygen, which
promote the decomposition and complete the combustion of the fibre. Nitre
is used for that purpose, because it parts with its oxygen readily; and
nitrate of baryta is also used, because, being more stable than the nitre,
it renders the combustion more gradual than would be the case if nitre
were alone employed. When both are used, the nitre, I should think, would
start, and the nitrate of baryta continue and finish the combustion of the
powder. The amount used is, I suppose, the result of calculation and
experiment; but a powder containing little true tri-nitro-cellulose should
require more of these salts than one containing much tri-nitro-cellulose;
and an excess of the salts would lower the rate of burning of the powder.

I will now give my analysis in full of the three powders, viz.--(1) the
ordinary powder issued last season, being part of a supply obtained from
Messrs Bland, gunmakers, of the Strand; (2) some powder furnished by
Messrs Blissett, of Holborn, and alluded to in their letter in the 'Field'
of Jan. 19th last, as having damaged a gun made by them; and (3) some of
the new powder of 1878, as used at the 'Field' trial of explosives in May
last.

                                           1877                   1878
                                          Bland's. Blissett's.  Trial or
                                                                  New.

  Moisture, per cent.                       2.18      2.39        2.97
            {Nitrate of baryta, per cent.  21.50     16.59       22.32
  Extracted {  "       potash, per cent.   11.46     10.46        6.47
  by water. {Yellow coloured organic
            {substance, trace of chlorides,
            {&c., undetermined

            {The converted wood fibre    }
  Insoluble {  (nitro-cellulose) then    }
  in water. {   remaining contained the  }  5.0       6.0         2.95
            {   following per-centage of }
            {   mineral matter           }

The converted wood fibre (after allowing for extraneous mineral matter)
possessed the following per-centage composition. I place for comparison
Professor Abel's determination of the composition of tri-nitro-cellulose,
and two of the impurities found along with it, in a parallel column.

          Bland's.  Blissett's.  Trial or New.  Tri-nitro-     Impurities.
                                                Cellulose.
  Carbon    28.75     28.07        28.12          24.24       29.20  30.50
  Hydrogen   3.49      3.65         3.54           2.36        --     2.91
  Nitrogen  10.80     15.60        11.66          14.14       11.85   --
  Oxygen    56.06     52.68        56.68          59.26        --     --

These powders exploded at a temperature of about 190 deg. C. (374 deg. F.), the
different samples varying but slightly. Pure gun-cotton is stated by
Professor Abel to explode at 150 deg. C. (302 deg. F.); and black powders are
said, by different authorities, to explode at various temperatures between
500 deg. and 600 deg. F., according to the variation in their composition and
manufacture.

In addition to the difference in chemical composition of these Schultze
powders, I would point out that there is a difference in density--the
Blissett being heaviest, the Bland next, and the New the lightest of the
three. I think this fact also has some bearing on the violence of the
explosion. In black powders, I believe, a dense powder, speaking
generally, is stronger than a lighter one; and the Schultze patent states
that hard woods make more explosive powders--not, I take it, because the
composition is thereby altered, but because a denser powder is produced.
It would appear to me, from the above analyses, that the new trial powder
should contain rather more explosive force than the Bland variety, though
considerably less than the Blissett. The result may, however, be modified
by the difference in density of the powders; and your practical
experiments will show how far this agrees with the results of the
shooting.

I have hitherto only spoken of the explosive force of the powder; now I
will touch on another point--its tendency to spontaneous decomposition.
Knowing that, in the case of gun-cotton, its stability is injured by a
small proportion of resin and other organic impurities, and by the
presence of free mineral acids. I did not expect to find this powder (made
from a less pure kind of cellulose, from which also it must be somewhat
difficult to wash all traces of acid) equal in stability to gun-cotton;
and on subjecting the three kinds of Schultze powder to the Government
'heat test' of 150 deg. F. (with a minimum of 10 minutes' duration), it was
found that the

  New or Trial (1878) Powder stood the test 12 m.
  'Bland's' sample            "              8 "
  'Blissett's' sample         "              7 "

This shows that the 'new' powder is very stable, as it stood the test for
two minutes beyond the Government minimum, while the other two samples
were a good way below it. The officials at Waltham Abbey would accept no
gun-cotton which did not stand the test for ten minutes; and I have seen
the best gun-cotton stand it for fifteen.

Whether the loose granulated condition of the Schultze powder, when
stored, is sufficient to neutralise this inferiority in purity, and render
a sample of Schultze, which only stands the test of seven minutes, as
little liable to spontaneous combustion as gun-cotton which stands the
test for ten minutes, there is at present no evidence to show.

To carry out this 'heat test' properly, some practice is required; so, in
order to put the matter beyond doubt, I called in the assistance of my
friend Mr Arthur Linnell, F.C.S., chemist to the Gun-Cotton Company,
Stowmarket, a gentleman who uses the test daily, and who carried out the
above three experiments strictly after the manner adopted by himself and
by the Government officials.

In addition to Mr Linnell's experiments, I noted that the aqueous extract
of 'Blissett' was very faintly acid; that when heated in a chest at 195 deg.
F. moist blue litmus was very quickly reddened.

I think this serious defect (want of stability) is due to want of care in
the washing; and I base this opinion on the following facts:

(1) The 'Bland' and 'Blissett' samples (the powders of least stability)
are of a deeper tint than the 'new' (due to the soluble yellow impurity
before mentioned). By continued washing in warm water they become pale,
like the more carefully prepared new powder, and the yellow substance is
dissolved away. Hence the lighter colour of the 'new' (and most stable)
indicates it has less of this organic impurity.

(2) Sulphuric and nitric acids are used in the dipping of the powder, but
should be entirely washed out, as they promote spontaneous decomposition.
If left in, the sulphuric acid will, when the salts are added, decompose
the nitrate of baryta, forming insoluble baric sulphate and free nitric
acid.

On experiment I ascertained that the abnormally large quantity of mineral
matter or ash (5 and 6 per cent.) found in the insoluble part of the
'Bland' and 'Blissett' powders _is_ due to baric sulphate, and I think the
acidity of the aqueous extract is due to the nitric acid thus set free.

Had this baric sulphate been present in the new powder, I should have
thought it was purposely formed in all to prevent access of moisture; but,
not finding this substance in this carefully prepared sample, I attribute
its presence in the other cases to carelessness on the part of the
workmen.

I should state that all these powders consisted of a granulated and
consolidated pulp. This improvement must, I think, have considerable
advantages over the sawdust form previously adopted by the Schultze
Company in as much as it facilitates a more thorough purification being
carried out, and produces a more homogeneous and equal powder. It is
possible, too, that working with pulp may be of advantage, inasmuch as the
company may now, by varying the pressure in forming the cake, obtain
grains of any required density.

In conclusion, I may say that, in my opinion the most difficult task which
the Schultze Company have had to encounter is that of obtaining
uniformity of strength in their explosive; and the 'Blisset' sample of
their powder may he looked upon as an experimental batch in which (by
altering the mode of procedure in some such manner as I have indicated)
they made a powder with a large per-centage of tri-nitro-cellulose, thus
producing a more rapidly burning substance, and consequently a more
violent explosion.

Taking all things into consideration, I think the Schultze Company, in
manufacturing a nitro-explosive which gives the uniformity of shooting
power shown in your recent experiments, have worked out a most troublesome
problem with remarkable success. The difficulty of obtaining such results
is evidenced by the fact that so many inventions of a somewhat similar
character have been abandoned for sporting purposes from a deficiency in
this respect.

But, however difficult it may be to manufacture a powder giving uniform
shooting, it is evidently possible, with suitable care to produce (as the
'new' Schultze shows) a wood powder which is perfectly safe and stable, as
far as spontaneous decomposition is concerned. The company, therefore, if
they have not already done so, ought to take means to prevent powder of
the low stability of the 'Bland' and 'Blissett' samples being again issued
from their works.

P.S.--Since writing the above I have examined cursorily a sample of the
'Dittmar' wood powder, an American variety of 'Schultze,' used by Captain
Bogardus in some of his recent shooting competitions. The powder is
somewhat darker in tint, and of slightly larger grain, than the Schultze.
In density it is intermediate between 'Bland's' and the 'new' powder; and
the charge in a twenty-bore cartridge was forty-two grains. This powder
would seem to be made from solid cubes of wood (not a pulped mass like the
present 'granulated' Schultze, or of sawdust splinters like the old
so-called 'cube' Schultze). It contains no nitrate of baryta, but has a
small quantity of nitrate of potash and soda. Possessing, as it would
seem, therefore, a much smaller proportion of oxidizing salts than the
English Schultze, it should contain, to make up for this loss of force, a
larger proportion of explosive pyroxylin; but this is a point I have not
experimentally determined. ('Field,' August 3rd, 1878, No. 1336, p. 143.)

=Gunpowder, White.= _Syn._ BLASTING POWDER. _Prep._ 1. See BLASTING
POWDER, No. 3.

2. Yellow prussiate of potash and white sugar, of each 1 part; chlorate of
potassa, 2 parts; powder each separately, and mix them well, but
carefully, with a bone or wooden knife. It may be granulated like
gunpowder, by making the powder into a paste with a little water, and
pressing the mass through a parchment sieve.[344]

[Footnote 344: See the precautions noticed under BLASTING POWDER, page
230.]

=GUN'JAH.= See HEMP (Indian).

=GUT.= _Syn._ FISHING GUT, SILKWORM G. This is obtained from the _Bombyx
mori_ (Linn.) or silkworm caterpillar. _Prep._ The silkworms, when just
ready to spin, are steeped in strong vinegar for 12 hours in warm weather,
or 2 or 3 in cold weather, and are then broken in half, and stretched out
as far as possible on a board, furnished with slits or pegs to hold them;
in this state they are allowed to dry in the sun or a warm place.

_Obs._ Used by anglers. The worms may be known to be going to spin by
refusing food, and by having a fine silken thread hanging from the mouth.

=GUT'TA PERCHA.= The concrete juice of the _Isonandro Gutta_, a tree
growing only in the Malayan Archipelago, and of other species of the same
genus. The stem of the gutta-percha tree grows to the diameter of 5 or 6
feet, and on being notched yields a milky juice, which, after exposure to
the air for some time, solidifies, forming the gutta percha of commerce.
It arrives in this country in irregular blocks of some pounds in weight,
usually containing a large portion of impurities in the form of pieces of
wood, stones, and earth. To prepare this crude product for manufacturing
into useful articles, the blocks are first cut into slices, and then torn
into shreds. These are softened by hot water, and kneaded in a
'masticator,' the stones, earth, and other impurities, being gradually
washed away by water. After several hours the gutta percha is found to be
kneaded into a perfectly homogeneous mass, which is rolled or drawn into
sheets, bands, or tubes, as required.

_Prop., &c._ Gutta percha is a tough, inelastic substance, becoming soft
and plastic at 212 deg. Fahr., at which temperature two pieces may be firmly
welded together. It is one of the best insulators of electricity, is
impervious to moisture, and resists the action of acids and alkalies to a
great extent. Its best solvents are benzol, chloroform, bisulphuret of
carbon, rectified mineral naphtha, and rectified oil of turpentine. All
these dissolve it readily. According to the analysis of Payen, the
purified gutta percha of commerce consists of 75 to 828 of chemically pure
gutta percha, which is insoluble in ether and alcohol, and a white and a
yellow resin, soluble in boiling alcohol.

_Uses._ These are numerous and varied. No substance, perhaps, with the
exception of caoutchouc, has been 'tortured' to so many different
purposes. Its perfect plasticity when warm, and its capability of
receiving the most delicate impressions, render it invaluable in many
cases where india rubber would be useless. Beautiful mouldings, picture
frames, and a number of ornamental articles, are made from it. To the
chemist and photographer it is of great use as a material for making
bottles, carboys, photographic baths, and voltaic battery cells. One of
the most important uses to which it has been applied is for enclosing the
metallic wires used for telegraphic purposes. Its indestructibility by
water, its plasticity, and high insulating power, have rendered it
particularly valuable for this purpose. At the International Exhibition of
1862 the Gutta Percha Company exhibited one mile of covered wire perfectly
insulated, which was hardly thicker than common sewing cotton. Gutta
percha may be rolled into thin transparent sheets, which, being perfectly
impervious to moisture, are well adapted for surgical purposes. Again, a
solution of gutta percha in chloroform forms an excellent dressing for
incised wounds, and a protection for abraded surfaces, burns, &c. It is
used in the same way as collodion.

=Gutta Percha, Purified.= Dr Cattell, of London, has succeeded in
purifying gutta percha so perfectly from all extraneous matter, that it
presents the appearance of ivory. The raw material is dissolved in a
certain solvent, and the solution most carefully filtered until it leaves
on evaporation the gutta percha in a pure milk-white condition.

=GYP'SUM.= This is native sulphate of lime. When baked, to deprive it of
water, and ground, it forms PLASTER OF PARIS. Gypsum is an excellent
manure for certain soils.


=HAARBALSAM, Vegetabilischer--Vegetable Hair Balsam= (Joh. Andr.
Hauschild, Leipsic). A decoction of burdock root, containing a little
spirit and coloured green with indigo. (Koenig.) Hager analysed a turbid
brownish fluid, which deposited a brown precipitate on standing, and when
filtered consisted of a decoction of burdock root with 20 per cent. of
spirit.

=Haarbalsam Mailandischer--Mailand's Hairbalsam= (Kreller, Nuremberg).
Beef marrow, 40 parts; cinchona extract, 5 parts; balsam of Peru, 1 part;
storax, 1 part; oil of bergamot, 1 part; oil of lemons, 1/2 part. (Hager.)

=Haarbalsam Ostindischer--East Indian Hairbalsam= (Dr Ayer). Contains
sugar of lead, sulphur, glycerin, oil of lavender, and water.

=Haarbalsam= (J. F. Sehwarzlose Soehne, Berlin). A brownish-yellow
spirituous aromatic fluid, having nearly the composition of eau de
Cologne, with liquid storax, carbonate of potash, and a fat--perhaps
derived from cantharides. (Hager.)

=Haarbalsam= (A. Marquart, Leipsic). A mixture of 83 grammes water
perfumed with eau de Cologne, with 12 grammes glycerin, 4.25 grammes milk
of sulphur, and 1.2 gramme lead nitrate.

=HAD'DOCK.= A small sea-fish, allied to the cod, and esteemed an excellent
article of food. It is the _Gadus aeglefinus_ of Linnaeus. Split, smoked,
and dried, it is common in the smaller shops of London.

=HAEMATEM'ESIS.= In _pathology_, vomiting of blood. See STOMACH AFFECTIONS.

=HAEM'ATITE.= _Syn._ HEMATITE. In _mineralogy_, one of the most important
iron ores. Two kinds are distinguished, the red, which is an anhydrous
peroxide of iron, and the brown, which is the hydrated peroxide.

=HAEMATOCRYS'TALLIN.= A crystalline substance obtained by the action of
oxygen and afterwards carbonic acid on the 'clot' of blood.

=HAEMATOS'IN.= _Syn._ HAEMATIN, RED PIGMENT OF BLOOD. The red colouring
principle of the blood. It is not known in a state of purity. It differs
from the other animal principles in containing, as an essential
ingredient, the sesquioxide of iron.

=HAEMATOX'YLIN.= A principle obtained by Chevreul from common logwood
(_Haematoxylon campechianum_), and on which its colour appears to depend.

_Prep._ 1. Infuse logwood chips in water, at a temperature of about 130 deg.
Fahr., for 12 hours, filter, and evaporate to dryness in a water bath;
digest the residuum in rectified spirit for 24 hours, again filter and
evaporate; then add a little water; again gently evaporate and set aside
the solution in a cold place that crystals may form; these must be washed
in rectified spirit and dried.

2. Digest powdered hard extract of logwood in rectified spirit, and
proceed as last.

3. Powdered logwood is mixed with sand and digested for several days in
pure ether; the resulting liquid is filtered, evaporated to a syrup, and
set aside to crystallise.

_Prop., &c._ Brilliant reddish-white or straw-yellow crystals, soluble in
boiling water, forming an orange-red solution which turns yellow as it
cools, but resumes its former colour on being heated. Alkalies in excess
change its colour successively into purple, violet, and brown; acids
brighten it; with the metallic oxides it forms compounds having a blue,
purple, or violet colour.

=HAEMOP'TYSIS.= In _pathology_, spitting of blood. It generally arises from
extreme fulness of the blood-vessels of the lungs, or the rupture of
blood-vessels, as a consequence of ulceration; but sometimes it is induced
by excessive exertion or external violence. Depletion, aperients,
acidulous and astringent drinks, and nauseants, are the usual remedies.
Acetate of lead, in small doses, has been recommended for this affection.
When this substance is given, it should be accompanied with a sufficient
quantity of free acetic acid, to prevent its being converted into the
poisonous carbonate of lead in the system.

=HAEM'ORRHAGE.= _Syn._ HEMORRHAGE; HAEMORRHAGIA, L. A bleeding or flow of
blood. Bleeding may be divided into active, passive, and
accidental.--Active haemorrhage is that arising from a full state of the
vessels, or plethora.--Passive haemorrhage, from general debility of the
system, and of the blood-vessels in particular.--Accidental haemorrhage,
from external violence, as blows, wounds, &c. The first generally requires
depletion, and the second the usual treatment to establish the general
health and vigour of the body. The bleeding from wounds, if extensive,
should be arrested by tying the ruptured blood-vessels; or where this
cannot be done, and in less important cases, by the application of
styptics, as creasote, sulphate of iron, infusion of galls, compound
tincture of benzoin, &c.

=HAIR.= _Syn._ CAPILLUS, PILUS, L. The hair of the human head has
continually formed a subject for the chisel of the sculptor, the pencil of
the artist, and the lay of the poet. Nor is this surprising, since all the
features of the face, as well as the head it covers, derive from it
additional finish and unequalled grace. The hair is, indeed, one of the
greatest auxiliaries of personal beauty, and imparts to it some of its
principal charms. All nations, in all ages of the world, have been
unanimous in their admiration of luxuriant and flowing or gracefully
arranged hair.

Of all organic substances, hair is the one least liable to suffer
spontaneous change. It is also less affected by aqueous liquids than most
other substances. Hence its value in various branches of the useful arts.

The preservation of the hair of the head, independently of its connection
with personal beauty, is a matter of the utmost importance in relation to
hygiene. In other parts of this work, we have referred to its management
under various conditions, but a few observations may be added here.

When the hair is in a weakly state, and either falls off or grows feebly,
frequently cutting it will be found of the greatest service. "In the
arrangement of the hairs, on the surface of the body, it might be inferred
that little existed to excite attention; but this is not the fact, if we
are to judge by the careful investigations to which the subject has given
rise. The hair-tubes are not placed perpendicularly, but obliquely, in the
skin; hence the direction of the hairs, after their escape from the tubes,
is in the same sense inclined towards the surface; and the 'set' of the
hair, from the root to the point, is governed by a law as precise as that
which regulates any other of the secondary vital functions. Thus, on the
head, the hair radiates from a single point, the crown, to every part of
the circumference, making a gentle sweep, behind towards the left and in
front to the right. The direction of this sweep is naturally indicated on
the heads of children, and is that in which the hair is turned," (Eras.
Wilson.) The same occurs on the face and other parts of the body. In
making our toilet, this natural arrangement of the hair should be
interfered with as little as possible. Combing it or banding it in an
opposite direction to that which it naturally assumes, is highly
prejudicial to its healthy growth, and if long persevered in, leads to its
premature and rapid decay. The practice now common among ladies, of
throwing the hair from the forehead towards the back of the head, is of
this reprehensible character.

In addition to our remarks elsewhere, we may here observe, that all the
various systems proposed for strengthening or restoring the hair depend
for their efficacy upon simple excitation or stimulation of the skin.
Friction with the hair-brush, and the use of the ordinary hair-oils,
pomades, and washes, are of this kind. The various advertised nostrums for
reproducing or restoring the hair are either stimulants or rubefacients of
more or less activity, or are emollients, which are directed to be applied
by friction, in such a manner as to set up a considerable amount of
irritation. When the affection depends on the languid circulation of blood
in the part, this treatment often succeeds; but when the hair-bulbs are
withered or decayed, or the scalp much attenuated, the restoration of the
hair is an impossibility. See BALDNESS.

=HAIR COSMETICS.= Under this head are included all preparations which are
used for beautifying, preserving, or restoring the hair. These are fully
described in different parts of this work, and we shall here merely name
the principal heads under which they will be found. The hard pomatums used
for keeping the hair, moustache, and whiskers, in form, and sometimes to
colour them at the same time, are noticed under COSMETIQUE; the
mucillaginous preparations for stiffening the hair, under FIXATURE; the
compounds for removing superfluous hairs, under DEPILATORY; the
applications for the cure and prevention of baldness, under POMADES and
WASHES; and those employed to cleanse or beautify the hair under the last
two heads, and under HAIR DYES and OILS.

=HAIR DYES.= _Syn._ TINCTURA CAPPILLORUM, L. The practice of dyeing the
hair is of great antiquity; and though not so common as formerly, it is
still far from infrequent at the present day. The numerous preparations
vended for this purpose have generally a basis of lead or silver. Bismuth,
pyrogallic acid, and certain astringent vegetable juices, are also
occasionally thus employed. The following list embraces all those of any
value:

_Prep._ 1. Litharge, 1 part; fresh-slaked lime and starch, of each 2
parts; all in fine powder, and perfectly dry; mix, and keep the compound
in well-corked bottles. This powder is to be made into a thin paste or
cream with water (for black), or milk (for brown), and applied to the hair
(previously freed from grease with soap and water, and dried), by means
of a sponge or brush, or the fingers; observing to rub it well into the
roots, and to pass a comb for some time through it, to ensure its coming
in contact with every part. The whole must be then covered with a moist
leaf of cotton wadding, or some brown paper several times doubled and well
damped with hot water, and allowed to remain so for 3 or 4 hours, or even
longer; or an oil-silk cap, or a bladder, may be worn, the object being
simply to prevent the evaporation of the moisture. After a sufficient time
has elapsed, the powder may be removed by rubbing it off with the fingers,
and afterwards washing it out with warm soap-and-water. A little pomatum
or hair-oil will restore the usual gloss to the hair. Another method of
operating is to apply the cream or paste as before, and then to keep
rubbing it about the hair with a brush as long as may be required,
occasionally adding a few drops of hot water to preserve the whole moist.
In this way the action of the dye is facilitated, and the process
concluded in a much shorter time.

2. Lime (slaked in the air), 2 parts; carbonate of lead (pure white lead),
1 part; mixed and applied as the last.

3. (AQUA ORIENTALIS.) From grain silver, 2 dr.; steel filings, 4 dr.;
nitric acid, 1 oz.; soft water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; digested together, the
solution being afterwards diluted with water, 3-1/2 fl. oz., and filtered.
Applied by means of a fine-toothed comb, or a half-worn tooth-brush to the
hair, previously well cleaned with soap and water, and dried.

4. (ARGENTAN TINCTURE.) From nitrate of silver, 1 dr.; eau de rose, 1 fl.
oz.; nitrate of copper, 2 gr., or q. s. to impart a slight greenish tint.
Used as the last.

5. (Dr Cattell.) Nitrate of silver, 11 dr.; nitric acid, 1 dr.; distilled
water, 1 pint; sap green, 3 dr.; gum arabic, 1-1/4 dr.; digest together.
Used as No. 3.

6. No. 1 Solution. Gallic acid, 7-1/2 gr.; acetic acid, 20 min.; distilled
water, 1 fl. oz.

No. 2 Solution. Nitrate of silver, in crystals, 30-1/2 gr.; distilled
water, 1 fl. oz.; ammonia sufficient to form the precipitate formed at
first.

7. (CHESTNUT HAIR DYE.) "We have met with the following, but do not
guarantee it:--Permanganate of potash gives the hair a beautiful
chestnut-brown colour, varying according to the strength of the solution
of the salt. A good formula is permanganate of potash, 1 dr.; powdered gum
Arabic, 2 dr.; rose water, 3 oz.; mix. Apply carefully with a tooth brush
so as to avoid staining the skin. ('Chemist and Druggist.')

8. (HAIR RESTORER.) This is in reality a dye. Sulphur, 45 gr.; acetate of
lead, 20 gr.; glycerin, 1/2 oz.; water to make up 10 oz.

9. (GOLDEN HAIR DYE, AUREOLINE.) A solution of peroxide of hydrogen in
water; containing from 3 to 6 per cent. of the peroxide.

10. (BROWN HAIR DYE.) Acetate of lead, 2 dr.; hyposulphate of soda, 1 dr.;
rose water, 14 oz.; glycerin, 2 oz. Dissolve the acetate of lead and the
hyposulphite in separate portions of the rose water; filter separately,
mix the solutions, and add the glycerin.

11. (A HARMLESS HAIR DYE. Dr Hager.) Ten parts of subnitrate of bismuth,
and 150 parts of glycerin are mixed in a glass vessel and heated in a
water bath; solution of potash is then added in small portions, and with
continued agitation, until a clear solution has been obtained, to which a
concentrated solution of citric acid is added until merely a slight
alkaline reaction is observed. Enough orange-flower water is added to make
the whole liquid weigh 300 parts; the addition of a small quantity of a
solution of an aniline colour completes the preparation.

12. (Chevallier.) Fresh-slaked lime, 5 dr.; water, 1-1/2 oz.; mix, strain
through gauze, and pour the milk into a four-ounce bottle. Next dissolve
sugar of lead, 5 dr., in water, 3 fl. oz.; add to this solution, dry
slaked lime, 1 dr., stir well together, wash the precipitate with a little
soft water, drain off the water, then add it to the milk of lime in the
bottle, and shake the whole well together, and again before use. Applied
as No. 1; but it acts much more quickly.

13. (Delcroix.) From acetate of lead, 2 oz.; prepared chalk, 3 oz.;
quicklime, 4 oz.; each in an impalpable powder. Used as No. 1.

14. (EAU D'AFRIQUE--Hopekirk.)--_a._ Nitrate of silver (cryst.), 1-1/2
dr.; distilled water, 2 fl. oz.; dissolve, and pour the solution into the
bottles labelled 'Solution No. 1,'--_b._ Liquor of potassa, 3 dr.;
sulphydrate of ammonium, 7 dr.; water, 1 fl. oz.; mix, and pour the liquid
into the bottles labelled 'Solution No. 2,' For use, the hair is moistened
by means of a small-toothed comb or tooth-brush, with the Solution No. 1,
either alone or diluted with a little water; care being taken to avoid
touching the skin, if possible. After the lapse of 8 or 10 minutes the
Solution No. 2, diluted with at least 5 times its measure of water, is
applied in the same manner, and any spots on the skin removed by rubbing
them with the corner of a napkin wetted with the liquid. The skin is then
sponged clean with a little warm water, and wiped dry, and the hair is
arranged with the comb as usual. It is better to avoid rubbing it or
washing it for a few hours. Sometimes the process is reversed, and the
liquid No. 2 applied first. In this way the stains on the skin are more
readily removed, but the dye is less permanent than when the other plan is
adopted.

15. (EAU D'EGYPTE.) Resembles No. 4 (_above_).

16. (ESSENCE OF TYRE.) Resembles the last.

17. (GRECIAN WATER.) Resembles No. 3, or 4.

18. (Dr Hanmann.) Litharge, 275 gr. (say 1 part); quicklime, 1875 gr. (or
6-3/4 parts); hair powder (or starch), 930 gr. (or 3-1/2 parts): all in
fine powder. Used as No. 1.

19. (Hewlet's.) Resembles Spencer's (No. 28).

20. (INSTANTANEOUS.) Moisten the hair first with a solution of nitrate of
silver in water (1 to 7 or 8), and then with a weak solution of
sulphydrate of ammonium. The colour of the hair, unaltered by the silver
solution, instantly turns black when moistened with the sulphuret. See EAU
D'AFRIQUE.

21. (La Forest's.) See WASHES.

22. (Orfila's.) From litharge, 3 parts; quicklime, 2 parts; starch, 1
part. The original form for this article is as follows:--Sulphate of lead,
4 parts; dry fresh-slaked lime, 5 parts; water, 30 parts; boil 1 hour,
collect the paste on a piece of calico, and apply it in a similar manner
to No. 1.

23. (POMADE DYE.)--_a._ Nitrate of silver, 1 part; nitric acid, 2 parts;
iron filings, 2 parts; mix, and let them stand together for 4 or 5 hours,
then pour them on oatmeal, 2 parts; next add, lard, 3 parts; and mix well
together.

_b._ From nitrate of silver and cream of tartar, of each 1 dr.; liquor of
ammonia, 2 dr.; dissolve, add of lard, 4 dr.; and mix well together.

24. (POUDRE D'ITALIE.) Resembles Orfila's (No. 22.)

25. (PYROGALLIC STAIN.) A weak solution of crude pyrogallic acid. Another
article sold under this name is prepared by distilling nutgalls (coarsely
powdered) in a retort, dissolving the solid acid which sublimes in a
little hot water, and after mixing this with the acid liquid which also
passes over, adding a little rectified spirit. The floating oil is then
separated and the solution filtered.

26. (Redwood.) Litharge, 2 oz.; slaked lime and powdered starch, of each 1
oz.; liquor of potassa, 2 dr.; water, q. s. to form a thick cream. Used as
No. 1.

27. (Redwood.) Liquor of potassa and distilled water, of each 1 pint; mix,
and pass sulphuretted hydrogen through the liquid until it is saturated.
Of this solution take 20 oz.; liquor of potassa, 4 oz.; mix, and label it
'Solution No. 1,' Next dissolve nitrate of silver, 1 dr., in distilled
water, 2 oz.; and label the liquid 'Solution No. 2,' Used in the same
manner as No. 8 and 20.

28. (Spencer's.) From sap green, 1/2 dr.; nitrate of silver, 1 dr.; hot
water, 1 oz. Applied as No. 3.

29. (TINCTURE OF WALNUT.) A strong tincture of the shells of green
walnuts, scented with oil of lavender.

30. (Ure.) Litharge, fresh-slaked lime, and bicarbonate of potassa, mixed
in various proportions, according to the shade of colour desired. Used
like No. 1.

31. (Warren's.) From litharge, 1 oz.; white lead, 2 oz.; quicklime (in
fine powder), 16 oz.; mix, sift through lawn, and at once bottle the
mixture. Used like No. 1. Mixed with water, it is said to dye the hair
black; with milk, brown.

32. White lead, 1 oz.; fresh slaked lime, 1-1/2 oz.; litharge and oxide of
bismuth, of each 1/2 oz.; water, 1 pint; mix, boil 15 minutes, with
frequent agitation, cool, pour it into a bottle, add of solution of
ammonia, 1/4 fl. oz., shake the whole frequently for some hours and the
next day pour off the liquid portion from the white sediment which forms
the dye. Used like No. 1. It is applied for 8 or 10 minutes for a brown;
30 minutes, or longer, for a black. For the first, it is washed off with
water containing a little common soda.

33. The juice of the bark or shell of green walnuts, applied with a
sponge. (Paulus AEgineta.)

34. A leaden comb used daily is said to darken the hair, but we have known
persons persevere in its use for months without any perceptible change
occurring. Premature baldness is a frequent consequence of its use.

_Obs._ It is right to inform the reader that all those compounds which
contain nitrate of silver stain the skin as well as the hair. These stains
may be removed, when quite recent, by rubbing them with water containing a
little sulphydrate of ammonium (see _above_) or iodide of potassium in
solution; but as this is attended with some trouble and inconvenience, the
best way is to avoid the necessity of doing so. The hair-dressers adopt
the plan of smearing hard pomatum over the skin immediately surrounding
the hair, to protect it from the dye. By very skilful manipulation, and
the observance of due precautions, the hair may be thoroughly moistened
with the above fluids, without touching the adjacent skin, but this can
only be done, in the case of the hair of the head, by a second person.
This has led to a preference being given by many to the compounds
containing lead, as the colouring matter formed in them does not stain the
skin. The hue given by the latter (when pale) is very apt to possess an
unnatural redness, but all the shades of colour given by the preparation
of silver are rich and unexceptionable. Pyrogallic acid, and the juice of
walnuts, also stain the skin, although less intensely and permanently than
nitrate of silver.

The detection of dyed hair is often a matter of importance in medico-legal
research. The presence of silver may be shown by digesting the hair in a
little weak chlorine water or hydrochloric acid, when the resulting
chloride of silver may be dissolved out with liquor of ammonia, and
submitted to the usual tests. Hair containing lead, when digested in
dilute nitric acid, gives a solution of nitrate of lead, in which form it
is readily detected. See LEAD and SILVER.

All the preceding compounds are for dyeing living hair (human);
horse-hair, bristles, &c., and other dead hair, may be readily stained by
steeping them in any of the ordinary liquid dyes, more especially those
employed for wool and silk. See POMADES, WASHES, &c.

=HAIRWASH, Golden, or Auricomus=, is a clear inodorous fluid, which is
said to dye hair blond or yellowish red, and really does so. Sold in
bottles containing 250 grammes. When exposed to the air the fluid
decomposes with time. This hair-dye is an aqueous solution of hydroxyl
contaminated with traces of baryta, and can be prepared as follows:--17
parts crystallised caustic baryta and 3 parts potassium chlorate,
intimately mixed in fine powder, are melted by a gentle heat. The mass
must be washed with cold water to remove the potassium chloride, and the
residue shaken in the cold with a solution of 8 parts glacial phosphoric
acid in 25 parts water, the whole being cooled with ice. When the peroxide
of barium is decomposed, the fluid should be decanted from the
precipitate. (Hager.)

=HALL MARKS.= The 'Hall Marks' on articles in gold and silver not only
inform us of their fineness, but furnish us with other important
particulars.

The Hall Mark (proper) denotes the place of manufacture or assay, being an
anchor, for Birmingham; a dagger or 3 wheat sheaves, for Chester;
Hibernia, for Dublin; castle and lion for Edinburgh; castle with 2 wings,
for Exeter; tree and salmon with a ring in its mouth, for Glasgow;
leopard's head for London; 3 castles, for Newcastle-on-Tyne; a crown, for
Sheffield; and five lions' heads and a cross, for York.

The Duty Mark is the head of the Sovereign, showing that the duty is paid.

The Date Mark is a letter of the alphabet, which varies every year, and
with the different companies, thus: the Goldsmith's Company of London have
used from 1716 to 1755, Roman capital letters; from 1756 to 1775, small
Roman letters; from 1766 to 1795 old English letters; from 1796 to 1815,
Roman capital letters, from A to U, omitting J; from 1816 to 1835, small
Roman letters, a to u, omitting j; from 1836, old English letters.

The Standard Mark for gold is, for England, a lion passant; Edinburgh, a
thistle; Glasgow, a lion rampant; Ireland, a harp crowned. For silver, a
figure of Britannia. If under 22 carats, gold has the figures 18.

The Manufacturer's Mark is the initials of the maker, as S. H., W. T., C.
E., &c.

=HAL'OGENS.= In _chemistry_, a name given by Berzelius to chlorine,
bromine, iodine, and fluorine. These elements unite with metals to form
compounds called 'haloid salts.'

=HAMBURGH POWDER.= The material known under this name is used to
adulterate chicory. It is composed of roasted and ground peas, coloured
with Venetian red.

=HAMS.= These are usually prepared from the legs of bacon pigs, but those
of the sheep are also sometimes used for the same purpose. SMOKED HAM is
strong eating, and rather fit for a relish than for diet, and should be
particularly avoided by the dyspeptic and by convalescents.

_Choice._ A sharp knife thrust under the bone should have a pleasant smell
when withdrawn. The recently cut fat should be hard and white, the lean
fine-grained, and of a lively red. Those short in the hock are the best.

_Curing._ An ordinary sized ham requires nearly three weeks, if wet
salted, and about a month if dry salted, to cure it perfectly. At the
expiration of this time they are ready for smoking. MUTTON HAMS should not
lie in pickle longer than 12 or 14 days.

_Cooking._ Hams should be put into the water cold, and should be gradually
heated. A ham of 14 lbs. will take about 4 hours, one of 16 lbs. will take
6-1/2 hours, and one of 20 lbs. about 5-1/2 hours, to dress it properly.
"If it is an old ham, it should be soaked for 12 hours previously."
(Soyer.)

_Pres._ Most grocers and dealers in hams enclose them, after being smoked,
in canvas, for the purpose of defending them from the attacks of the
little insect, the _Dermestes lardarius_, which, by laying its eggs in
them, soon fills them with its larvae; or maggots. This troublesome and
expensive process may be altogether superseded by the use of pyroligneous
acid, applied by means of a painter's brush.

=HANDS.= Dirty and coarse hands are no less the marks of slothfulness and
low breeding, than clean and delicate hands are those of cleanliness and
gentility. To promote the softness and whiteness of the skin, mild
emollient soaps, or those abounding in oil, should alone be used, by which
means CHAPS AND CHILBLAINS will generally be avoided. The coarse, strong
kinds of soap, or those abounding in alkali, should for a like reason be
rejected, as they tend to render the skin rough, dry, and brittle. The
immersion of the hands in alkaline lyes, or strongly acidulated water, has
a like effect. When the hands are very dirty, a little good soft soap may
be used with warm water, which will rapidly remove oily and greasy matter.
Fruit and ink stains may be taken out by immersing the hands in water
slightly acidulated with oxalic acid or a few drops of oil of vitriol, or
to which a little pearlash or chloride of lime has been added; observing
afterwards to well rinse them in clean water, and not to touch them with
soap for some hours, as any alkaline matter will bring back the stains,
after their apparent removal by all the above substances, except the last.
The use of a little chloride of lime and warm water, or Gowland's lotion,
imparts a delicate whiteness to the skin; but the former should be only
occasionally used, and should be well washed off with a little clean water
to remove its odour. Glycerine employed in the same manner renders the
skin soft, white, and supple. The use of a little sand or powdered pumice
stone with the soap will generally remove the roughness of the skin
frequently induced by exposure to cold. The hands may be preserved dry,
for delicate work, by rubbing a little club moss (LYCOPODIUM), in fine
powder, over them. A small quantity of this substance sprinkled over the
surface of a basin of water will permit the hand to be plunged to the
bottom of the basin without its becoming wet.

=HANG'ING.= In cases of suspended animation from hanging, the assistance
must be prompt and energetic. The body on its discovery should be
instantly relieved from the state of suspension and all pressure about the
throat. The remedial treatment chiefly consists, in the severer cases, in
cupping the temples or opening the jugular vein, and so relieving the head
of the blood which is accumulated in its superficial veins in consequence
of strangulation. When the body is cold, friction, and the other means
used for restoring the animal heat in drowned persons, should be resorted
to. See ASPHYXIA and DROWNING.

=HARD'NESS.= Compactness; solidity; the power of resisting abrasion.
Mineral substances are frequently distinguished and identified by their
relative hardness. This is ascertained by their power to scratch or be
scratched by one another. A valuable table on this subject will be found
in the article on GEMS.

=HAR'MALINE.= _Syn._ HARMALINA. An alkaloid, forming yellow-brown
crystals, discovered in the seeds of _Peganum harmala_. It has a bitter
astringent and acrid taste, is soluble in alcohol, and forms yellow,
soluble salts with the acids. It has been proposed as a yellow dye. By
oxidation it yields another compound (harmine), which is a magnificently
red dye-stuff, easily prepared and applied. The seeds are produced
abundantly in Southern Russia.

=HAR'NESS POLISH.= See BLACKING, &c.

=HARTS'HORN.= _Syn._ CORNU CERVI, C. CERVINUM, CORNU (Ph. L.) L. The "horn
of the _Cervus elephas_" (Ph. L.) or stag.

=Hartshorn, Burnt.= _Syn._ CORNU USTUM (Ph. L.), CORNU CERVI USTUM, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. L. 1836.) Burn pieces of harts' horns until perfectly white,
then grind and prepare them in the same way as directed for prepared
chalk.

_Obs._ Finely powdered bone-ash is usually sold for burnt hartshorn, and
possesses exactly the same properties.--_Dose_, 10 to 30 gr., or more 2 or
3 times a day, in rickets, &c

=Hartshorn Shavings.= _Syn._ HARTSHORN RASPINGS; RARURA CORNU CERVI,
RAMENTA C. C., L. Obtained from the turners. Boiled in water, it yields a
nutritive jelly. Used by straw-plait workers to stiffen bonnets, &c.

=HATCH'ING.= See INCUBATION.

=HATS.= Those should be chosen possessing a short, smooth, fine nap, and a
good black colour; and sufficiently elastic to resist ordinary wear and
tear, without breaking or giving way. The HAT BRUSH for daily use should
be made of soft hairs, but a stiffer one should be employed occasionally,
to lay the nap smooth and close. Grease may be removed by means of porous
brown paper, and pressure with a hot iron.

=HAY-FEVER.= _Syn._ HAY-ASTHMA, CATARRHUS AESTIVAS. Dr Aitken defines this
affection as "a variety of asthma or catarrh, occurring generally during
the summer months, especially during the inflorescence of the hay crop, or
during the drying or conversion of the newly-mown grass into hay, in May
and June." The disease is distinguished by extreme irritation of the eyes,
nose, and the whole of the air-passages, these symptoms giving rise in
succession to troublesome itching of the eyes and nose, frequent paroxysms
of sneezing, with copious discharge from the nostrils, pricking sensation
in the throat, cough, tightness of the chest and difficulty of breathing,
accompanied sometimes with, and sometimes without, great mucous
expectoration. The inhalation of the powder of ipecacuanha sets up similar
symptoms with some persons.

Dr Aitken's definition of hay-fever seems to point to what is pretty
generally accepted as its cause, viz. the inhalation of minute and
impalpable emanations from certain grasses given off during the period of
their flowering and subsequent conversion into hay. This supposition as to
the origin of this disease derives support from the circumstance, that it
always takes place during the hay season, and at no other; and also that
it may be cured by the avoidance of hay-fields and hay-stacks. "Hence
going to the sea-coast, and especially to those parts of the coast that
are barren of grass, offers a means of protection; and when this cannot be
done, such persons obtain refuge in some measure from the cause of
irritation, by remaining within doors and shutting out as much as possible
the external air during the hay-crop."[345]

[Footnote 345: Sir Thomas Watson.]

Furthermore, those whom the disease attacks are not particularly subject
to catarrh at other times.

_Treatment._--Numerous remedies have been proposed and employed for
hay-asthma. Dr Elliotson suggests the mild fumigation of the patient's
apartment by means of the solutions of the chlorides of lime or soda; and
further advised the sufferers using a smelling bottle containing one or
the other of the chlorides. He also employed with success the sulphate of
quinine and iron. Mr Gordon recommends the tincture of _Lobelia inflata_,
with the use of the cold shower-bath. Tincture of nux vomica is also said
to have been used with good results, as also has Fowler's solution of
arsenic, with very decided advantage, by Dr Mackenzie.

These potent remedies, however, should only be administered under the
supervision of a qualified medical practitioner. An esteemed medical
friend assures us he has employed the new remedy, _Quinetum_ (the alkaloid
of the East India red bark), with the happiest effects. He gives four
grains of the quinetum three times a day. The use of an ori-nasal
respirator of cotton wool has also been suggested. Great relief has, we
know, in a great number of cases, been experienced by snuffing from a
smelling bottle containing the following ingredients:--Pure crystallised
carbolic acid, 1 dr.; sesquicarbonate of ammonia, 1 oz.; wood charcoal, 1
oz.; oil of lavender, 1/2 dr.; compound tincture of benzoin, 1/2 oz.; all
reduced to fine powder, and thoroughly mixed.

=HEAD'ACHE.= _Syn._ CEPHALALGIA, L. In _pathology_, pain in the head. The
symptoms of this very general complaint are too well known to require any
description. According to pathologists, headache arises either from a
sympathy with the stomach and chylopoietic (chyle-forming) viscera, or
from a weakness or exhaustion of the power of the encephalon. The former
may be called SYMPATHETIC HEADACHE, and the latter NERVOUS HEADACHE. When
it attacks only one side of the head it is called HEMICRANIA. The
treatment of the first form should consist in restoring the healthy action
of the stomach, by the administration of aperients, and by the use of
proper food and exercise; or when that viscus is overloaded with
undigested food, by the exhibition of an emetic. For this purpose 1/4 to
1/2 an oz. of ipecacuanha wine may be taken in a cupful of warm water,
which will generally relieve the stomach, especially if its action is
assisted by drinking copiously of warm water. Headache is a common
accompaniment of indigestion and stomach disease, and in general it will
be found that whatever will remove the one will also cure the other.
Nervous headaches are relieved by nervous tonics and stimulants, as bark,
cascarilla, calumba, and gentian, camphor, ammonia, ether, and wine, the
latter in a state of considerable dilution. A cup of strong coffee or
strong green tea often acts like a charm in removing this species of
headache. Small doses of tincture of henbane have also often a like
effect. 20 or 30 drops of laudanum, or, preferably, half that number of
liquor opii sedativus, may be taken with advantage as an anodyne, and to
induce sleep. Amongst popular remedies may be mentioned 'nasal
stimulants,' as snuff (cephalic), smelling salts, and aromatic vinegar,
the use of which is familiar to every one; and local applications, as very
cold water, ether, vinegar, strong spirits, Cologne water, &c., all of
which are rubbed over the part of the head affected, with the fingers, or
a linen rag dipped in them is laid thereon instead. Pressure on the head
has also been used with advantage. Silence, darkness, and repose, are
powerful remedies, alike suitable to every variety of headache; and change
of air, scene, and occupation, are especially beneficial to those
resulting from excessive mental anxiety or exertion. Blisters are
extensively applied behind the ears in cases of violent headache.

Headache is often symptomatic of other diseases, especially those of the
inflammatory and nervous kind, rheumatism, &c. In all these the primary
disease should be sought out and attempted to be cured. In many cases
these attacks rapidly yield to a few doses of compound decoction of
sarsaparilla containing a little iodide of potassium. Headache in
pregnancy may generally be removed by proper attention to the bowels;
observing to assist their action, should they require it, by the use of
some mild aperient, as castor oil, lenitive electuary, seidlitz powders,
&c. When the constitution is very robust, blood may be taken. Headache in
bed may frequently be relieved by washing the head with cold water, and
discontinuing the use of a nightcap, at the same time preserving the feet
warm by wearing worsted socks or stockings.

=HEAD'ING.= _Syn._ BEER HEADING, CAULIFLOWER H. _Prep._ 1. Alum and green
copperas, equal parts, in fine powder.

2. Alum, copperas, and common salt, equal parts.

Used by brewers to make their beer keep its head or froth.

=HEALTH.= That state of the living body in which all its functions are
duly performed. See HYGIENE.

=HEALTH, GOOD--Gut-Heil= (Aust). A liquor containing the extractive
matters of calamus root, rhubarb, cinnamon, orange peel, &c., with 35 per
cent. of sugar. (Hager.)

=HEAR'ING.= See DEAFNESS, EAR, &c.

=HEART'BURN.= _Syn._ CARDIALGIA, L. Anxiety and pain about the region of
the stomach, generally attended by a sense of gnawing and heat; hence its
popular name. Faintness, nausea, and eructation of a thin, acidulous,
watery liquid, especially in the morning, are common symptoms of this
complaint. The usual causes of heartburn are excess in eating and
drinking, the use of improper food, and sedentary habits. A good remedy is
a teaspoonful of carbonate of magnesia, or carbonate of soda, in a glass
of peppermint or cinnamon water, to which a little powdered ginger may be
added with advantage. This dose may be taken 2 or 3 times daily until the
disease is removed. Articles of food that easily undergo fermentation
should at the same time be avoided, and a dry diet had recourse to as much
as possible. Soda water, toast-and-water, and weak spirit-and-water, are
the most suitable beverages in this complaint.

=HEAT.= _Syn._ CALORIC; CALORICUM, L. The consideration of this subject
belongs to physics and chemistry. Much useful information, in connection
with it, will, however, be found in this work under the heads EBULLITION,
EVAPORATION, EXPANSION, REFRIGERATION, &c.

=HEAVY SPAR.= Native sulphate of barium. See BARYTA.

=HED'ERIN.= _Syn._ HEDERINA, L. From the decoction of the ground seeds of
ivy (_Hedera helix_), boiled in water, along with a little slaked lime or
magnesia, the precipitate being afterwards digested in rectified spirit,
and the filtered tincture evaporated. Febrifuge and sudorific.

=HEIGHT, Average of Man.= The 'Boston Journal of Chemistry' gives the
following particulars of the average height of man:--"The Yankee would
appear to be the tallest of civilised men, if we may trust some statistics
given in foreign journals as the result of the measurement of over half a
million men. The mean height of the American Indian is 67.934 inches; of
the American white man, 67.672; Scotch, 67.066; English, 66.575; Russian,
66.393; French, 66.277; Mexican, 66.110." If the Yankee carries off the
palm as the tallest of men, he also does so for his tallest tales; but if
weight were introduced into the calculation, we think our Transatlantic
cousins would rank last.

=HEIGHTS.= The following table, calculated by Regnault, gives the
temperature at which water boils at the corresponding heights of the
barometric column. The figures have been confirmed by direct observation.

        _Boiling Points of Water at different Pressures._

  +--------------|-----------|---------------|-----------|---------------|----------+
  |Boiling Point.| Barometer.| Boiling Point.| Barometer.| Boiling Point.|Barometer.|
  | Deg. Fahr.   |  Inches.  |   Deg. Fahr.  |  Inches.  |   Deg. Fahr.  |  Inches. |
  +--------------|-----------|---------------|-----------|---------------|----------+
  |    184       |   16.676  |       195     |   21.124  |      206      |  26.529  |
  |    185       |   17.047  |       196     |   21.576  |      207      |  27.068  |
  |    186       |   17.421  |       197     |   22.030  |      208      |  27.614  |
  |    187       |   17.803  |       198     |   22.498  |      209      |  28.183  |
  |    188       |   18.196  |       199     |   22.965  |      210      |  28.744  |
  |    189       |   18.593  |       200     |   23.454  |      211      |  29.331  |
  |    190       |   19.992  |       201     |   23.937  |      212      |  29.922  |
  |    191       |   19.407  |       202     |   24.441  |      213      |  30.516  |
  |    192       |   19.822  |       203     |   25.014  |      214      |  31.120  |
  |    193       |   20.254  |       204     |   25.468  |      215      |  31.730  |
  |    194       |   20.687  |       205     |   25.992  |      216      |  32.350  |
  +--------------|-----------|---------------|-----------|---------------|----------+

=HEL'ENIN.= See INULIN.

=HELIOG'RAPHY.= See PHOTOGRAPHY.

=HEL'LEBORE.= _Syn._ BLACK HELLEBORE; HELLEBORUS (Ph. L.), L. "The rhizome
and root" of "_Helleborus niger_" (Ph. L.) or black hellebore. It is
alterative and emmenagogue, in small doses (2 to 8 gr.); and a drastic
hydragogue purgative and anthelmintic in larger ones (10 to 20 gr.) See
WHITE HELLEBORE.

=HELLEBOR'IE.= _Syn._ SOFT RESIN OF HELLEBORE. An odourless, acrid
substance, extracted by alcohol from black hellebore, and on which,
according to Vauquelin, the activity of that drug depends.

=HEM'LOCK.= _Syn._ CONII FOLIA (B. P.); CONIUM (Ph. L. E. & D.), L. In
_pharmacy_, "the fresh and dried leaf of the wild herb _Conium
maculatum_," or spotted hemlock. The first is used to make the extract;
the last, the tincture and powder.

Hemlock is a powerful narcotic acrid poison, occasioning stupor, delirium,
paralysis, convulsions, coma, and death. In small doses it is anodyne,
alterative, resolvent, antispasmodic, and anaphrodisiac, and has been
exhibited in cancer, dropsy, epilepsy, rheumatism, scrofula, syphilis, and
other diseases.--_Dose_, 3 or 4 gr. of the powder, twice or thrice daily,
until some obvious effect is produced.

Hemlock, whether in leaf (conii folia) or powder (pulvis conii) rapidly
deteriorates by keeping. When good, the powder, triturated with solution
of potassa, exhales a powerful odour of conia.

In cases of poisoning by hemlock, the treatment is similar to that noticed
under ACONITE. See CONIA, EXTRACT, TINCTURE, &c.

=HEMP.= _Syn._ CANNABIS, L. In _botany_ the typical genus of the natural
order _Cannabinaceae_. The common hemp, from the fibres of which cordage is
made, is the species _Cannabis sativa_. The fruit of this plant (hemp
seed) is demulcent and oleaginous. It is said that the plumage of
bullfinches and goldfinches fed on it for too long a time, or in too large
a quantity, changes from red and yellow to black.[346]

[Footnote 346: Burnett, 'Outlines of Botany.']

=Hemp, Indian.= _Syn._ HASHISH, CANNABIS INDICA. This plant, now so
largely used in medicine, is a variety of _Cannabis sativa_, or, perhaps,
the same simply rendered more active by climate. The parts employed in
Asia for the purposes of intoxication, and in Europe as medicine, are the
herb or leaves and the resin. The 'gunjah' sold in the bazaars in the East
Indies is the plant, just after flowering, dried, and pressed together.
'Bang,' 'bhang,' 'subjee,' or 'sidhee,' consists of the larger leaves and
capsules without the stalk. The concrete resinous exudation from the
leaves, stems, and flowers, is called 'churrus,' and in this country
'resin of Indian hemp.' 'Hashish' seems to be a general term for the
preparation of hemp.

Dr Preobraschensky, has lately subjected hashish to a chemical analysis,
and states that he has found an alkaloidal body, not only in the
commercial substance, but also in the flower-tops of the hemp itself, and
the pure extract prepared from it, which was recognised as _nicotine_.

Indian hemp is anaesthetic, anodyne, exhilarant, antispasmodic, hypnotic,
and narcotic. In the East it is commonly used as an intoxicant, either by
smoking it, like tobacco, or swallowing it. The inebriation produced by it
is of an agreeable or cheerful character exciting the party under its
influence to laugh, dance, sing, and to commit various extravagancies. It
also acts as an aphrodisiac, augments the appetite for food, and, in some
cases, occasions a kind of reverie and catalepsy. In this country its
action is less marked. It has here been chiefly administered under the
form of alcoholic or resinous extract. See EXTRACT OF INDIAN HEMP.

=HEN'BANE.= _Syn._ HYOSCYAMI FOLIA (B. P.); HYOSCYAMUS (Ph. L. E. and D.),
L. In _pharmacy_, "the fresh and dried stalk-leaf of the biennial herb,
_Hyoscyamus niger_" (Ph. L.), or common biennial or black henbane. The
first is used for preparing the extract; the last, for the powder and
tincture.

Henbane is anodyne, hypnotic, antispasmodic, and sedative. It differs from
opium in not being stimulant, and by not confining the bowels; and hence
may be administered in cases in which that drug would be improper. In
large doses it acts as a powerful narcotic poison, producing obscurity of
vision, dilatation of the pupils, delirium, phantasms, coma, &c.--_Dose_,
3 to 10 gr., in powder. It is usually given in the form of extract or
tincture. The antidotes, &c., are the same as those noticed under OPIUM.

=HEN-COOPS, Fumigator for.= Consisted wholly of coal-tar.

=HE'PAR.= _Syn._ LIVER. A name given by the older chemists to various
combinations of sulphur, from their brownish or liver colour; as '_hepar
antimonii_,' '_hepar sulphuris_,' &c. See ANTIMONY (Liver of), POTASSIUM
(Sulphide), &c.

=HERBAR'IUM.= [Eng., L.] _Syn._ HORTUS SICCUS, L. A collection of dried
specimens of plants; hence called HORTUS SICCUS, or dry garden. Plants for
the herbarium should be gathered on a dry day, and carried home in a
tin-box ('VASCULUM'), or other convenient receptacle which will preserve
them fresh for a time. Those which have collected moisture in their leaves
should be allowed to dry, their stalks being placed in water to keep them
alive. Plants with very thick, succulent leaves or stems must be killed by
immersion in hot water before they can be safely placed in the drying
press. The press consists simply of a few stout boards with a screw--or,
still better, a number of heavy weights, bricks, or stones--for pressing
them together. The specimens of plants, when all superficial moisture has
been removed, are placed between layers of bibulous paper (BOTANICAL
PAPER), care being taken that the parts of each are arranged in a natural
manner. The sheets containing the specimens are then placed between the
boards, and pressure is applied. This must be very gentle at first, and
should be gradually increased as the plants become dry. The paper is
changed every day or every second day, and the damp sheets are dried for
use at a future time. When properly dried, the specimens are placed on
sheets of writing paper, and fixed by a few stitches of thread, a little
gum, or strips of gummed paper. The name of the genus and species, and the
locality where found, &c., are then marked beside each. Camphor or a
little corrosive sublimate may be used to preserve herbaria from the
ravages of insects. The preparation of an herbarium offers an almost
endless source of amusement to the ingenious, whilst the specimens so
collected, if well preserved, are almost as useful to the botanist as the
living plants.

=HERBS.= _Syn._ HERBAE, L. The collection and drying of herbs for medicinal
purposes and perfumery are noticed under VEGETABLE SUBSTANCES.

Amongst cooks, several aromatic herbs, either fresh or dried, are used for
seasoning. "In many receipts is mentioned a bunch of sweet herbs, which
consists, for some stews and soups, of a small bunch of parsley, two
sprigs of thyme, and one bayleaf; if no parsley, then of four sprigs of
winter savory, six of thyme, and one bayleaf." (Soyer.)

=HER'NIA.= See RUPTURE.

=HER'RING.= A well-known small sea-fish, belonging to the family of
_Clupeidae_, a branch of the order _Malacopterygii_. As an article of food,
herrings are of a vast importance to a large proportion of the population
of Europe. When recently caught and dressed by broiling or boiling, they
are wholesome and agreeable; but if fried, or long kept, they become
strong and oily, and are then apt to offend the stomach. The preparation
of salted and dried of smoked herrings (bloaters, red herrings) furnishes
employment for thousands, both in these countries and Holland. Real
Yarmouth bloaters and Dutch herrings are highly esteemed by many as a
relish. Salted herrings are said to be diuretic. The pickle was formerly
used in clysters, dropsies, &c. M. Soyer calls this fish "the poor man's
friend," and tells us that, after being "cleaned and scaled, and the head
removed," it should be "opened in the back, and the gut taken out." Also
that "the way to ascertain if a herring is too salt is to take the fish in
the left hand, and pull out a few of the fins from the back, and to taste
them. You may thus find out the quality and flavour. This plan is adopted
by the large dealers."

=HESPER'IDIN.= A peculiar substance obtained from the white portion of the
rind of oranges, lemons, &c. It forms crystalline silky needles, is
odourless, tasteless, fusible, soluble in alcohol and ether, less soluble
in water. Hesperidin is a glucoside.

=HIC'COUGH= (h[)i]k'-[)u]p). _Syn._ HICCUP; SINGULTUS, L. A convulsive
motion of the diaphragm and parts adjacent. The common causes are
flatulency, indigestion, acidity, and worms. It may generally be removed
by the exhibition of warm carminatives, cordials, cold water, weak
spirits, camphor julep, or spirits of sal-volatile. A sudden fright or
surprise will often produce the like effect. An instance is recorded of a
delicate young lady that was troubled with hiccough for some months, and
who was reduced to a state of extreme debility from the loss of sleep
occasioned by it, that was cured by a fright, after medicines and topical
applications had failed. A pinch of snuff, a glass of iced soda water, or
an ice-cream, will also frequently remove this affection.

=HI'ERA-PI'CRA.= See POWDER OF ALOES AND CANELLA.

=HIP'POCRAS.= An aromatic medicated wine, formerly much used in England,
and still employed on the Continent.

_Prep._ Lisbon and Canary wine, of each 12 pints; cinnamon, 2 oz.; white
canella, 1/2 oz.; cloves, mace, nutmeg, ginger, and galangal, or
cardamoms, of each 1 dr.; bruise the spices, and digest them in the wine
for three or four days; strain, and add of lump sugar, 2-1/2 lbs.

=HIPPU'RIC ACID.= HC_{9}H_{8}NO_{3}. _Syn._ ACIDUM HIPPURICUM, L. A
compound discovered by Liebig in the urine of the horse, cow, and other
graminivora, in which it exists as hippurate of potassium or sodium.

_Prep._ Concentrate fresh cow's urine by a gentle heat to about 1/10th its
bulk, filter from deposit, mix the liquid with excess of hydrochloric
acid, and set it aside to crystallise. It may be decoloured by
redissolving it in boiling water, and treating it with animal charcoal, or
with a little chloride of lime along with some hydrochloric acid, and
re-crystallising it.

_Obs._ Hippuric acid, when pure, forms long, slender, milk-white, square
prisms; it is soluble in 400 parts of cold water; it also dissolves in hot
alcohol. When strongly heated, it yields benzoic acid, benzoate of
ammonia, and benzonitrile, with a coaly residue. The urine of horses or
cows, left to itself for some time, or evaporated at a boiling
temperature, yields not a trace of hippuric acid, but only benzoic acid.
Nitric acid and hot oil of vitriol convert it into benzoic acid. Boiling
hydrochloric acid converts it into benzoic acid and glycocoll. With the
bases it forms salts, which are called hippurates. See BENZOIC ACID.

=HIPS.= _Syn._ HEPS; ROSA CANINA (Ph. L.). The fresh fruit of the dog rose
(_Rosa canina_), or wild briar. Used to make a conserve.

=HOL'LANDS.= _Syn._ GENEVA, SCHIEDAM, HOLLANDS GIN, DUTCH G. _Prep._ 1.
The materials employed in the distilleries of Schiedam, in the preparation
of this excellent spirit, are 2 parts of the best unmalted rye and 1 part
of malted bigg, reduced to the state of coarse meal by grinding. About a
barrel (36 galls.) of water, at a temperature of from 162 deg. to 168 deg. Fahr.,
is put into the mash-tun for every 1-1/2 cwt. of meal, after which the
malt is introduced and stirred, and, lastly, the rye is added. Powerful
agitation is next given to the magma till it becomes quite uniform, when
the mash-tun is covered over with canvas, and left in this state for two
hours. Agitation is then again had recourse to, and the transparent 'spent
wash' of a preceding mashing is added, followed by as much cold water as
will reduce the temperature of the whole to about 85 deg. Fahr. The gravity of
the wort at this point varies from 33 to 38 lbs. A quantity of the best
pressed Flanders yeast, equal to 1 lb. for every 100 galls. of the mashed
materials, is next stirred in, and the whole is fermented in the mash-tun
for about 3 days, or until the attenuation is from 7 to 4 lbs. (sp. gr.
1.007 to 1.004). During this time the yeast is occasionally skimmed off
the fermenting wort. The wash, with the grains, is then transferred to the
still, and converted into 'low wines.' To every 100 galls. of this liquor,
2 lbs. of juniper berries (3 to 5 years old), and about 1 lb. of salt, are
added, and the whole is put into the low-wine still, and the fine spirit
drawn off by a gentle heat, one receiver only being employed. The product
per quarter varies from 18 to 21 galls. of spirit, 2 to 3 o. p.

2. (BEST HOLLANDS.) Hollands rectified to the strength of 24 deg. Baume (sp.
gr. .9125, or about 6 o. p.).

3. (ENGLISH-MADE.)--_a._ From juniper berries (at least a year old, and
crushed in the hands), 3 lbs.; rectified spirit, 1-1/2 gall. (or proof
spirit, 2-1/2 galls.); digest, with agitation, for a week, and then
express the liquor; after 24 hours' repose, decant the clear portion, add
it to good corn spirit, at 2 or 3% overproof, 90 or 100 galls., and mix
them well together.

_b._ From juniper berries, 2-1/2 lbs.; sweet fennel seed, 5 oz.; caraway
seed, 3-1/2 oz.; proof spirit, 2 galls.; corn spirit, 90 or 100 galls.

_c._ As the last, with the addition of Strasburg turpentine or Canadian
balsam, 1 lb.

_d._ To either of the last two or three add a very small quantity of
ground cardamoms or horse-radish. Some compounders also add 4 or 5 cloves
of garlic, or about 15 gr. of assaf[oe]tida, with 1 gr. of ambergris
rubbed to a powder with a little white sand or lump sugar. Good plain gin
may be advantageously employed in lieu of the corn spirit ordered above,
when expense is no object.

_Obs._ The last four forms, which are only given as examples, produce a
very pleasant spirit, if it is kept for some time to 'mellow.' Age is one
of the principal causes of the 'creaminess' of foreign gin, which usually
lies in bond for some time before being consumed. The product is, however,
much superior if the ingredients are rectified along with 20 galls. of
water, and about 14 lbs. of salt, by a gentle heat.

It will be seen from the above that the superior flavour of Hollands
spirit depends more on the peculiar mode of its manufacture than on the
quantity of juniper berries employed; 2 lbs. of them, when new, being
barely equivalent to 1 oz. of the essential oil; and when old, to less
than 1/2 oz., a quantity wholly insufficient to flavour 100 gallons of
spirit. The Dutch distillers, most noted for this liquor, add a little
pure Strasburg turpentine and a handful or two of hops to the spirit,
along with the juniper berries, before rectification. The former substance
has a pale yellowish-brown colour, and a very fragrant and agreeable
smell, and tends materially to impart that fine aroma for which the best
geneva is distinguished. At Rotterdam sweet fennel seed is commonly added
as a flavouring; and at Weesoppe Strasburg turpentine and fennel seeds, or
the essential oil of fennel, are frequently substituted for a large
portion of the juniper berries.

Schiedam Hollands is considered the best; the next quality is that of
Rotterdam; after these comes that of Weesoppe.

Attempts have been made by Mr Robert Moore, and others to introduce into
general consumption in this country a home-made liquor, resembling and
prepared in the same manner as foreign geneva, "but the palates of our
gin-drinkers were too corrupted to relish so pure a spirit."

=HOM[OE]OP'ATHY.= _Syn._ HOM[OE]OPATHIA, L. A medical hypothesis
promulgated at the commencement of the present century by the late Dr
Hahnemann, of Leipsic, according to which diseases may be cured by the
administration of minute doses of medicines capable of producing in
healthy persons affections similar to those it is intended to remove. The
doctrine that "_similia similibus curantur_" had long previously been
practically acted on, to a limited extent, in certain cases, in legitimate
medicine (allopathy, heteropathy), although not verbally recognised as
belonging to its system. The administration of infinitesimal doses is an
absurdity which hom[oe]opathy, however, alone can claim. According to this
method, the millionth of a grain is often an excessive dose; whilst
billionths and decillionths, quantities so small as to be vastly beyond
human perception, form the common doses. This reduces the whole practice
of hom[oe]opathy to a system of doing nothing beyond regulating the diet
and habits of the patient. "All judicious practitioners have long been
agreed that there are many cases which are best treated in the manner just
mentioned, and in which physic does more harm than good; in which, in
short, a sensible physician endeavours to amuse the patient, whilst nature
cures the disorder; so that the frequent success of hom[oe]opathic
treatment may be explained, without admitting the principle upon which it
is presumed to be founded." (Brande.)

=HON'EY.= _Syn._ MEL (B. P.), L. The sweet substance elaborated by the
domestic bee from the juices of the nectaries of flowers, and deposited in
the cells of wax forming the honeycomb.

_Var._ Pure honey consists of a syrup of uncrystallisable sugar and
crystalline saccharine grains, resembling grape sugar.--'Virgin honey' is
that which flows spontaneously from the comb.--'Ordinary honey,' that
obtained by heat and pressure. The former is pale and fragrant; the latter
darker, and possessing a less agreeable taste and smell.--'English honey'
is chiefly collected from furze and broom flowers, and is more waxy than
that from the South of Europe;--'Narbonne honey,' chiefly from rosemary,
and other labiate flowers, very fine;--'Poisonous honey' is found near
Trebizond, in Asia, its toxic effects being due to the bees having
collected it from a poisonous plant, the _Azalea pontica_.

_Pur._ Honey is frequently adulterated with treacle, potato-sugar syrup,
potato farina, starch, and wheat flour. The first may be detected by the
colour and odour; the second in the way noticed under SUGAR; and the
others by the honey not forming a nearly clear solution with cold water,
and striking a blue colour with iodine. When it contains wheat flour, and
is heated, it at first liquefies, but on cooling it becomes solid and
tough. The absence of starchy matter or flour is easily proved by the
following test:--Boiled with water for five minutes, and allowed to cool,
it should not become blue with iodine water--indicating absence of flour.

_Uses, &c._ Honey is nutritive and laxative, but rather apt to gripe. It
is employed in the preparation of OXYMELS and GARGLES, and also to cover
the taste of nauseous medicines, which it does better than sugar.
Clarified honey is alone ordered to be used in medicine.

=Honey, Clarified.= _Syn._ REFINED HONEY, STRAINED H.; MEL DEPURATUM (Ph.
D.), MEL PRAEPARATUM, L. The honey is simply melted by the heat of a water
bath, and strained whilst hot through flannel (Ph. D.); or--it is melted
as last, and the scum removed (Ph. U. S.); or--it is melted with 1-3rd its
weight of water, skimmed, strained through flannel, and evaporated until
it reaches the sp. gr. 1.261. (P. Cod.) Honey is not to be employed
without being desquamated. (Ph. L.)

_Obs._ Clarified honey is less agreeable than raw honey, and has lost the
crystalline character of the latter; but it is less liable to ferment and
gripe. The use of copper and iron vessels or implements should be avoided,
as honey acquires a dark colour by contact with them. Berlin-ware,
stone-ware, or well-silvered or tin copper pans, should alone be used. On
the large scale, one or other of the following plans are adopted:--

1. The honey is mixed with an equal weight of water and allowed to boil up
5 or 6 times without skimming; it is then removed from the fire, and after
being cooled, brought on several strong linen strainers, stretched
horizontally, and covered with a layer of clean and well-washed sand, an
inch in depth; the sand is rinsed with a little cold water, and the mixed
liquor is finally evaporated to the thickness of syrup.

2. Dissolve the honey in water, as last, clarify with white of egg, and
evaporate to a proper consistence.

3. Dissolve in water, add 1-1/2 lb. of animal charcoal to every 1/4 cwt.
of honey, gently simmer for 15 minutes, add a little chalk to saturate
excess of acid, if required, strain or clarify, and evaporate.

4. Honey, 1 cwt.; water, 9 galls.; fresh burnt animal charcoal, 7 lbs.;
simmer for 15 minutes, add a little chalk to saturate free acid (if
required), strain or clarify, and evaporate as before.

=HONEYS.= (In _pharmacy_.) _Syn._ MELITA, L. These are minor preparations,
now almost superseded by 'syrups' (SYRUPI). The _mellita_ of the Ph. L.,
including two 'oxymels,' are only four in number.

=Honey of Bo''rax.= _Syn._ MEL BORACIS (B. P. Ph., L. E. & D.), L. _Prep._
(B. P.) Finely powdered borax, 1; clarified honey, 7; mix. Astringent,
detersive, and cooling. It is employed in aphthae of the mouth, excessive
salivation, &c. A great improvement would be to dissolve 1 of borax in 1
of glycerin, and then add 6 of honey.

=Honey of Col'chicum.= _Syn._ MEL COLCHICI, L. _Prep._ (Beasley.) Dried
colchicum 1 part; water (at 140 deg.), 16 parts; infuse for 12 hours, strain,
let it settle, and boil the clear liquor with white honey, 12 parts, to
the consistence of a syrup. See COLCHICUM.

=Honey of Liq'uorice.= _Syn._ MEL GLYCYRRHIZATUM, L. _Prep._ (Ph. Hamb.)
Honey and a strong infusion of liquorice boiled to a proper consistence.
Emollient, pectoral, and laxative.

=Honey of Male Fern.= _Syn._ MEL FILICIS, L. _Prep._ (Dunglison.) Ethereal
extract of male fern, 30 gr.; honey of roses, 4 dr.; mix. In
tapeworm.--_Dose._ One half at bedtime, followed by the remainder in the
morning.

=Honey of Mercury.= _Syn._ MEL HYDRARGYRI, L. _Prep._ (Bell.) Mercury, 1
dr.; honey, 1 oz.; triturate till the globules disappear. Allard adds of
oil of cloves, 1/2 dr. Properties similar to those of mercurial pill. It
is chiefly used as an application to ulcers of the throat.

=Honey of Ro''ses.= _Syn._ MEL ROSAE (Ph. L. and E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph.
L.) Dried petals of the red rose (the leaves separated), 4 oz.; boiling
water, 16 fl. oz.; macerate for 2 hours; lightly press them in the hand,
and strain; then add 8 fl. oz. more of boiling water to the roses,
macerate for a short time, and again gently express the liquor; to this
add the other half; next add to the mixed liquors, honey, 5 lbs.; and
evaporate in a water bath, so that, the infusion which was set aside being
added, it may become of a proper consistence.

2. (Ph. E.) Dried rose petals, 4 oz.; boiling water, 2-1/2 pints; infuse
for 6 hours, and gently squeeze out the liquor; after the impurities have
subsided, decant the clear, add of honey, 5 lbs., and evaporate as before,
to a proper consistence, removing the scum which forms. Used to make
astringent gargles. It must not be boiled in a copper or iron vessel, as
they will spoil the colour. The last form is that commonly adopted in
trade.

=Honey of Squills.= _Syn._ MEL SCILLAE, L. _Prep._ 1. Thick clarified
honey, 3 lbs.; tincture of squills, 2 lbs.; mix.

2. (Soubeiran.) Dried squills, 1 oz.; boiling water, 3/4 pint; infuse 2
hours, strain, add of honey, 12 oz.; and evaporate to a proper
consistence. Resembles OXYMEL OF SQUILLS (nearly).

=Honey of Verdigris.= EGYPTIACUM.

=Honey of Vi'olets.= _Syn._ MEL VIOLAE; L. _Prep._ From clarified honey, 2
parts; expressed and depurated juice of violets, 1 part. Resembles syrup
of violets.

=HON'EY DEW.= _Syn._ ROS MELLITUS, L. A sweetish matter ejected upon the
leaves of plants by certain aphides.

=HOOP'ING COUGH.= See WHOOPING COUGH.

=HOPS.= _Syn._ LUPULUS (B. P.), L. "The catkins of the female plant of the
_Humulus lupulus_" or common hop. (B. P.) "The dried strobiles." (Ph. D.)
The hops of commerce are the strobiles or catkins (LUPULI STROBILI, L.
AMENTA) of the hop plant. The yellow powder or small lupulinic grains or
glands (LUPULIN), which are attached to the strobiles, are the portion on
which their characteristic qualities chiefly depend.

The hop is tonic, stomachic, and moderately narcotic. It is used in
diseases of local debility with morbid vigilance and other nervous
derangement, producing sleep where opiates are objectionable. Hops may be
used topically as a fomentation or a poultice, as a resolvent or
discutient in painful swellings and tumours. The golden dust attached to
the scale of the hop is sometimes administered in doses of from 5 to 10
grains. Very freshly dried hops, made into a pillow, procure sleep.

In the choice of hops, care should be taken to select those that have
large cones or strobiles, that are the most powerfully odorous and most
free from leaves, stems, scaly fragments, and sticks, and which, when
rubbed between the hands, impart, in the greatest degree, a yellowish tint
and glutinous feeling to the skin. The tightness with which they are
packed should also be noticed; as, without being very firmly pressed
together, and quite solid they soon spoil by keeping. The finest flavoured
hops are the 'GOLDINGS,' grown chiefly in middle and east Kent; the
'WHITEBINES' of Farnham and Canterbury; and the WORCESTER HOPS, grown on
the red soils of the vale of the Severn. These are principally employed
for the finer class of ales. Mid Kent and Sussex hops are also used for
ale, but have an inferior colour and flavour. The best hops are packed in
sacks of fine canvas, termed 'pockets,' weighing from 1-1/4 cwt. to 1-3/4
cwt. each; and the inferior qualities in coarse 'bags,' of about double
the size. The former are mostly purchased by the ale brewers, and the
latter by the porter brewers. When hops are older than of last season's
growth they are termed 'yearlings,'--when of the second season's growth,
'old,'--and when three years, or older, 'old olds.' See BREWING, EXTRACT,
HUMULIN, LUPULIN, TINCTURE, &c.

=HOOSE.= Young cattle, especially calves, as well as sheep and lambs, are
frequently liable to attacks of a species of bronchitis, caused by the
presence in the bronchial tubes of minute worms. They are mostly so
attacked in autumn.

_Treatment._ For a calf of six months old give half an ounce of oil of
turpentine in two ounces of linseed oil, to be repeated once or twice
after an interval of two days. Half this dose may be given to sheep. The
mixture should be administered by the mouth, and _not_ by the nostrils, as
usually recommended. Calves should additionally be comfortably housed at
night, and be fed with a little oil cake and other good food.

=HORE'HOUND.= _Syn._ WHITE HOREHOUND; MARRUBIUM VULGARE (Linn.), L. This
herb has long been a popular remedy in chronic pulmonary complaints,
especially catarrh, and in uterine and liver affections. Horehound tea
(THEA MARUBII, INFUSUM MARUBII) is prepared by infusing 1 oz. of the herb
in boiling water, 1 pint, for an hour;--syrup of horehound (SYRUPUS
MARUBII), by thickening the infusion of tea with sugar;--candied horehound
(MARUBIUM CONDITUM), by mixing 1 pint of horehound juice with 8 or 10 lbs.
of white sugar, boiling the mixture to a candy height, and pouring it,
whilst warm, into moulds, or small paper cases, well dusted with finely
powdered lump-sugar; or by pouring it out on a dusted slab, and cutting it
into squares. See CANDYING.

=HORN.= For the purposes of the turner and comb-maker, horns of the goat
and sheep are preferred on account of their superior whiteness and
transparency. For medical purposes, those of the stag (HARTSHORN) are
ordered to be employed.

Horn is dyed with the same dyes, and in a similar manner to bones and
ivory.

Horn is softened, bent, and moulded, by means of heat and pressure. For
these purposes boiling water and a screw press are commonly employed.

Horn is reduced to plates or sheets by sawing it, and then exposing it to
powerful pressure between hot iron plates; the pith having been previously
removed, and its texture softened by soaking for some days in water, and
subsequent boiling in that liquid.

Surfaces and edges may be united or cemented together by softening the
horn by the heat of boiling water, placing the parts in contact under
strong pressure, and exposing the whole thus arranged to the heat of
boiling water.

Horn is stained or party-coloured to imitate tortoise-shell, by a solution
of terchloride of gold, for the red portion; nitrate of silver, for the
dark brown and black; and nitrate of mercury (hot), or a paste made of red
lead, and potash or quicklime, for the brown. When the last is used the
horn must be heated and exposed to its action for some hours.

=Horn Silver.= (Ag. Cl.) A native chloride of silver, which occurs either
crystallized in cubes, or as a compact semi-transparent mass.

=HORS-D'[OE]UVRES.= [Fr.] _Syn._ ASSIETTES, Fr. Small _entrees_, as
'_aiguillettes_,' '_ragouts_,' plates of sardines, anchovies, or other
relishes, served at dinner between the leading dishes. '_Assiettes
volantes_' (flying plates) are dishes handed round to the guests, but not
placed on the table.

=HORSE.= _Syn._ EQUUS, L. This most useful quadruped belongs to the family
_Equidae_, distinguished by a single digit and hoof on each foot. The horse
can scarcely be said to exist at the present day in its natural wild
state, as the so-called 'wild-horses' of America and Asia are but the
progeny of horses which have escaped from the haunts of civilisation. Of
all animals the horse is most useful to man. Independently of its value as
a beast of burden and draught, its skin, its hide, intestines, and bones,
furnish us with leather, the thongs of whips, gut, grease, bone-black,
manure, &c. The excrement, fat, and hoof were included in the Materia
Medica of the Ph. L. 1618. The flesh is eaten in some countries, and was
formerly esteemed to possess many virtues.

Injuries of a serious character, and even death, are often occasioned by
horses running away, or becoming unmanageable. Various methods have been
proposed to prevent accidents of this kind, and to place the animal
entirely under the power of its rider or driver. In Russia, around the
horse's neck, near the neck strap, is placed a cord with a running knot.
To this slip-noose is attached a pair of reins, which always lie thrown
over the dashboards, ready to be seized at once. When the horse starts,
and becomes unruly, the gentleman takes up this cord, and tightens the
horse's throat, so that he cannot take breath. The most furious horse
stops instantly, and will not fall or kick. See BEDDING, BRAN MASH, BROKEN
KNEES, BROKEN WIND, CLIPPING, CANKER, CATARRH, CHOKING, CHOREA, CHOLIC,
CONSTIPATION, CORNS, CRIB-BITING, CURB.

=HORSE BALLS.= See VETERINARY MEDICINE.

=HORSES, Condition Powder for.= The principal ingredients were: Fenugreek,
liquorice root, resin, brimstone, common salt, nitrate of potash, and a
green powder, probably senna. It contained traces of calcium and magnesium
carbonates; alumina, silica, and iron.

=HORSE POW'ER.= This term was first employed by James Watt to express a
power capable of raising 33,000 lbs. one foot high per minute. The
effective pressure on the surface of the piston was estimated at 7 lbs. to
the square inch, and hence the area of the piston, in square inches,
multiplied by 7, gave the gross effective moving pressure, and the space
passed over by this piston in a minute gave the distance through which the
pressure was exerted, or the weight was raised. From these data the horse
power was easily calculated. In process of time improvements in the
formation of boilers and steam engines increased the effective pressure on
the piston, and, consequently, the power of the engine. In modern engines
the actual power is commonly from 2 to 4 times greater than the nominal
power, which is, however, still retained as the unit of power in
commercial calculations.

=HORSERAD'ISH.= _Syn._ ARMORACIA RADIX. (B. P.). "The fresh root of
_Cochlearia Armoracia_" (B. P.). Horseradish is pungent, acrid, stimulant,
and rubefacient. It is also regarded as diaphoretic, diuretic, and
antiscorbutic. It forms a useful masticatory in hoarseness, sore throat,
and toothache. As a condiment, it provokes the appetite and assists
digestion. Reduced to shreds (scraped horseradish), it forms a common and
excellent accompaniment to roast beef. The root of aconite or wolfsbane,
which somewhat resembles it in appearance, has occasionally been mistaken
for it, with fatal results; the two are, however, readily distinguished
from each other, as the taste of horseradish is warm and pungent,
approaching that of mustard, whilst aconite is bitter, and its odour is
earthy and disagreeable, and after a few minutes' contact with the lips,
tongue, and fauces, produces a sensation of numbness, and tingling. See
ACONITUM NAPELLUS; under which article will be found engravings of the two
roots. The root may be kept fresh for some time if buried in sand in a
cool place. Horseradish powder is prepared from the roots gathered in
November or December, and dried by a gentle heat or exposure to a current
of dry air. It is used as a condiment.

=HOR'TICULTURE.= _Syn._ GARDENING. The art of cultivating gardens.
According to Loudon, horticulture differs from agriculture, chiefly in the
comparatively limited space over which it extends, and in being conducted
by manual labour; whilst the latter is performed jointly by human and
animal labour, in fields, or on an extensive tract of land called a farm.

=HOR'TUS-SICCUS.= See HERBARIUM.

=HOS'PITAL GAN'GRENE.= _Syn._ PHAGEDAENA GANGRENOSA. L. A species of
ulcerating mortification, particularly characterised by its infectious
nature, and its tendency to attack wounds and ulcers in crowded hospitals,
so that often the most trifling operation cannot be performed with safety.
Under its influence the parts are rapidly destroyed, not by the formation
of ordinary sloughs, as in common mortification, but by their conversion
into an ash-coloured viscid substance interspersed with bloody specks. The
treatment is similar to that noticed under MORTIFICATION, but here, above
all things, thorough ventilation must be established, and persevered in,
and, when possible, change of situation sought.

=HUILE.= [Fr.] Oil; a term applied to various substances and preparations
on account of their smoothness, consistence, or real or imaginary
emollient or oleaginous nature. See LIQUEUR, OIL, &c.

=Huile Acoustique.= _Prep._ From garlic and bay leaves, of each, 1/2 oz.;
olive oil, 1/2 lb.; boiled together for 15 minutes, and strained. Used in
ear-ache and deafness. A little is dropped on cotton wool and placed in
the ear.

=Huile, Antique.= See OILS (Hair).

=Huile Liqueureuse.= _Prep._ 1. (DE LA ROSE.) From eau de rose, 1 part;
simple syrup, 2 parts; mixed together.

2. (DES FLEURS D'ORANGES.) From orange-flower water and syrup, as No. 1.

3. (DE VANILLE.) From essence of vanilla, 1 dr.; simple syrup, 1 pint.

_Obs._ The above are kept in small decanters, and used to flavour water,
grog, liqueurs, &c., instead of sugar or capillaire; also to perfume the
breath. Other flavoured syrups, for the same purposes, are prepared in a
similar manner.

=HU'MIC ACID.= _Syn._ ULMIC ACID. See HUMUS.

=HUMULIN.= The name given to a beautiful extract or essence of hops, made
as follows:--

A concentrated tincture of hops is prepared by percolation with rectified
spirit; the same hops are then exhausted with water; the spirit is removed
from the tincture by careful distillation, and the upper aqueous portion
is skimmed off, and added to the infusion, which latter is then evaporated
to the consistence of a soft extract; the oleo-resinous residuum of the
tincture is next added, and well mixed in; after which the whole is put
into pots and carefully tied over for sale. The product possesses all the
fragrant, tonic, and bitter qualities of the hop in a highly condensed
form. See HOPS, LUPULIN, &c.

=HU'MUS.= _Syn._ ULMIN. When wood, or woody fibre, is exposed to the joint
action of air and moisture, it suffers eremacausis or decay, and crumbles
down into a dark-brown or black powder commonly called 'mould,' and to
which chemists have given the name of 'humus.' In this state it exists in
fertile soils, in which it is derived from the decay of plants. A powder
of similar composition is produced by the action of powerful chemical
reagents on sugar, lignin, &c. When acted upon by dilute boiling solution
of caustic potassa, this substance yields a deep-brown solution, from
which acids precipitate a flocculent brown substance generally called
'ulmic' or 'humic acid.' Both bodies require further investigation, as
they are supposed to vary exceedingly in composition.

=HUNGER.= The peculiar sensation arising from the want of food. When
severe, it increases to actual pain, the coats of the stomach are acted on
by its own juices, the respiration becomes less frequent, the circulation
languid, and there is a general diminution of the heat of the body and of
the secretions. The return of hunger is accelerated by exercise and
labour, and by the exposure of the body to a low temperature. Long fasting
is injurious, more particularly to the young and the debilitated. See
APPETITE, NUTRITION, &c.

=HUS'BANDRY.= The business of the farmer; by some the term is restricted
to the joint operations of farming and gardening on the small scale. It is
also sometimes used synonymously with agriculture.

=HY'ACINTH.= In _botany_, the English name for the genus _Hyacinthus_.
There are numerous varieties of the garden hyacinth, all very beautiful.
The bulbs are largely imported from Holland, and are often grown in water
contained in suitable glass vessels (hyacinth glasses). In _mineralogy_,
the term is applied to crystallised yellow or brown zircon. See GEMS.

=HYDRAC'IDS.= _Syn._ HYDROGEN ACIDS. A name formerly given to those acids
which do not contain oxygen, as hydrochloric, &c. It is still occasionally
employed.

=HY'DRAGOGUES.= _Syn._ HYDRAGOGA, L. Medicines which cause the removal of
water from any of the cavities of the body. Many cathartics, as gamboge,
jalap, &c., are classed under this head.

=HYDRAS'TIN.= The name given to a concentrated remedy much employed by the
medical eclectics of America.

_Prep._ Treat the powdered root of golden-seal (_Hydrastis Canadensis_)
with cold water by percolation; acidulate the infusion with hydrochloric
acid; collect the precipitate on a filter; then dry it, dissolve the dried
mass in alcohol, filter, and set aside to crystallise.

_Prop._ Yellow, acicular crystals, insoluble in cold alcohol, ether, and
water.--_Dose_, 3 to 5 gr., 3 to 6 times a day; as a tonic in dyspepsia,
inflammation of the stomach, &c.--_Obs._ According to the most recent
investigations, hydrastin contains berberine, and another alkaline called
hydrastia or hydrastina.

=HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.= _Syn._ The GOLDEN SEAL. This is a small herbaceous
perennial North American plant, belonging to the natural order,
_Ranunculaceae_. The rhizome, which is the officinal part, though yellow in
the recent root, becomes of a dark yellowish-brown by age. It contains
albumen, starch, fatty matter, resin, yellow colouring matter, sugar,
lignin, and various salts; also a peculiar nitrogenous crystallisable
substance, to which Dr Durand, the discoverer, proposed the provisional
name of hydrastin, which substance will be found described below. The root
of the golden-seal, as well as the alkaloids obtainable from it, are
largely used in American medical practice, and are stated to possess
valuable tonic, aperient, diuretic, and deobstruent powers. They have been
employed in dyspepsia, jaundice, and functional disorders of the liver.
They are also regarded as one of the best substitutes for quinine in
intermittents.

Golden seal has been given in the form of infusion, decoction, tincture,
and extract, and the fluid extract is now officinal in the United States'
Pharmacop[oe]ia.

=HY'DRATES.= Compounds of hydroxyl (HO) with other bodies, _e.g._
KHO--hydrate of potassium. The term hydrate is also given to chemical
combinations of water (H_{2}O) with other substances, _e.g._
C_{2}HCl_{3}O.H_{2}O--hydrate of chloral.

=HY'DRIDE.= A compound of hydrogen with another radical, _e.g._ hydride of
methyl--CH_{3}H.

=HYDRIO'DATE.= A name formerly given to the salts now termed iodides. See
IODIDES.

=HYDRIO'DIC ACID.= _Syn._ IODHYDRIC ACID; ACIDUM HYDRIODICUM, L. An acid
compound of iodine and hydrogen. See IODINE.

_Prep._ 1. By heating iodine in hydrogen, the volume of the gas becomes
doubled, and a colourless acid gas is produced; it is, however, never
prepared for use by this means. 2. Place 10 parts of potassic iodide in a
small retort with 5 parts of water, and add 20 of iodide; then drop in
cautiously one part of phosphorus, cut into small fragments, and apply a
gentle heat. The gas will be given off abundantly and may be collected, by
displacement, in dry bottles.

A solution of hydriodic acid may be prepared by suspending iodine in
water, and passing a current of sulphuretted hydrogen through the mixture
until the brown colour of the iodine disappears; sulphur is deposited in
abundance, and hydriodic acid formed.

=HYDRO'BENZANIDE.= White crystalline mass, obtained from oil of bitter
almonds by treatment with ammonia.

=HYDROBRO'MIC ACID.= See BROMIDE.

=Hydrobromic Acid.= (HBr.) _Syn._ HYDRIC BROMIDE, HYDROGEN BROMIDE.

_Prep._ This very powerfully acid gaseous body may be prepared as
follows:--1. By decomposing bromide of potassium with a concentrated
solution of phosphoric acid. 2. By decomposing bromide of phosphorus by
means of a small quantity of water.

Hydrobromic acid gas is colourless and non-inflammable; it extinguishes
flame. It is extremely irritating to the lungs when breathed. It is very
soluble in water.

=HYDROBRO'MIDE.= _Syn._ BROMIDE (which _see_).

=HYDROCAR'BON.= A compound of carbon and hydrogen. The hydrocarbons
constitute a most important series of organic compounds.

=HYDROCHLORIC ACID.= (HCl = 36.5.) _Syn._ MURIATIC ACID, HYDRIC CHLORIDE,
HYDROGEN CHLORIDE. This important gaseous compound was discovered by
Priestly in 1772. In nature it is given off with other gases from active
volcanoes, and is occasionally to be met with in the springs and rivers of
volcanic districts. When hydrogen and chlorine are mixed in equal volumes,
they are without action upon each other if kept in the dark, but if
exposed to direct sunlight, chemical combination, accompanied by a loud
explosion, instantly takes place between them, the result of their union
being the colourless gaseous, intensely sour hydrochloric acid. If,
instead of bright sunshine, the mixed gases are exposed to diffused
daylight, chemical union also ensues between them, but the process is then
a slow and gradual one; the passage through them, however, of the electric
spark, or the application of a lighted match or taper instantly causes
their explosion and combination.

One volume of chlorine unites with one volume of hydrogen, forming two
volumes of hydrochloric acid; no condensation occurs in the act of union.

Hydrochloric acid may also be formed by transmitting moist chlorine
through a red-hot porcelain tube; oxygen being at the same time liberated.

_Prep._ Hydrochloric acid, save for the purposes of illustrative
experiment, is never obtained by any of the above processes. An easy mode
of procuring it, when required for laboratory use, is to heat the ordinary
aqueous solution of the acid in a flask, and to collect the gas, which is
given off by displacement. It may also be readily got by introducing
pieces of common salt (which should have been previously fused in a
crucible at a red-heat and allowed to cool) into a glass retort, and
pouring over them about twice their weight of oil of vitriol. The
hydrochloric acid, which escapes very abundantly, must be collected either
by displacement or over mercury.

_Prop._ Hydrochloric acid is a colourless gas, very acid to the taste, and
irritating to the eyes; and induces coughing even if breathed in small
quantities, or when largely diluted. It is very destructive to vegetation,
on which account the soda manufacturer is compelled by law to condense and
thus prevent the escape of its fumes. It has a specific gravity of 1.261.
When subjected to a pressure of 40 atmospheres at 50 deg. F., it becomes a
colourless fluid capable of dissolving bitumen, and having a specific
gravity of 1.27. It has never been frozen. Hydrochloric acid neither
burns, nor supports combustion. The white fumes which it forms when
exposed to the air, are due to its condensing the atmospheric moisture,
and thus giving rise to a body less volatile than water. This gas is
greedily and instantly absorbed by water. A fragment of ice placed in a
jar of the gas absorbs it, and becomes immediately dissolved.

=Hydrochloric Acid, Solution of.= The hydrochloric acid of commerce is a
solution of the above gas in water. When exposed to the air it emits grey
fumes. Water at 40 deg. F. absorbs about 480 times its bulk of hydrochloric
acid, increasing in volume about one third in doing so, acquiring a
density of 1.2109, and then containing nearly forty-three per cent. of the
acid.

_Strength of Solution of Hydrochloric Acid, 77 deg. Fahr._ (E. DAVY.)


              |Hydrochloric|            |Hydrochloric
  Sp. Gravity.|  acid in   |Sp. Gravity.|  acid in
              | 100 parts. |            | 100 parts.
  -------------------------|-------------------------
    1.21      |   42.43    |    1.10    |  20.20
    1.20      |   40.40    |    1.09    |  18.18
    1.19      |   38.38    |    1.08    |  16.16
    1.18      |   36.36    |    1.07    |  14.14
    1.17      |   34.34    |    1.06    |  12.12
    1.16      |   32.32    |    1.05    |  10.10
    1.15      |   30.30    |    1.04    |   8.08
    1.14      |   28.28    |    1.03    |   6.06
    1.13      |   26.26    |    1.02    |   4.04
    1.12      |   24.24    |    1.01    |   2.02
    1.11      |   22.22    |            |


In the laboratory, solution of hydrochloric acid is in constant use. It
may be easily prepared from chloride of sodium and sulphuric acid. The
retort should be connected with a couple of Woulfe's bottles; into the
first of which a small quantity of water should be poured, to detain any
impurities mechanically carried over with the gas; the second bottle
should contain four parts of water, and should be placed in a vessel of
cold water, as the gas in becoming condensed, disengages a large amount of
heat. The gas comes off and is absorbed readily by the water upon applying
a gentle heat to the retort.

It is by this last method that solution of hydrochloric acid is obtained
in such enormous quantities[347] for the various purposes in which it is
used, in the arts and manufactures.

[Footnote 347: In South Lancashire alone, more than 1000 tons of
hydrochloric acid in solution are made weekly.]

Hydrochloric acid is, in fact, a by-product in the manufacture of
carbonate of soda, and is generated during the first stage of the
operation, known as the salt-cake process, which consists in the
decomposition of salt by sulphuric acid, and is accomplished in a furnace
called the salt-cake furnace.

The hydrochloric acid gas which is given off escapes from the furnace
through a flue with the products of combustion into high brick towers
filled with coke or stones, over which a stream of water trickles down,
the whole of the acid vapours are thus condensed, the smoke passing off by
a chimney connected with the towers. The diluted acid solution thus formed
is concentrated by the aid of the apparatus shown in section in figs. 1,
2, and 3.

This apparatus consists of several cast-iron cylinders, 57 feet long by 27
feet in diameter, closed in the same manner as gas retorts, by lids luted
with clay. One of the lids has an opening _o_, into which is fitted the
stoneware or leaden pipe _a_, conveying the hydrochloric acid to the
condensing apparatus. The other, or posterior lid, is also provided with
an opening _d_, through which is passed the tube of a leaden funnel, so
that after the retort is filled with salt sulphuric acid may be poured in.
The construction of the furnace in which two retorts are usually placed,
permits the flame of the fire at O to play round the cylinders before
reaching the flue leading to the chimney F. B is an arch over the furnace.
The first stage of the operation consists in filling each cylinder with
330 lbs. of salt. The lids or covers are then luted on, and the fire is
kindled. The requisite quantity of strong sulphuric acid is next poured
into the retort, and the funnel having been withdrawn from D, the hole is
covered by a clay plug.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

As soon as the reaction is over, the 396 lbs. of sulphate of soda produced
are removed, and the operation repeated.

The condensation apparatus 1 and 3 is composed of rows of Woulfe's
bottles, partly filled with water, care being taken to place the first
pairs of these bottles in a tank of cold water.

The condensation of the last portions of hydrochloric acid gas is effected
either by the aid of the coke columns, or in leaden chambers, into which
fine jets of cold water are injected on all sides.

"A saturated solution of hydrochloric acid in water has the specific
gravity of 1.21; and when heated in a retort, loses at first hydrochloric
acid gas, but after a time an aqueous acid distils over, at the ordinary
atmospheric pressure, containing 20.22 per cent. of hydrochloric acid, and
boiling constantly at 110 deg. C. If the distillation be conducted under
diminished pressure, the liquid boils at a lower temperature, and attains
a composition which is different for each boiling point; hence the dilute
acids thus obtained by boiling the solution of hydrochloric acid gas in
water, cannot be considered as definite compounds of hydrochloric acid and
water."[348]

[Footnote 348: Roscoe and Dittmar.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

Commercial hydrochloric acid is usually of a yellow colour owing to its
being contaminated with iron. It also very frequently contains sodium,
arsenic, sulphuric and sulphurous acids, and free chlorine.

Pure aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid should leave no residue upon
evaporation; it should give no precipitation of ferric oxide when
saturated with ammonia, sulphuretted hydrogen should cause no turbidity in
it; if diluted with three or four times its volume of water, and chloride
of barium be added, no white cloud or precipitate should form in the
mixture; nor should the acid, if pure, discolour a fluid made faintly blue
with iodide of starch.

Hydrochloric acid is largely consumed in the manufacture of chlorine, sal
ammoniac, chloride antimony, glue, phosphorus, in the preparation of
carbonic acid for the manufacture of artificial mineral waters, in
beet-root sugar works, hydro-metallurgy, and alone, or mixed with nitric
acid, for dissolving various metals.[349] See ACIDS, EFFECTS OF VEGETATION
ON, CHLORINE.

[Footnote 349: Wagner.]

=HYDROCHLORIC ETHER.= (C_{2}H_{5}Cl.) _Syn._ ETHYL CHLORIDE, CHLORIDE OF
ETHYL. This ether may be obtained either by saturating alcohol with
hydrochloric acid gas, and then distilling at a gentle heat, or by
distilling a mixture of three parts of oil of vitriol, two of alcohol, and
four of fused chloride of sodium; the retort is in either case connected
with a tubulated receiver, surrounded by water at a temperature of about
68 deg. Fahr., in which most of the alcohol and water which pass over during
the operation become condensed, whilst the ether escapes in the form of
vapour through a bent tube, which is inserted into the tubulure of the
receiver, and passes to the bottom of a flask kept cool with ice. The
liquid which is condensed in the flask must be rectified from calcic
chloride.

Hydrochloric ether is a colourless liquid, having a specific gravity at
32 deg. Fahr. of 0.921, and a boiling point of 51.9 deg. Fahr. The specific
gravity of its vapour is 2.219. It has an ethereal, penetrating, somewhat
garlicky odour. It is sparingly soluble in water, but readily so in
alcohol. These solutions fail to give a precipitate with argentic nitrate.

=HYDROCYANIC ACID.= (HCN HCy.) _Syn._ PRUSSIC ACID, HYDRIC CYANIDE,
CYANHYDRIC ACID. Hydrocyanic acid was discovered by Scheele; but its
nature and chemical properties were first investigated by Gay-Lussac.

_Sources._ This acid is found in water distilled from the kernels of the
apricot, the peach, the plum, and cherry, the leaves of the laurel, and
some other shrubs. The kernels of the bitter almond also yield it by
distillation, mixed with an essential oil. The juice of the tapioca plant
(the _Jatropha manihot_) likewise contains it. Many nitrogenous
substances, when submitted to destructive distillation, also evolve
hydrocyanic acid. Crystallised ammonic formiate subjected to heat in a
retort yields a vapour which, passed through a red-hot tube, decomposes
into this acid and water. Another method by which it may be obtained,
consists in sending a current of dry sulphuretted hydrogen gas through a
long tube filled with cyanide of mercury; and very recently it has been
obtained by the direct combination of nitrogen and acetylene gas, by
adding one volume of the former to two of the latter, and passing a series
of electric sparks through the mixture, the gases combining without
condensation. Lastly, it is yielded when a metallic cyanide or
ferrocyanide is decomposed by an acid, this latter being the means by
which it is invariably procured.

1. ANHYDROUS HYDROCYANIC ACID may be prepared by Woehler's plan, which is
as follows:--A crude potassium cyanide is prepared by fusing eight parts
of the dried potassium ferrocyanide with three of potassium carbonate and
one of charcoal.

The fused mass is treated with six times its weight of water in a
well-closed vessel; the clear liquid is decanted from the iron, which it
is the object of this operation to separate, and is poured into a retort:
sulphuric acid, diluted with an equal weight of water, is gradually added
in the proportion of one part of oil of vitriol to two parts of the
cyanide. At first the distillation proceeds spontaneously from the heat
developed by the admixture of sulphuric acid with the water. In order to
condense the acid, the products are made to pass through a long U-shaped
tube, immersed in cold water and filled with calcic chloride, with the
exception of the first fourth of the tube, which contains fragments of the
crude potassium cyanide; to the bent tube is attached a second delivery
tube, which passes to the bottom of a bottle cooled with ice and salt. The
calcic chloride in the syphon tube retains the moisture, and the potassic
cyanide any sulphuric acid that might chance to pass over, whilst the
hydrocyanic acid collects in the anhydrous state in the cooled receiver.

Trautwein recommends it to be prepared by the dehydration of the strong
aqueous acid, by means of fused and pulverised chloride of calcium.[350]

[Footnote 350: The details of this process are given in 'Watt's Chemical
Dictionary.']

[asterism] The observance of the greatest care and caution are necessary
in the preparation of this most potent poison. The operation is most
safely performed in winter. The apparatus should be so arranged as to
allow of any vapours given off being carried from the operator by a brisk
current of air.

_Prop._ At ordinary temperatures anhydrous hydrocyanic acid is a
colourless liquid, having a specific gravity of 0.7058 at 44.6 deg. Fahr. It
is very inflammable, burning with a violet flame resembling that of
cyanogen, but somewhat whiter in colour. It is soluble in all proportions
in water, the resulting mixture being lighter than that fluid, and
miscible with alcohol. It is very feebly acid; potassic cyanide always
having an alkaline reaction. Red oxide of mercury is readily dissolved by
it, and when added to a solution of argentic nitrate it precipitates white
flocculi of cyanide of silver. Anhydrous hydrocyanic acid is an extremely
volatile liquid; if a drop be let fall on a glass plate, part of it
becomes frozen by the cold produced by its own evaporation.

2. PREPARATION OF AQUEOUS HYDROCYANIC ACID.

_a._ _From hydrated ferrocyanide of potassium._--By heating it in a glass
retort with oil of vitriol and water, Everitt states that the best
proportions are nearly ten parts of the salt to seven of oil of vitriol
(diluted with any convenient amount of water). Adopting these proportions,
422.4 parts of ferrocyanide of potassium yield 81 parts of hydrocyanic
acid. The greater part of the hydrocyanic acid passes over at the
beginning of distillation, at a temperature a little above 212 deg. Fahr.; and
when the residual liquid reaches a higher temperature, the water (which
then contains but little hydrocyanic acid) is then carried over. It is
therefore necessary to employ a good condensing apparatus, or the
hydrocyanic acid which passes over at first will for the most part be
dissipated in vapour mixed with the air of the apparatus. This loss may
also be obviated by placing water in the receiver. The residue need not be
boiled down to dryness; it will be found best to distil off from two
thirds to three fourths of the liquid, according to the amount of water
present.

It is not necessary to dissolve the ferrocyanide in water previous to
adding the sulphuric acid, as it readily dissolves in the water during the
process of distillation.

Three conditions are important to be observed in the arrangements of the
apparatus:--1. The mixture in the retort should not be allowed to spirt
over. 2. It should contain but little air. 3. It should present the
greatest possible amount of surface to be cooled.

If sulphate of potassium and prussian blue are spirted over into the
distillate, this must be carefully rectified over a small quantity of
magnesia, chalk, or carbonate of barium.

_b._ _From cyanide of potassium_ (without distillation).--To a solution of
nine parts of tartaric acid in sixty parts of water, contained in a
well-stoppered bottle nearly filled with it, four parts of pure cyanide of
potassium are added; the vessel is shaken, frequently dipped into cold
water, and then left in the cold for twelve hours; and the aqueous
hydrocyanic acid, which contains but a very small quantity of tartrate of
potassium, is poured off from the crystallised tartrate.[351] This acid
contains 3.6 per cent. of anhydrous hydrocyanic acid.

[Footnote 351: 'London Med. Surg. Journ.,' vi, 524.]

_c._ _From cyanide of mercury._--126 (accurately weighed) parts of cyanide
of mercury are agitated with at least 28 parts of iron filings, in a
well-stoppered bottle, containing 49, or rather more, parts of oil of
vitriol, diluted with a considerable quantity of water. The agitation is
continued until a portion of the liquid taken out is not blackened by
sulphuretted hydrogen.

The solution, decanted from the iron and mercury, is then placed in a
retort and distilled; the acid coming over at a gentle heat. Excess of
iron accelerates the decomposition.

_d._ _From cyanide of silver._--Everitt recommends 200 parts of pure
cyanide of silver to be shaken up with 240 parts of hydrochloric acid of
specific gravity of 1.129, and when the decomposition is complete, the
hydrocyanic acid to be separated from the chloride of silver by
decomposition.

This hydrocyanic acid may contain a small quantity of hydrochloric acid, a
not very objectionable admixture, since it retards decomposition. It
possesses the advantage of definite strength.

_Prop._ The aqueous is very similar in properties to the anhydrous acid,
differing in taste, odour, poisonous and combustible properties, according
to its degree of concentration. Like the anhydrous, the aqueous acid
decomposes, but not so readily; when perfectly pure, becoming brown, and
at last black. As before stated, a little free mineral acid assists to
preserve it. It should be always kept in a dark place.

_Detection and estimation of hydrocyanic acid and soluble cyanides._--The
presence of hydrocyanic acid, indicated by the characteristic smell, which
is given off by the contents of the stomach, or of any fluid containing it
(provided this is not disguised by any substance of stronger odour) may be
confirmed by the following tests:

1. To the filtered suspected fluid add a slight excess of caustic potash,
and then a solution containing ferrous and ferric sulphates. If
hydrocyanic acid, or a soluble cyanide be present, upon the addition of an
excess of hydrochloric acid the liquid turns to a blue colour (more or
less intense according to the quantity of acid present), owing to the
formation of Prussian blue.

2. Add the suspected fluid solution of nitrate of silver; if hydrocyanic
acid be present, a white cyanide of silver is formed, which is nearly
insoluble in cold nitric acid, but is soluble in ammonia and cyanide of
potash, and which, when heated to redness, gives off the inflammable
violet-flamed cyanogen.

3. Acidulate a small quantity of the suspected liquid with a few drops of
hydrochloric acid, and place it in a watch-glass; then invert a second
watch-glass, moistened with a drop of solution of ammonic sulphide over
this. After a few minutes remove the upper watch-glass, and evaporate the
liquid to dryness over a water bath; let the dry residue be treated with a
drop of a weak solution of ferric chloride. If hydrocyanic acid be
present, a blood-red colour is produced, owing to the formation of red
ferric hydrocyanide, which may be discharged by chloride of mercury; a
reaction which distinguishes it from a similar colour given by meconic
acid.

Where large quantities of material have to be examined, it is desirable
that the acid should be distilled off by the heat of a water-bath,
acidulating the liquid with tartaric acid if it be alkaline. The
distillate is then to be tested by any of the above methods.

_Antidotes._--Give a scruple of carbonate of potash dissolved in about an
ounce of distilled water, and directly afterwards, ten grains of sulphate
of iron, also dissolved in the same quantity of distilled water, to which
should be added one drachm of tincture of perchloride of iron. Whilst this
is being prepared, and subsequently, apply cold affusion to the head and
neck, artificial respiration, and, if practicable, give strong coffee and
brandy. A more ready remedy is ammonia, given both internally and applied
to the nostrils.

=Hydrocyanic Acid, Diluted.= _Syn._ ACIDUM HYDROCYANICUM DILUTUM. (B. P.)
The 'British Pharmacop[oe]ia' gives the following simple directions for
the preparation of this acid:--

Dissolve two and a quarter ounces (avoir.) of ferro-cyanide of potassium
in ten fluid ounces of distilled water, then add one fluid ounce of
sulphuric acid, previously diluted with four fluid ounces of distilled
water, and cooled. Put them into a retort and adapt this to a receiver,
containing eight fluid ounces of water, which must be kept carefully cold.
Distil with a gentle heat until the fluid in the receiver measures
seventeen fluid ounces. Add to this three fluid ounces of the water, or as
much as may be sufficient to bring the acid to the required strength of
two per cent. by weight.

_Prop._ Specific gravity, .997. 100 grains, or 110 minims, precipitated
with a solution of nitrate of silver, give a precipitate of cyanide of
silver, which when dried, weighs 10 grains. 270 grains rendered alkaline
by liquor sodae, require a 1000 grain measures of volumetric solution of
nitrate of silver, before a permanent precipitate begins to form.

_Antidotes._ See HYDROCYANIC ACID.

=Hydrocyanic Acid, Scheele's.= _Syn._ ACIDUM HYDROCYANICUM SCHEELII. The
original process of Scheele does not yield an acid of uniform strength,
and is probably never followed. It is therefore impossible to state
precisely what is intended when Scheele's acid is prescribed, or to
understand why it should be preferred by certain physicians to the British
Pharmacop[oe]ia preparation, which is of a known and definite strength. As
prepared by different makers it has been found to contain from three to
five per cent. of anhydrous acid. The following is Scheele's process:--

Mix two ounces of Prussian blue, with six ounces of red precipitate of
mercury, and add six ounces of water. Boil for some minutes, constantly
agitating; pour the whole on a filter and wash the residuum on the filter
with two ounces of hot water, which is to be added to the filtered liquor.
Add to this an ounce and a half of clean iron filings, and three drachms
of sulphuric acid; shake well and let it settle; then pour the clear
liquor into a retort, and distil a fourth part into a receiver well luted
and kept cold.

=HYDROFLUORIC ACID. (H. F.)= _Syn._ HYDRIC FLUORIDE, HYDROGEN FLUORIDE.
_Prep._ 1. From _fluor-spar_ (free from silica and metallic sulphides) and
oil of vitriol. The fluor-spar being reduced to fine powder and placed in
a leaden retort, is mixed with twice its weight of concentrated oil of
vitriol, and on applying heat, an acid and highly acid vapour distils
over, which condenses to a liquid if passed into a receiver of the same
metal, standing in a freezing mixture at a temperature of 4 deg. Fahr. Louyet
has shown that the liquid acid, obtained as above, is not (as once
believed) anhydrous.

2. From the double fluoride of potassium and hydrogen. Fremy first renders
the salt anhydrous by careful drying; and by the subsequent application of
a strong heat, expels the equivalent of hydrofluoric acid contained in it;
condensing it into a colourless, mobile, very volatile liquid by the
application of a freezing mixture of ice and salt.

3. By decomposing plumbic fluoride by dry hydrogen.

_Prop._ The strong, aqueous, hydrofluoric acid obtained by the action of
oil of vitriol on fluor-spar, is a densely fuming, volatile, colourless
liquid, which boils at 60 deg. F., and remains unfrozen at 4 deg.. It combines
with water so greedily, and evolves so much heat in doing so, as to give
rise to a hissing noise like that produced when a red-hot iron is plunged
into cold water. In a concentrated form it has a specific gravity of
1.060. Brought into contact with animal matter of any kind it instantly
destroys it, the smallest drop on the skin producing a deep and painful
wound; hence the necessity of the greatest care in its preparation. With
the exception of platinum, gold, silver, mercury and lead, hydrofluoric
acid, when diluted, dissolves the metals, the metal when it undergoes
solution, displacing hydrogen. Potassium decomposes the strong acid with
explosion.

In both the gaseous and fluid form hydrofluoric acid is largely consumed
for etching on glass; and this property constitutes one of its most
available and reliable tests. The test may be conveniently applied as
follows:--

Cover a small piece of window glass or a watch glass with a thin layer of
wax, scraping away a very small portion by means of a sharply pointed
instrument, and then expose the glass for a short time to the vapour of
the acid, given off when the materials are heated in a small leaden saucer
or platinum crucible; on removing the wax with a little turpentine, the
marks on the glass caused by the hydrofluoric acid will be distinctly
perceived.

=HYDROFLUOSILIC'IC ACID.= (_{4}HF.SiF_{4}.) FLUORIDE OF SILICON AND
HYDROGEN. _Prep._ From powdered fluor-spar, and siliceous sand or powdered
glass, of each 1 part; concentrated sulphuric acid, 2 parts; mix in a
glass retort, apply a gentle heat, and pass the evolved gas (fluoride of
silicon) into water. Decomposition ensues, silica being deposited in a
gelatinous state, and hydrofluosilicic acid remaining in solution. This
acid liquor, which is a double fluoride of silicon and hydrogen, is used
as a test for barium and potassium, with which it forms nearly insoluble
precipitates.

=HY'DROGEN. (H.)= _Syn._ HYDROGENIUM, L. An elementary body discovered by
Cavendish in 1766. It has been found existing in an uncombined state in
the gases evolved from the solfataras of Iceland. Combined with oxygen, it
constitutes water, and in this form is extensively distributed through
earth, air, and ocean. It is an important constituent of all organised
tissues.

_Prep._ Hydrogen is always obtained for experimental purposes by the
deoxidation of water, by one or other of the following methods:--

1. A tube of iron or porcelain (a gun-barrel, for instance) containing a
quantity of iron turnings or scraps of iron, is fixed across a furnace, so
that its middle portion may be made red-hot; to the one end is attached a
retort or other vessel containing water, and to the other a bent tube
connected with a pneumatic trough or gasometer. The tube being now heated
to redness, and the water in the retort brought into a state of brisk
ebullition, the evolved steam suffers decomposition; the oxygen being
absorbed by the iron, and the hydrogen escaping into the gas receiver.

2. Sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol), diluted with 6 or 8 times its bulk of
water, is poured on granulated zinc (or scraps of iron) placed in a retort
or gas bottle; hydrogen is evolved and is collected, as before.

_Obs._ This is the most convenient method of preparing hydrogen, and the
one usually adopted in the laboratory. To ensure the gas being quite pure,
distilled zinc is employed, and the gas is passed, first through a
concentrated solution of pure potassa, then through a solution of nitrate
of silver, and, lastly, through strong oil of vitriol, or over fragments
of chloride of calcium. When hydrogen is prepared from crude zinc, it has
a slight smell; and when from iron, its odour is often strong and
disagreeable.

_Prop._ Gaseous; colourless; tasteless; odourless (when pure);
combustible; sp. gr. .06935, being 16 times lighter than oxygen gas, and
14.4 times lighter than atmospheric air. 100 cubic inches, at 60 deg. Fahr.
and 30 inches of the barometer, weigh 2.1371 (say 2.14) gr.; 1 gr.
occupies 46.6 inches. It is very readily inflamed, even by a red-hot wire.
It burns with a scarcely visible flame. Mixed with atmospheric air or
oxygen, it explodes with extreme violence on the approach of flame, or
sudden compression. One measure of hydrogen and 5 of atmospheric air, and
2 of hydrogen and 1 of oxygen, are the proportions that explode with the
greatest violence. The combination of hydrogen and oxygen, when mixed, is
brought about by the heat of a red-hot solid or a flame, by the electric
spark, and by the presence of spongy platinum, the black powder of
platinum, clean platinum foil, and some other substances. A jet of
hydrogen burnt in oxygen gas, or a jet of these gases (mixed) burnt in the
air, with proper precautions, produces a most intense heat. Water absorbs
about 2% by volume of hydrogen.

Hydrogen has recently been liquefied and even solidified.

_Tests._ It is recognised by--its combustibility;--the pale colour of its
flame;--producing water only when burnt in air or oxygen;--extinguishing
the flame of other bodies; and--exploding when mixed with half its volume
of oxygen, and fired.

_Uses, &c._ Pure and uncombined hydrogen is not employed in the arts.
Inhalations of this gas have, however, been occasionally used in medicine.
Dr Beddoes recommended them in phthisis. In combination, the uses of
hydrogen are almost numberless. Combined with oxygen, it forms water; with
chlorine, hydrochloric acid; with fluorine, hydrofluoric acid; with
cyanogen, hydrocyanic acid; with carbon, innumerable hydrocarbons; with
nitrogen, ammonia; with sulphur, sulphuretted hydrogen--in fact, an
enumeration of the valuable compounds which it enters into would occupy
many pages of this work. From its extreme lightness it has been used to
fill balloons, but coal-gas is now commonly employed for this purpose. On
its property of inflaming in contact with spongy platinum is arranged the
popular little instrument for the production of instantaneous light
(DOBEREINER'S LAMP) sold by the philosophical instrument makers. The
chemist avails himself of the great heat developed by its combustion in
oxygen in the formation of the OXYHYDROGEN BLOWPIPE.

Some of the compounds of hydrogen are noticed _below_; the others under
their respective names.

=Hydrogen, Antimo''niuretted.= (SbH_{3}.) _Syn._ ANTIMONETTED HYDROGEN,
HYDRIDE OF ANTIMONY, STIBAMINE; HYDROGENIUM ANTIMONIATUM, L. A gaseous
compound of antimony and hydrogen, prepared by dissolving an alloy of
antimony with a large excess of zinc in hydrochloric or dilute sulphuric
acid. It has never been obtained pure, a variable proportion of free
hydrogen being always present. It burns with a bluish-white flame, giving
rise to dense fumes of teroxide of antimony, and when conducted through a
red-hot tube, or the flame is thrown on a cold surface, as a porcelain
plate, metallic antimony is deposited. This gas is a deadly poison when
inhaled. See ARSENIOUS ACID.

=Hydrogen, Arsen''iuretted.= (AsH_{3}.) _Syn._ ARSENETTED HYDROGEN,
HYDRIDE OF ARSENIC, ARSENAMINE; HYDROGENIUM ARSENIURATUM, L. A gaseous
compound of arsenic and hydrogen.

_Prep._ Arsenide of zinc (made by fusing together equal weights of zinc
and arsenic) is acted upon by strong hydrochloric acid or by sulphuric
acid diluted with three parts of water.

_Obs._ This gas is produced whenever arsenious or arsenic acid, or any of
their salts, is in presence of nascent hydrogen. The properties of
arsenetted hydrogen are fully described in the tests for ARSENIOUS ACID.
This gas is a deadly poison when inhaled.

=Hydrogen, Car'buretted.= _Syn._ CARBONETTED HYDROGEN. This term is
specially applied to two of the numerous compounds of carbon and hydrogen
(CARBIDES OF HYDROGEN, HYDROCARBONS):--

1. =Light Carburetted Hydrogen.= (CH_{4}.) _Syn._ MARSH GAS, FIRE-DAMP,
GAS OF THE ACETATES. This is often abundantly disengaged in coal mines,
and its combustion occasions those fearful explosions which are so
destructive to human life. The mud at the bottom of stagnant pools, on
being stirred, suffers bubbles of gas to escape, which, when collected and
examined, are found to be a mixture of light carburetted hydrogen and
carbonic acid. The latter is easily removed by passing the gas through a
solution of caustic potassa or milk of lime.

_Prep._ (Dumas.) A mixture of acetate of soda (cryst.) and hydrate of
potassa (dry), of each 2 parts, and quicklime (in powder), 3 parts, is
strongly heated in a flask or retort. The gas in a state of absolute
purity is disengaged in great abundance, and may be collected over water.

_Prop._ Colourless; neutral; nearly inodorous; burns with a yellow flame,
producing pure water and carbonic acid; explodes when kindled in contact
with air or oxygen.

2. =Heavy Carburetted Hydrogen.= (C_{2}H_{4}.) See OLEFIANT GAS.

_Obs._ COAL GAS, OIL GAS, and RESIN GAS, consist, for the most part, of
mixtures of these two gaseous hydrocarbons in uncertain proportions,
obtained respectively from coal, oil, and resin, by the action of heat,
and used for the purposes of illumination. See GAS.

=Hydrogen, Oxides of.= There are two well-defined compounds of hydrogen
and oxygen:--

1. =Subox'ide of Hydrogen.= (H_{2}O.) Water (which _see_).

2. =Perox'ide of Hydrogen.= (HO.) _Syn._ HYDROXYL, BINOXIDE OF HYDROGEN,
DEUTOXIDE OF H., OXYGENATED WATER; HYDROGENIIBINOXYDUM, L. This singular
fluid was discovered by M. Thenard in 1818.

_Prep._ (Odling.) A known quantity of pure hydrochloric acid, diluted with
8 or 10 times its volume of distilled water, is placed in a glass beaker
surrounded with ice or a freezing mixture. A quantity of binoxide of
barium rather less than sufficient to neutralise the acid is then ground
to a fine paste with distilled water, and added gradually to the acid in
which it should dissolve without effervescence. Diluted sulphuric acid is
next added cautiously, to precipitate the barium, and reproduce
hydrochloric acid to act upon a fresh quantity of peroxide. The liquid
having been filtered from the insoluble sulphate of baryta, a second
proportion of binoxide of barium paste is added gradually, as before. The
treatment with sulphuric acid, filtration and addition of binoxide, is
repeated 6 or 7 times. Sulphate of silver is then very carefully added, so
as exactly to precipitate in the form of chloride of silver the whole of
the chlorine. After filtration, pure baryta, first as a paste and then in
solution, is cautiously added, to precipitate exactly the sulphuric acid
set free from the sulphate of silver. Filtration is again resorted to, and
the clear liquid (aqueous solution of peroxide of hydrogen) is placed in a
dish over oil of vitriol in vacuo, in order that the water mixed with it
may evaporate.

_Prop., &c._ A colourless, transparent, somewhat syrupy liquid, of sp. gr.
1.452. It has a metallic taste, and corrodes the skin. It is easily
resolved into oxygen and water. It mixes freely with water, and becomes
more permanent by the dilution. It bleaches organic substances, and acts
as a powerful oxidating agent. Under certain circumstances, however, it
plays the part of a reducing agent. To the chemist, peroxide of hydrogen
and its analogue, binoxide of barium, have been of great service as
instruments of research. Binoxide of hydrogen has been applied in the arts
to restore the blackened lights of paintings which have become darkened by
sulphuretted hydrogen; it is also sold by hair-dressers for bleaching
human hair.

=Hydrogen, Phosphuret'ted.= See PHOSPHORUS.

=Hydrogen, Sulphides of.= See SULPHUR.

=HYDROMEL.= _Syn._ HYDROMELI, L. An aqueous solution of honey. _Prep._ (P.
Cod.) Honey, 2 oz.; boiling water, 32 oz.; dissolve, and strain. A
refreshing and slightly laxative drink; in fevers, hoarseness, sore
throats, &c.

=HYDROM'ETER.= _Syn._ AREOMETER, GRAVIMETER; HYDROMETRUM, L. An instrument
for ascertaining the specific gravities of liquids, and hence their
strength, the latter being either in inverse or direct proportion to the
former. Hydrometers are of two kinds:--1. Those which are always immersed
to the same depth in distilled water, and the liquid to be tried, small
weights being used for the purpose, as in FAHRENHEIT'S and NICHOLSON'S
hydrometers; and 2nd, those which are suffered to rise or sink freely in
the liquid, until they come to a state of rest, as in SYKE'S, BAUME'S, &c.
In both cases a correction must be made for any variation in temperature.

Of the two kinds, the first give the most accurate results, and have the
great advantage of being applicable to liquids either lighter or heavier
than water, but the second are the readier in practice, requiring less
time and less skill to use them. The following are those best known:--

BAUME'S HYDROMETER or AREOMETER, which is very generally employed on the
Continent, consists of two distinct instruments, the one for liquids
heavier than water, the other for liquids lighter than that fluid. The
first floats at the 0, or 'zero,' of the scale, in distilled wafer, at the
temperature of 58 deg. Fahr., and each degree, marked downwards, indicates a
density corresponding to one per cent. of common salt. The hydrometer for
liquids lighter than water is poised so that the 0 of the scale is at the
bottom of the stem, when it is floating in a solution of 1 oz. of common
salt in 9 oz. of water, and the depth to which it sinks in distilled water
shows 10 deg.; the space between these fixed points being equally divided, and
the graduation continued upwards to the top of the scale.

The temperature at which these instruments were originally adjusted by
Baume was 12.5 deg. Centigrade (54.5 deg. Fahr.). They are now commonly adjusted
in this country at 58 deg. or 60 deg. Fahr. Hence arise the discrepancies
observable in the published tables of the "correspondence between degrees
of Baume and real specific gravities."

CARTIER'S HYDROMETER, which is much used in France for light liquids, has
the same point for the zero of its scale as Baume's, but its degrees are
rather smaller, 30 deg. Baume being equal to 32 deg. Cartier.

FAHRENHEIT'S HYDROMETER consists of a hollow ball, with a counterpoise
below, and a very slender stem above, terminating in a small dish. The
middle, or half-length of the stem, is distinguished by a fine line across
it. In this instrument every division of the stem is rejected, and it is
immersed in all experiments to the middle of the stem, by placing proper
weights in the little dish above. Then, as the part immersed is constantly
of the same magnitude, and the whole weight of the hydrometer is known,
this last weight, added to the weights in the dish, will be equal to the
weight of fluid displaced by the instrument, as all writers on
hydrostatics prove. And accordingly, the specific gravities for the common
form of the tables will be had by the proportion--

_As the whole weight of the hydrometer and its load, when adjusted in
distilled water_, is to the _number_ 1000, so is the _whole weight when
adjusted in any other fluid, to the number expressing its specific
gravity._

GAY-LUSSAC'S ALCOHOLOMETER is used to determine the strength of spirituous
liquors. It, at once, indicates on the stem, the per-centage of absolute
alcohol in the liquid examined. The original experiments of Gay-Lussac
having been made on liquids at a temperature of 59 deg. Fahr., all examples
examined by the alcoholometer, must either be brought to that temperature
previous to being tested, or a correction made in the strength found.

NICHOLSON'S HYDROMETER is constructed on the same principle as
Fahrenheit's. It has in addition to the small dish for weights above, a
little cup attached below, for holding any solid body whose weight in
water is required. It is chiefly intended for taking the sp. gr. of
minerals.

RICHTER'S HYDROMETER resembles, for the most part, Gay-Lussac's.

SYKE'S HYDROMETER is that adopted by the Revenue authorities in England
for ascertaining the strength of spirits, and has been already fully
noticed.

TRALLES'S HYDROMETER resembles Gay-Lussac's (nearly).

TWADDELL'S HYDROMETER is much used in the bleaching establishments of
Scotland, and in some part of England. According to this scale, 0 is equal
to 1000 or the sp. gr. of distilled water, and each degree is equal to
.005; so that, by multiplying this number by the number of degrees marked
on the scale, and adding 1., the real specific gravity is obtained.

_Obs._ Hydrometers, unless manufactured with great care and skill, merely
afford approximate results; but which are nevertheless sufficiently
correct for all ordinary purposes. They also require several ounces of
liquid to float them, and hence cannot be used for very small quantities.
Those of Fahrenheit, Nicholson, and Sykes are the most accurate, both in
principle and application. They are all employed with a tall glass
cylinder termed a sample, test, or hydrometer glass, in the way already
noticed; but the thermometer for ascertaining the temperature must be
covered with a glass case, or arranged with a folding scale to allow of
its immersion in corrosive liquids.

ALCOHOLOMETERS, ELAIOMETERS, SACCHAROMETERS, URINOMETERS, &c., are simply
hydrometers so weighted and graduated as to adapt them for testing
spirits, syrups, urine, &c. See ALCOHOLOMETRY, ALONHOLMETRY, AREOMETER,
SPECIFIC GRAVITY, &c.

=HYDROM'ETRY.= _Syn._ AREOMETRY. The art of determining the specific
gravity of liquids, and hence their strength and commercial value. The
instruments used are noticed above; their action depends upon the fact
that a floating body displaces a bulk, equal to itself in weight, of the
fluid in which it floats, and consequently that a body of a given weight
sinks deeper in a lighter than in a heavier fluid. In hydrometric
determinations the temperature of the samples must be carefully attended
to, for fluids expand as their temperature is increased. The hydrometers
used in England are generally adjusted to the standard temperature of 60 deg.
Fahr., and when 'Hydrometer Tables,' giving the corrections for the
variations of the thermometer, are not accessible, the fluids to be
examined should be brought to this standard temperature by applying heat
directly to the vessel, when the temperature is below the standard, or by
surrounding the vessel, with cold water, when it is above the standard.
The principal applications of hydrometry are described in different parts
of this work. See ACETIMETRY, ALCOHOLOMETRY, CHLOROMETRY, SPECIFIC
GRAVITY, &c.

=HYDROP'ATHY.= _Syn._ WATER CURE; HYDROPATHIA, L. A mode of curing
diseases by the copious use of pure cold water, both internally and
externally, together with dry sweating, and the due regulation of diet,
exercise, and clothing. This "treatment of diseases undoubtedly includes
powerful therapeutic agents, which, in the hands of the educated and
honourable practitioner, might be most beneficially resorted to as
remedial agents." (Pereira.)

=HYDROPHO'BIA.= _Syn._ CANINE MADNESS; RABIES CANINA, L. A disease which
is generally considered as the result of a morbid poison being introduced
into the system by the bite of a rabid animal. A clear case of idiopathic
or spontaneous hydrophobia has never yet been known to occur in the human
subject.

The common symptoms of hydrophobia are great excitability and horror at
the sight of water, or the attempt to drink, fever, vomiting, excessive
thirst, spitting of viscid saliva, difficult respiration, irregular pulse,
convulsions, syncope, delirium, and death.

The whole materia medica has been, unfortunately, unsuccessfully sought
without the discovery of a single remedy for this disease, or even a
palliative of its severer symptoms. See CURARINE.

The treatment of recent bites of venomous animals has been fully
explained, and need not be repeated here. To prevent secondary or
constitutional effects arising, the use of lemon juice, or arsenical
solution, has long been popular. (Graham, and others.) Dr Buchan remarks
that "vinegar is of considerable use, and should be taken freely."

=HYDROSULPHU'RIC ACID.= See SULPHUR.

=HYGIENE'.= _Syn._ HYGIENE, Fr. Health; its preservation, promotion, and
restoration. That department of medicine and civil government which
relates to health. See AIR, BATH, EXERCISE, FLANNEL, FOOD, NUTRITION,
SLEEP, VENTILATION, &c.

=HYGROMETER.= An instrument for measuring the amount of moisture in the
atmosphere.

Amongst the various contrivances for accomplishing this end are Daniel's
dew-point hygrometer; and the wet bulb hygrometer.

By the first, the quantity of moisture in the atmosphere, is determined by
noting with a sensitive thermometer, the temperature at which a film of
dew mass, to deposit on one of the bulbs of a species of cryophorus,
disappears; the tension of the aqueous vapour present in the air at that
period, being readily ascertained from tables constructed for the purpose,
the corresponding proportion of moisture can thus be readily ascertained.

The wet bulb hygrometer consists of two small thermometers placed side by
side, the bulb of them being surrounded by cotton films kept constantly
damp by a simple contrivance. According to the rate of evaporation of the
bulb so moistened, with the fall of the thermometer to which the moistened
bulb belongs, the depression, of course, being greater the further the
surrounding atmosphere is from the saturation point, and tables are
furnished for determining the degree of saturation for all differences of
temperature within the ordinary atmospheric range.

=HYOCHO'LIC ACID.= C_{25}H_{40}O_{4}. _Syn._ GLYCOHYOCHOLALIC ACID. A
compound peculiar to the gall of pigs, discovered by Strecker and
Gundelach.

_Prep._ The fresh gall of pigs is mixed with a solution of sulphate of
sodium; the precipitate is dissolved in absolute alcohol, and decolourised
by animal charcoal. From this solution ether throws down hyocholate of
sodium, which, on the addition of sulphuric acid, yields hyocholic acid as
a resinous mass, which is dissolved in alcohol, re-precipitated by water,
and dried. When heated with alkaline solutions, glycocine and a new
crystalline acid (hyocholalic acid) are formed. When boiled with acids, it
yields glycocine and hyodyslysin.

=HYOSCY'AMINE.= _Syn._ HYOSCYAMIA, HYOSCYAMINA, DATURINE, DATURIA. An
alkaloid obtained from common henbane (_Hyoscyamus niger_), and also from
the thorn apple (_Datura stramonium_). See DATURA.

=HYPNOT'ICS.= _Syn._ HYPNOTICA, L. Agents or medicines which induce sleep,
as opium, morphia, henbane, Indian hemp, lactucarium, &c. Agents which
prevent sleep are called agrypnotics (_Agrypnotica_, L.), or anthypnotics
(_Anthypnotica_, L.).

=HYPOCHLO'RIC ACID.= See CHLORINE.

=HYPOCHONDRI'ASIS.= _Syn._ HYPOCHONDRIACISM. The 'hip' or 'hyp,' the
'vapours,' depression of spirits, 'blue devils.' This disease chiefly
affects persons of the melancholic temperament, and is commonly induced by
hard study, irregular habits of life, want of proper social intercourse,
living in close apartments, and insufficient out-of-door exercise. The
treatment may, in most cases be similar to that recommended for DYSPEPSIA,
observing, however, that success depends more on amusing and engaging the
mind, and in gradually weaning it from old conceits, than in the mere
administration of medicine. When the patient is tormented with a visionary
or exaggerated sense of pain, or of some concealed disease, or a whimsical
dislike of certain persons, places, or things, or groundless apprehensions
of personal danger or poverty, or the conviction of having experienced
some dreadful accident or misfortune, the better way is to avoid any
direct attempts to alter his opinions, but to endeavour to inspire
confidence in some method of relief. Greding mentions the case of a
medical man who conceived that his stomach was full of frogs, which had
been successively spawning ever since he had bathed, when a boy, in a pool
in which he had perceived some tadpoles; and he had spent his life in
endeavouring to get them removed. One patient, perhaps, fancies himself a
giant; another as heavy as lead; a third a feather, in continual danger of
being blown away by the wind; and a fourth a piece of glass, and is hourly
fearful of being broken. Marcellus Dentatus mentions a baker of Ferrara
who thought himself a lump of butter, and durst not sit in the sun, or
come near the fire, for fear of being melted. The writer of this article
once knew a man who always put on his coat the wrong side in front,
because he conceived his face looked behind him. In such cases it is
useless to argue with the patient, as it only causes irritation, and
increases the malady. The restoration of the bodily health, and a sudden
surprise or change of scene, will often effect a cure.

=HYPONI'TRIC ACID.= See NITROGEN.

=HYPONI'TROUS ACID.= See NITROGEN.

=HYPOPHOS'PHITES.= See PHOSPHORUS.

=HYPOPHOS'PHITE.= A salt of hypophosphorous acid.

=HYPOSUL'PHATE.= _Syn._ DITHIONATE; HYPOSULPHAS, L. A salt of
hyposulphuric acid.

=HYPOSUL'PHITE.= _Syn._ THIOSULPHATE; HYPOSULPHIS, L. A salt of
hyposulphurous acid.

=HYPOSUL'PHUROUS ACID.= See SULPHUROUS ACID.

=HYRA'CEUM.= A substance produced by the Cape badger (_Hyrax Capensis_),
and proposed as a substitute for CASTOREUM. Pereira considered it to be
inert and useless.

=HYSTERICS.= _Syn._ HYSTERIA, PASSIO HYSTERICA, L. In _pathology_, a
nervous affection peculiar to women, attacking in paroxysms or fits,
preceded by dejection; tears, difficult breathing, sickness, and
palpitation of the heart. The treatment of this disease varies with the
causes and the symptoms. Bleeding, cupping, and depletives, are generally
had recourse to in robust and plethoric habits, and stimulants and tonics
in those of a weakly or relaxed constitution. Affusion of cold water and
nasal stimulants will frequently remove the fit in mild cases. Exercise,
proper amusements and regular hours and diet, are the best preventives.
See DRAUGHT (Antihysteric and Hydrocyanic), &c.


=ICE.= _Syn._ GLACIES, L. Water in the solid state. On being cooled, water
gradually contracts until the temperature has fallen to 39.9 deg. Fahr., when
it begins to expand. At the freezing-point, 32 deg. Fahr., under ordinary
conditions, water crystallises or freezes, and in consequence of the
continued expansion, the sp. gr. of ice, as compared with that of water at
39.9 deg., is as .94 to 1.00. Ice has the peculiar property of reuniting by
the contact of adjoining surfaces after having been broken into fragments
(REGELATION). Coloured water and salt water, by freezing, produce
colourless and fresh ice; and clean solid ice, when thawed, furnishes
water equal in purity to that which has been distilled.

The use of ice in the preparation of ICE-CREAMS, ICED-LIQUORS, &c., is
noticed elsewhere. The confectioner collects his ice as early as possible
during the winter, and stores it in a well-drained well or excavation,
somewhat of the form of an inverted sugar-loaf, contained in a small shed
or building called an ICE-HOUSE. This building should always be situated
on a dry sandy soil, and, if possible, on an eminence. The door should be
on the north side, and the roof should be conical and thickly thatched
with straw.

In _medicine_, ice is frequently employed externally in inflammation of
the brain, to resolve inflammation, to stop haemorrhage, to constringe
relaxed parts, and an anodyne, to deaden pain. For these purposes it is
pounded small, in a cloth, and placed in a bladder or bag of gauze
(ICE-CAP, ICE-POULTICE) before applying it. Internally, ice or ice-cold
water has been given with advantage in heartburn, typhus, inflammation and
spasms of the stomach, to check the vomiting in cholera, and to arrest
haemorrhage, whether bronchial, gastric, nasal, or uterine. Very recently,
ice has been proposed as a remedy in the treatment of diphtheria. Small
lumps of ice, or a small glassful of pounded ice-and-water, will often
temporarily restore the tone of the stomach and nervous system during hot
weather, when all other means fail. Ice-creams, taken in moderation, act
in the same way.

In the warmer climates of Europe an ICE-HOUSE or an ICE-SAFE (a
REFRIGERATOR) is a necessary appendage to every respectable dwelling, not
merely for the purpose of pleasing the palate with iced beverages, but to
enable the residents to preserve their provisions (fish, meat, game, milk,
butter, &c.) in a wholesome state from day to day. In addition to large
cargoes of ice imported yearly from Norway, and principally consumed in
England, Germany and France, ice is now manufactured to no inconsiderable
amount, in these three countries artificially, the principal consumption
of the factitious article being by brewers, who use it for the cooling of
their worts. The artificial manufacture of ice is effected by the means of
the condensation of elastic vapours in machines expressly made for the
purpose. In Siebe's ice-making machine the vapour of ether is made to
traverse metallic tubes surrounded with a concentrated solution of common
salt, by which it becomes recondensed to the liquid state, to be again
utilised in the production of the vapour; the solution of salt becoming at
the same time so reduced in temperature, as to convert into ice, water,
contained in proper vessels, placed in it. In Carre's machine the same end
is accomplished by means of ammoniacal gas, a solution of calcic chloride
being used for absorbing the cold instead of common salt. Reece's is a
modification, (he states an improvement) of Carre's. Ice machines are also
made, in which ice is produced, by bringing water into contact with air,
which has been greatly reduced in temperature by cooling it when in the
compressed state, and subsequently allowing it to expand. Liquid carbonic
and sulphurous acids have likewise been used in the preparation of
artificial ice, but not when it has been required in any considerable
quantity. See REFRIGERATION.

=Ice, Medicated.= Mr Martin, of Weston-super-Mare, writing to the
'Lancet,' says:--"Every practitioner has at times to face the difficulties
of the scarlatinal throat in young children. It may sadly want topical
medication; but how is he to apply it? Young children cannot gargle, and
to attempt the brush or the spray fills them with terror. In many cases
neither sternness nor coaxing avails. Yet these little ones in almost
every case will greedily suck bits of ice. This has long been my chief
resource where I could not persuade the child to submit to the sulphurous
acid spray. Lately, I have been trying an ice formed of the frozen
solution of the acid (or some other antiseptic). Though, of course, not so
tasteless as pure ice, the flavour is so much lessened by the low
temperature, and probably also through the parched tongue, very little
appreciating any flavour, that I find scarcely any complaint on that score
from the little sufferers; they generally take to it very readily. The
process of making it is very simple. A large test-tube immersed in a
mixture of ice and salt is the only apparatus required, and in this the
solution is easily frozen. When quite solid a momentary dip of the tube in
hot water enables one to turn out the cylinder of ice, as the cook turns
out her mould of jelly. I have tried the three following formulae, all of
which answer, although I think I prefer the first.

"1. Sulphurous acid, 1/2 dr.; water, 7-1/2 dr.; mix and freeze.

"2. Chlorate of potass, 1 scruple; water, 1 oz.; dissolve, and freeze.

"3. Solution of chlorinated soda, 1/2 dr.; water, 1 oz.; mix and freeze.

"However, the form is of secondary importance, as each practitioner can
construct his own. Boracic acid, salicylic acid, or any other harmless
antiseptic with not too much taste, would doubtless be as useful as those
indicated."

=ICE'LAND MOSS.= _Syn._ CETRARIA (B. P.), LICHEN ISLANDICUS, L. The lichen
termed _Cetraria Islandicus_. It is much employed, both as a nutritious
food and as a mild mucilaginous tonic, in catarrh and consumption. It may
be purified from its bitter principle by a little cold solution of
potassa.

=Iceland Moss, Saccharated.= _Syn._ (P. C.), SACCHARUM LICHENIS. Iceland
moss, 1 lb.; refined sugar 1 lb.; macerate the moss in water to extract
the bitterness, express, boil in water for an hour, strain, let settle,
decant, add the sugar, evaporate to dryness with a gentle heat, constantly
stirring, and finally reduce to powder.

=ICES.= (In _confectionery_.) These are commonly composed of cream or
sweetened water, variously flavoured, and congealed by ice or a freezing
mixture. Sometimes, instead of cream, the materials of a custard are used.
The mixed ingredients are placed in a tin furnished with a handle at top,
called a 'freezer,' or 'freezing-pot,' which is then plunged into a bucket
containing ice broken small, and mixed with about half its weight of
common salt, and is kept in rapid motion, backwards and forwards, until
its contents are frozen. As the cream congeals and adheres to the sides,
it is broken down with the ice-spoon, so that the whole may be equally
exposed to the cold. As the salt and ice in the tub melt, more is added,
until the process is finished. The 'ice-pot,' with the cream in it, is
next placed in a leaden 'ice-stand,' is at once surrounded with a mixture
of ice and salt, and closely covered over. In this state it is carried
into the shop. The glasses are filled as required for immediate use, and
should have been previously made as cold as possible.

PLAIN ICE-CREAM, or CREAM FOR ICING, is commonly made by one or other of
the following formulae:--

1. New milk, 2 pints; yolks of 6 eggs; white sugar, 4 oz.; mix, strain,
heat gently and cool gradually.

2. Cream 1 pint; sugar, 4 oz.; mix as above.

3. Cream and milk, of each 1 pint; white sugar, 1/2 lb.

FLAVOURED ICE-CREAMS are made by mixing cream for icing with half its
weight of mashed or preserved fruit, previously rubbed through a clean
hair sieve; or, when the flavour depends on the juice of fruit or on
essential oil, by adding a sufficient quantity of such substances.
RASPBERRY and STRAWBERRY ICES are made according to the former method;
LEMON, ORANGE, NOYEAU, and ALMOND ICES, by the latter method. In the same
way any other article besides cream may be frozen.

CHOCOLATE FOR ICING is made by rubbing 1 oz. of chocolate to a paste with
a tablespoonful of hot milk, and then adding 'cream for icing,' 1 pint.

COFFEE FOR ICING is made of cream for icing, 1 quart, to which a small
teacupful of the strongest possible clarified coffee has been added
together with 2 oz. of sugar and the yolks of 3 or 4 eggs. See ICING
(_below_).

=I'CING.= (For cakes.) _Syn._ SUGAR ICE. The covering of concreted sugar
with which the confectioners adorn their cakes. _Prep._ Beat the white of
eggs to a full froth, with a little rose or orange-flower water; then add
gradually, as much finely powdered sugar as will make it thick enough,
beating it well all the time. For use, dust the cakes over with flour,
then gently rub it off, lay on the icing with a flat knife, stick on the
ornaments while it is wet, and place it in the oven for a few minutes to
harden, but not long enough to discolour it. It may be tinged of various
shades by the addition of the proper 'stains.'

=ID'RIALIN.= A fusible, inflammable substance, found associated with the
native cinnabar of the mines of Idria, in Carniola. It is extracted from
the ore by means of oil of turpentine. It is only slightly soluble in
alcohol and ether. When pure, it is white and crystalline.

=ID'RYL.= A hydrocarbon generally found associated with idrialin.

=IGASU'RIC ACID.= _Syn._ ACIDUM IGASURICUM, L. An acid associated with
strychnine in the St. Ignatius' bean and in nux vomica. It may be obtained
by digesting the rasped or ground beans first in ether and then in boiling
alcohol, evaporating the latter decoction to dryness, diffusing the
residuum through water, adding a little carbonate of magnesium, again
boiling for some minutes, filtering, washing the powder with cold water,
and digesting it in alcohol, and filtering. The igasurate of magnesium
thus obtained is dissolved in boiling water, the solution decomposed by
acetate of lead, and the precipitate (igasurate of lead), after being
washed and diffused through distilled water, is decomposed by sulphuretted
hydrogen. The solution thus obtained yields crystals (igasuric acid) on
being evaporated. It is soluble in both water and alcohol.

=IGNI''TION.= In the laboratory this term is commonly applied to the act
of heating to redness or luminousness. See CALCINATION.

=ILLICIN.= Boil a clear decoction of holly with animal charcoal; let it
settle, collect the deposited charcoal, wash it with cold water, dry it,
and treat it with boiling alcohol; let the filtered liquid be evaporated
to dryness. Febrifuge.--_Dose_, 6 to 24 gr.

=ILLUMINA'TION.= The act of illuminating or making luminous. For supplying
artificial light to streets and the interiors of houses coal gas and oils
and fats are generally employed. These illuminating agents are compounds
rich in carbon, upon the presence of which the brightness of their flames
depends. Flame is gas or vapour heated to incandescence during the
process of combustion. A flame containing no solid particles emits but a
feeble light, even if its temperature is the highest possible. Pure
hydrogen, for instance, burns with a pale, smokeless flame, though with
the production of considerable heat. On the other hand, wax, paraffin,
coal-gas, &c., while undergoing combustion, give out considerable light,
because their flames contain innumerable solid particles of carbon, which
act as radiant points. To give the greatest degree of luminosity to flame,
the supply of air must be proportioned to the character of the burning
substance, and be insufficient for the instantaneous combustion of the
evolved gases; in which case the hydrogen takes all the oxygen, and the
larger portion of the carbon is precipitated, and burnt in the solid form,
at some little distance within the outer surface of the flame. When the
supply of air is sufficient for the immediate and complete combustion of
the whole of the combustible matter, no such precipitation takes place,
and the flame is neither white nor brilliant. The richest coal-gas, mixed
with sufficient air to convert all its hydrogen and carbon into water and
carbonic acid, explodes with a pale blue flash; yet the same gas, when
consumed in the ordinary way, burns with a rich white flame. Every one
must have noticed the effect of a gust of wind upon the flaring gas-jets
of a butcher's shop; the plentiful supply of air causes complete
combustion, and so converts the bright white flames into dull blue streaks
of fire. When the supply of air is insufficient to cause the combustion of
the newly formed solid carbon at the instant of its development, and
whilst it is in an incandescent state, the flame becomes red and smoky,
and unburnt sooty particles are thrown off. The same occurs when the
temperature of any portion of the hydrogen is reduced below that intensity
required for the combustion of the newly separated charcoal. Solid bodies,
as tallow, oils, and fats, which burn with flame, are converted into the
state of gas by the heat required to kindle them, and it is this gaseous
matter which suffers combustion, and not the substance which produces it.

The relative value of the ordinary illuminating agents has been accurately
determined by Dr Frankland. According to his experiments, the quantities
of various substances required to give the same amount of light as would
be obtained from 1 gallon of Young's Paraffin oil are as follows:--

  Young's Paraffin oil    1.00 gall.
  American rock oil[352]  1.26  "
  Paraffin candles       18.6  lbs.
  Sperm                  22.9   "
  Wax                    26.4   "
  Stearic                27.6   "
  Composite              29.5   "
  Tallow                 39.0   "

[Footnote 352: Acknowledged to be an inferior sample.]

The following table exhibits the comparative cost of the light of 20 sperm
candles, each burning 10 hours at the rate of 120 gr. per hour; also the
amount of carbonic acid produced and heat evolved per hour, in obtaining
this quantity of light:--

                                 Carb. acid    Units of
                     Cost.       per hour in     heat
                  _s._  _d._      cub. feet    per hour.

  Wax              7    2-1/2 }
  Spermaceti       6    8     }      8.3         82
  Paraffin candles 3    10           6.7         66
  Tallow           2    8           10.1        100
  Rock oil         0    7-1/2 }
  Paraffin oil     0    6     }      3.0         29
  Coal gas         0    4-1/2        5.0         47
  Cannel gas       0    3            4.0         32

These figures prove that coal-gas and the mineral oils are the cheapest
and best illuminating agents, producing the largest amount of light with
the least development of heat.

The light emitted by incandescent lime (DRUMMOND LIGHT, HYDRO-OXYGEN
LIGHT, LIME LIGHT, OXYHYDROGEN LIGHT) is intensely brilliant, and is often
made use of to enable workmen to continue operations at night. It is
obtained by directing the flame produced by the combustion of a mixture of
hydrogen (or coal-gas) and oxygen upon a small cylinder of lime. In the
improved form of this light the lime is protected from crumbling by a cage
of platinum wire, and is caused to rotate slowly by means of clockwork, so
as constantly to expose a fresh surface to the flame. When reflected from
a 'parabolic mirror' in a pencil of parallel rays, the Drummond light has
been recognised during daylight at a distance of 108 miles. The lime light
produced with coal-gas and oxygen is used for the MAGIC LANTERN and GAS
MICROSCOPE.

The most powerful illuminator is the ELECTRIC LIGHT, which is now being
subjected to trial in many cities for street illuminations, &c., in place
of coal-gas. It is usually produced by the passage of a strong current of
electricity between two pencils of hard carbon. The electric light has
been successfully applied to lighthouse illumination. Hitherto it has been
found too intense and too costly for application to domestic purposes. See
CANDLES, FLAME, GAS, PHOTOMETRY, &c.

=ILLU'TATION.= See BATH (Mud).

=IMAGINA'TION.= The influence of the imagination, both in the production
and cure of disease, has been long admitted by medical practitioners. It
is probably the most powerful therapeutic agent known. "Extraordinary
cures have been ascribed to inert and useless means, when, in fact, they
were referable to the influence of the imagination." (Dr Pereira.)

=IMPE'RIAL.= _Syn._ POTUS IMPERIALIS, PTISANA I., L. _Prep._ 1. Cream of
tartar, 1/4 oz.; 1 lemon, sliced; lump sugar, 2 oz.; boiling water, 1
quart; infuse, with occasional stirring until cold, then pour off the
clear portion for use.

2. A lemon, sliced; sugar, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint.

3. Yellow rind and juice of lemon; citric acid, 1 dr.; sugar, 2-1/2 oz.;
hot water (which has been boiled), 1 quart; as No. 1. Refrigerant and
slightly diuretic. Used as a common drink in fevers, dropsy, &c., and as a
summer beverage.

=IM'PLEMENTS (Agricultural).= "Almost all the operations of agriculture
may be performed by the plough, the harrow, the scythe, and the flail; and
these are the sole implements in the primitive agriculture of all
countries. With the progress of improvement, many other implements (and
machines) have been introduced, the more remarkable of which are the DRILL
PLOUGH, the HORSE HOE, the WINNOWING MACHINE, the THRESHING MACHINE, the
HAY-MAKING MACHINE, and the REAPING MACHINE. The object of all these
implements and machines is to abridge human labour, and to perform the
different operations to which they are applied with a greater degree of
rapidity, and in a more perfect manner than before." (Loudon.) On the
perfection of agricultural implements and machines depends much of the
improvement of which this art is susceptible. See AGRICULTURE, &c.

=IMPROV'ING.= The trade name for 'doctoring,' 'adulterating,' or
'lowering,' the quality of any substance, with the view of cheapening it
or increasing its bulk. See WINE, &c.

=IN'CENSE.= _Prep._ 1. Olibanum, 2 or 3 parts; gum benzoin, 1 part.

2. Olibanum, 7 parts; gum benzoin, 2 parts; cascarilla, 1 part. Placed on
a hot plate or burned, it exhales an agreeable perfume. Used in some of
the rituals of the Roman Catholic church.

3. Benzoin and storax, of each 4 oz.; labdanum and myrrh, of each 6 oz.;
cascarilla 3 oz.; oil cinnamon, 8 minims; oils bergamot and lavender, of
each 20 minims; oil cloves, 10 minims; mix, and pass through a coarse
sieve.

=INCINERA'TION.= The reduction of organic substances to ashes by
combustion. See CALCINATION.

=INCOMBUSTIBIL'ITY.= The property of being incapable of being kindled, or
of being consumed by fire. Substances possessing this property are said to
be 'incombustible' or 'fire-proof.'

=INCOMBUST'IBLE FAB'RICS.= _Syn._ NON-INFLAMMABLE FABRICS. The fashion of
wearing light gauzy dresses extended by hoops or crinoline has made death
from fire a common casualty. With a view of diminishing the danger to
which women expose themselves, chemists have lately devoted considerable
attention to the problem of rendering muslin and other light fabrics
non-inflammable. This object may be attained by steeping the fabric in
almost any saline solution. Thus, cotton or linen stuffs prepared with a
solution of borax, phosphate of soda, phosphate of ammonia, alum, or sal
ammoniac, may be placed in contact with ignited bodies without their
suffering active combustion or bursting into flame. The salts act by
forming a crust of incombustible matter on the surface of the fibres. They
do not, however, prevent carbonisation taking place, when the temperature
is sufficiently high. It is by a knowledge of this property of culinary
salt that jugglers are enabled to perform the common trick of burning a
thread of cotton while supporting a ring or a small key, without the
latter falling to the ground. The cotton is reduced to a cinder, but from
the action of the salt its fibres still retain sufficient tenacity to
support a light weight.

The addition of about 1 oz. of alum or sal ammoniac to the last water used
to rinse a lady's dress, or a set of bed furniture, or a less quantity
added to the starch used to stiffen them, renders them uninflammable, or
at least so little combustible that they will not readily take fire; and
if kindled, are slowly consumed without flame. None of the above-named
salts are adapted for fine soft muslins, which mostly require chemical
treatment, because they injure the texture, rendering the fabric harsh and
destroying all its beauty. The salt which is found to answer most
completely all the required conditions is TUNGSTATE OF SODA. "Muslin
steeped in a solution containing 20% of this salt is perfectly
non-inflammable when dry, and the saline film left on the surface is
smooth and of a fatty appearance like talc, and therefore does not
interfere with the process of ironing, but allows the hot iron to pass
smoothly over the surface. The non-fulfilment of this latter condition
completely prevents the use of many other salts--such as sulphate or
phosphate of ammonia, which are otherwise efficacious in destroying
inflammability--for all fabrics which have to be washed and ironed."
(Watts.)

The addition of a little phosphoric acid or phosphate of soda to the
tungstate is recommended, for without this addition a portion of the
tungstate is apt to undergo a chemical change and become comparatively
insoluble. Messrs Versmann and Oppenheim, the introducers of tungstate of
soda, give the following formula for a solution of minimum strength:--

Dilute a concentrated solution of neutral tungstate of soda with water to
28 deg. Twaddell (sp. gr. 1.14), and then add 3% of phosphate of soda. This
solution is found to keep and to answer its purpose very well; it is now
constantly used in the Royal Laundry.

PAPER, WOOD, &c., may be also rendered comparatively incombustible by
soaking them in saline solutions. See ASBESTOS, FIRE, &c.

=INCOMPAT'IBLES.= In _medicine_ and _pharmacy_, substances which exert a
chemical action on each other, and cannot, therefore, with propriety, be
prescribed together in the same formula or prescription. The principles
on which we should act to avoid prescribing or dispensing incompatibles,
are briefly developed under the heads AFFINITY and DECOMPOSITION. To this
we may add that, if a substance is endowed with well-marked therapeutical
or poisonous properties, independent of those which may exert a chemical
effect upon the tissues, its mode of action will neither be changed nor
destroyed by the combinations which it forms, provided always that the new
compounds are not insoluble in water.

"It is not necessary to give two incompatible medicines at the same time,
in order to produce decomposition; it is sufficient if they are given
within a very short interval of each other. Thus, a sick person, who has
been treated with lead externally, or even internally, will present a
discoloration of the skin, if he takes a sulphur bath four or five days
after the lead treatment has been discontinued. If a person is rubbed with
iodide of potassium shortly after having applied Vigo's plaster (plaster
of ammoniacum with mercury), or the Neapolitan ointment (mercurial
ointment), iodide of mercury and caustic potash will be formed, which will
cause vesication. So also vomiting occurs if lemonade made with tartaric
acid is taken five or 6 days after the administration of white oxide of
antimony." (Trousseau and Reveil.)

Lists of incompatibles are published in many pharmaceutical and medical
works, but are, in reality, of little use beyond illustrating rules and
principles which are familiar to every chemist, and which every prescriber
should also be intimately acquainted with.

=INCRUSTATION, Prevention of, in Steam Boilers.= With all qualities of
water commonly used for feeding steam boilers there is a tendency to the
production of hard calcareous deposits or layers of incrustation within
the boilers, due to the separation of lime salts (particularly the
carbonate and sulphate, or mixtures of these with a certain amount of
carbonate of magnesia) as the direct consequence of the accumulation of
these impurities from large quantities of water evaporated. The sparing
solubility of the sulphate of lime (gypsum) in hot water fully accounts
for its deposition in the boiler, and the carbonate of lime (chalk) is
thrown down, not only as the result of direct evaporation, but by the
ebullition expelling free carbonic acid, which holds this body to some
extent in solution. Rain water, which of itself is too pure to give rise
to these incrustations, cannot be used _alone_ for boiler purposes, for it
has been found to exert a highly corrosive action upon the iron plates and
fittings. It can, however, be advantageously employed in conjunction with
'hard' spring or river waters, and has the effect of diminishing the
incrustation merely as the result of dilution. The drain pipes leading
from the roof of the factory may be placed in connection with the tank or
well from which the supply of water is drawn for the boilers. It will be
seen hereafter that the self-same remedy is efficient both as a means of
preventing incrustation and obviating corrosion, and that by using one of
the alkaline substances about to be specified this twofold advantage may
be secured. Iron will not rust when immersed in water containing a mere
trace of caustic alkali, and it is a common observation that the iron
vessels used in the preparation of potash and soda remain for any length
of time free from all appearance of rust. This singular property is, no
doubt, susceptible of important applications, amongst them may be
mentioned the better protection of iron ships from the attack of bilge
water, of hydraulic rams, moulding boxes, smith's tools, and other objects
liable to be placed at times under the influence of water. Some forms of
surface condensers become quickly corroded in consequence of the purity of
the water accumulating in them by the process of distillation, and a small
dose of caustic alkali is then useful as a means of protection; the
engine-cylinders also to some extent are preserved when alkaline
anti-incrustation fluids are introduced into the boilers, for the minute
quantity which is carried forward mechanically in the form of spray mixed
with the steam, suffices to preserve the iron. Whilst a tendency to
'priming' undoubtedly results from a too liberal use of soda or other
alkali in the boiler, it will in practice be found easy to adjust the
proportion of this ingredient, so as to secure immunity from corrosion and
incrustation, and at the same time, avoid the tumultuous kind of
ebullition known as 'priming.' In all cases it is advisable to carry out a
rigid system of inspection, and it is only in the way of saving fuel and
labour that the application of boiler fluids is to be recommended.

Much benefit has often resulted from a coating of coal-tar or 'dead oil'
applied to the interior surfaces below the water line, when the boiler is
opened for cleaning and inspection. These will tend very considerably to
lessen the adhesion of calcareous crusts, and are not in any way affected
by the boiler fluids in common use. Soda crystals and caustic soda may be
used with great success in boilers to effect the immediate precipitation
of the lime salts, and they act by throwing down a finely divided form of
carbonate of lime, which in time furnishes nuclei for the deposition of
subsequent accretions both of the carbonate and sulphate, so that they are
prevented from crystallising upon the walls of the boiler. A granular mud
is thus formed, which subsides quickly and may be for the most part got
rid of through the 'blow-off cock,' which should be opened for this
purpose two or three times every day, and run out with as little water as
possible.

The use of caustic soda has undergone a thorough trial at the hands of Mr
J. Spiller, F.C.S., in the boilers of the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, and we
are favoured with the following general instructions regarding its use,
which are based upon an experience of upwards of ten years. The caustic
soda should be dissolved in water so as to make a concentrated solution of
specific gravity 1.300. This, being perfectly miscible with water, may be
introduced into the boiler with the feed-water at any time when, from the
pressure of steam, it may not be convenient to pour it through the safety
valve or other openings in the boiler. But when the steam is down there is
no difficulty in introducing the prescribed dose by using a tin funnel
with flattened aperture to pass it through the safety valve; or a tubular
arrangement with double cocks will answer at all times. Half a gallon per
diem is the average quantity found sufficient for a 20-horse stationary
boiler, working with Thames water for ten hours daily. If the water should
happen to be unusually hard a larger dose may be employed, but it would
not be expedient to add in one charge more than the amount required for
the day's consumption. Locomotive and multitubular boilers have been
worked successfully with caustic soda, and it is here that the importance
of using anti-incrustation fluids makes itself most apparent.

Many other methods have at various times been proposed to prevent the
formation of deposits in steam boilers. Dr Ritterband's method consists in
simply throwing a little sal ammoniac into the boiler, by which carbonate
of ammonia is formed, which passes off with the steam, and chloride of
calcium, which remains in solution. In Holland this plan has been used
with satisfaction for locomotive boilers. About 2 oz. of the salt may be
placed in the boiler twice a week. The chloride of tin is equal to sal
ammoniac, and is similar in its action. Carbonate of soda has been
recommended by Kuhlmann and Fresenius of Germany, and by Crace Calvert of
England. It is now employed generally in the boilers of engines in
Manchester. The common plan adopted by working engineers to prevent
incrustations from either variety of water is, on each occasion of
cleaning out the boiler, to introduce some substance which, by its
mechanical action, shall prevent the precipitated earthy matter caking
together, or adhering to the boiler plates. Some common tar, bitumen, or
pitch, appears to answer well under most circumstances. Mr Ira Hill
recommends the use of 3 or 4 shovelfuls of course sawdust. He states that,
after adopting the use of this article, he never had any difficulty from
lime, although using water strongly impregnated with it, and has always
found the inside of his boilers as smooth as if just oiled. Mr De Haen
recommends the sulphate and bicarbonate of calcium to be decomposed by
adding barium chloride and milk of lime in the proper proportion; when the
water is at a temperature of 35 deg.-45 deg. C. the whole becomes clear in about
ten minutes, a precipitate consisting of a mixture of barium sulphate and
calcium carbonate deposits; if the water be cold, the greater part
separates in ten minutes, but a little turbidity is noticeable for some
hours due to suspended matter.

Protzen recommends the introduction of a piece of zinc into the boiler,
this determines a galvanic current, which protects the iron against
oxidation and corrosion, and causes the mineral ingredients of the water
to be deposited as a fine loose mud, entirely preventing the formation of
incrustation.

Slippery elm bark, and spent bark from the tan works have also been
suggested. We (A. J. Cooley) have worked a powerful boiler daily for
months without opening the 'man-hole,' after throwing a few pounds of
potatoes into it. In all cases, when the earthy matter can be kept in a
state of solution, or precipitated in a pulverulent form, it is easily
removed from the boiler by what engineers term 'priming,' which is
allowing the hot water to be blown over with the steam, so that, after a
sufficient time, the whole original contents of the boiler are removed,
and replaced by fresh water. Before doing so, however, it is of
consequence to cut off the communication with the cylinders, and to open
the waste-steam cock. Consult a pamphlet on 'Boiler Incrustation and
Corrosion' by F. J. Rowan, published by Spon, London.

=INCUBA'TION (Artificial).= The hatching of eggs by artificial heat. This
has been practised by the Egyptians from a very remote period. M.
Bonnemain has the honour of having introduced this art to Western Europe,
in 1775, and having been the first to pursue it successfully on the
commercial scale. The source of heat employed by him was a circulatory
hot-water apparatus, and the temperature maintained by it 100 deg. Fahr. His
plan was to introduce, daily, 1-20th only of the eggs the apparatus was
capable of receiving, so that on the 21st day the first chickens were
hatched, and a like number every day afterwards as long as the supply of
eggs was kept up. Among the trays containing the eggs he placed saucers of
water, to compensate for the absence of moisture derived in natural
incubation by transpiration from the body of the hen. The chickens, as
soon as hatched, were transferred to a 'nursery' or 'chick-room,' also
artificially heated, and were fed with crushed millet seed. Several
attempts have been made of late years to introduce artificial incubation
into this country, with variable success.

=IN'CUBUS.= See NIGHTMARE.

=IN'DIA RUB'BER.= See CAOUTCHOUC.

=INDIGES'TION.= See DYSPEPSIA.

=IN'DIGO.= _Syn._ INDICUM, PIGMENTUM INDICUM, L. A blue dyestuff extracted
from several plants growing in India and America, especially from the
leguminous species _Indigofera tinctoria_ and _I. c[oe]rulea_. It exists
in the plant as a colourless juice. The method of manufacture consists in
steeping the plant in water until fermentation sets in; the colouring
matter dissolves in the water, forming a yellow solution, which is drawn
off from the rest of the vegetable matter, and agitated and beaten to
bring it freely into contact with the air for about 2 hours; this
treatment causes the indigo to form and settle down as a blue precipitate;
this is cut, while soft, into cubical cakes, and dried by artificial heat.
To hasten the formation of the indigo, a little lime water is sometimes
added to the yellow solution. The indigo of commerce contains INDIGO-BLUE
or INDIGOTIN, its most important constituent, INDIGO-RED, and many other
substances, some of which must be regarded as accidental impurities or
adulterations.

_Prop._ Tasteless; scentless; of an intense blue colour, passing into
purple; when rubbed with a smooth hard body, it assumes a coppery hue;
insoluble in water, cold alcohol, ether, alkalies, hydrochloric acid,
dilute sulphuric acid, and the cold fixed and volatile oils; slightly
soluble in boiling alcohol and oils; freely soluble in concentrated
sulphuric acid, and, when decoloured or reduced by contact with
deoxidising substances, in alkaline lyes; soluble in creasote; its colour
is destroyed by chromic acid, nitric acid and chlorine; when suddenly
heated, it gives off rich purple fumes, which condense into brilliant
copper-coloured needles.

_Pur._ The best indigo is that which has the deepest purple colour, that
assumes the brightest coppery hue when rubbed with the nail; its fracture
is homogeneous, compact, fine-grained, and coppery; its powder is of an
intensely deep blue tint, and light enough to swim on water; and it leaves
only a fine streak when rubbed upon a piece of white paper. In general,
when indigo is in hard, dry lumps of a dark colour, it is considered of
bad or inferior quality. Indigo, when in hard or brittle lumps, or in dust
or small bits, is often adulterated with sand, pulverised slate, and other
earthy substances.

_Estimation._ Various methods for estimating the value of samples of
indigo have been proposed, but none of them can be depended upon to give
perfectly accurate results. The plan recommended by O'Neill[353] is
perhaps the best; it is performed as follows:--

[Footnote 353: See 'Dictionary of Calico Printing and Dyeing.']

Weigh 25 gr. of a fair sample of the indigo finely ground; and to soften
or disintegrate it still further, boil it for a short time with weak
caustic soda, and then, if there be any soft lumps or clots, strain
through calico; mix this with 3 quarts of water in a narrow-necked bottle
which it will nearly fill, and add 400 gr. of quicklime, which has been
slaked as perfectly as possible; shake well up and add a 1000 gr. measure
of solution of green copperas (protosulphate of iron) at 30 deg. Twaddell;
cork the bottle closely, and leave it for three days, frequently shaking
it in the interval. The indigo will be dissolved by this time; 1 quart of
the clear solution is drawn off, shaken up in a bottle to oxidise it,
acidified with acetic acid, and the pure indigo (INDIGOTIN) collected upon
a filter, dried, and weighed. Four times the weight of the pure indigo is
the per-centage of indigo in the sample.

_Uses._ As a dye stuff indigo is of great importance, both from the beauty
and permanence of the colour it yields, and from the ease with which it is
applied to fabrics of all materials. As a medicine it has been employed in
various affections of a spasmodic character, as chorea, convulsions,
epilepsy, hysteria, &c. In large quantities it often induces giddiness,
vomiting, and diarrh[oe]a; and when continued for sometime, muscular
twitchings, resembling those arising from strychnine.--_Dose._ Beginning
at about 15 gr., and gradually increased to 1, 2, or even 3 dr., at which
it should be continued for 3 or 4 months; made into an electuary with
honey or sugar, to which some aromatic may be added. See INDIGO DYE,
INDIGOTIN, &c.

=Indigo, Sul'phate of.= _Syn._ SULPHINDYLIC ACID, SULPHINDIGOTIC A.,
SAXONY BLUE, SOLUBLE INDIGO.

_Prep._ By gradually adding indigo (in fine powder), 1 part, to fuming
sulphuric acid (Nordhausen sulphuric acid), 5 parts, or oil of vitriol, 8
parts contained in a stone-ware vessel placed in a tub of very cold water,
to prevent the mixture heating; the ingredients are stirred together with
a glass rod at short intervals until the solution is complete, after which
the whole is allowed to repose for about 48 hours, by which time it
becomes a homogeneous pasty mass of an intense blue colour, which in a
dull light appears nearly black.

_Obs._ In this state it forms 'BARTH'S BLUE,' or the 'CHEMIC BLUE' or
'INDIGO COMPOSITION' of the dyer. Diluted with about twice its weight of
soft water, it is converted into the 'SAXONY BLUE' or 'LIQUID BLUE' of the
shops, also used for dyeing. When commercial sulphate of indigo is
diffused through a large quantity of water, nearly boiling, and wool (old
white flannel rags, &c.) is macerated in it for some time, the latter
absorbs the whole of the sulphate and is dyed blue, whilst the liquor
assumes a greenish-blue colour. Wool, so prepared, when well rinsed in
cold water, and boiled for some minutes in a large quantity of that liquid
containing 1% or 2% of carbonate of potassa, or a quantity equal to about
1-3rd that of the indigo originally employed, gives up its blue colour,
and becomes of a dull brown. The liquid is now a rich blue-coloured
solution of sulphindylate of potassa, from which the salt may be obtained
by cautious evaporation. This compound is prepared on the large scale, by
diluting sulphate of indigo with about 12 times its weight of soft water,
and imperfectly saturating the solution with carbonate of potassa; the
sulphindylate falls down as a dark-blue coppery-looking powder, soluble
in 140 parts of cold water and in about 90 parts of boiling water. This
substance is kept both in the moist and dry state, and is known in
commerce under the respective names of 'DISTILLED INDIGO,' 'PRECIPITATED
INDIGO,' 'SOLUBLE INDIGO,' 'INDIGO PASTE,' 'BLUE CARMINE,' 'DISTILLED
BLUE,' 'SOLUBLE BLUE,' &c. It is extensively used in dyeing; and when
mixed with starch, whilst in the moist state, and made into cakes or
knobs, it constitutes the finest variety of the 'BLUE' used by laundresses
for tinging linen. The ammonia and soda salts may be prepared in the same
way as the potassa salt, by substituting the carbonates of those bases for
carbonate of potassa. The ammonia salt is very soluble.

=INDIGO BLUE.= See INDIGOTIN.

=INDIGO DYE.= There are two methods of preparing solutions of indigo for
dyeing.--1. By deoxidising it, and then dissolving it in alkaline
menstrua.--2. By dissolving it in sulphuric acid. The former method is
used in preparing the ordinary INDIGO VAT of the dyers.

1. _a._ (COLD VAT.) Take of indigo, in fine powder, 1 lb.; green copperas
(clean cryst.), 2-1/2 to 3 lbs.; newly slaked lime, 3-1/2 to 4 lbs.;
triturate the powdered indigo with a little water or an alkaline lye, then
mix it with some hot water, add the lime, and again well mix, after which
stir in the solution of copperas, and agitate the whole thoroughly at
intervals for 24 hours. A little caustic potassa or soda is frequently
added, and a corresponding portion of lime omitted. For use, a portion of
this 'preparation vat' is ladled into the 'dyeing vat,' as wanted. After
being employed for some time, the vat must be refreshed with a little more
copperas and fresh-slaked lime, when the sediment must be well stirred up,
and the whole thoroughly mixed together. This is the common vat for
cotton.

_b._ (POTASH VAT.) Take indigo, in fine powder, 12 lbs.; madder, 8 lbs.;
bran, 9 lbs.; 'potash,' 24 lbs.; water at 125 deg. Fahr., 120 cubic feet; mix
well; at the end of about 36 hours add 14 lbs. more potash, and after 10
or 12 hours longer further add 10 lbs. of potash, and rouse the whole up
well; as soon as the fermentation and reduction of the indigo are well
developed, which generally takes place in about 72 hours, add a little
fresh-slaked lime. This vat dyes very quickly, and the goods lose less of
their colour in alkaline and soapy solutions than when dyed in the common
vat. It is well adapted for woollen goods.

_c._ (WOOD VAT.) As the last, but employing wood instead of madder; the
vat is 'set' at 160 deg. Fahr., and kept at that temperature until the
deoxidation and solution of the indigo has commenced. The last two are
also called the 'warm vat.'

_d._ (PASTEL VAT.) This is 'set' with a variety of wood which grows in
France, and which is richer in colouring matter than the plant commonly
known as 'wood.'

_e._ (SCHUeTZENBERGER and DE LALANDE'S VAT.) It is known that the low stage
of oxidation of sulphur obtained on the reduction of sulphurous acid with
zinc, dissolves indigo. On this reaction the following proceedings for
dyeing and printing with indigo are founded:--To prepare the reducing
liquid, a solution of bisulphite of soda at 35 deg. B. is brought in contact
with sheet zinc in a closed vessel, of which the liquid should occupy only
one fourth. After the lapse of an hour the zinc is precipitated from the
clear liquid by means of milk of lime. It is then diluted or decanted, or
filtered with exclusion of air.

The clear liquid is then poured upon the ground indigo, with the addition
of the needful soda and lime. One kilo of indigo yields in this manner a
very concentrated vat of from 10 to 15 litres. Cotton is dyed cold, and
wool with the aid of heat. A vat is filled with water, and a suitable
quantity of the above indigo mixture introduced, when the dyeing can be
performed at once. The excess of the low sulphur acid dissolves the froth
which appears on the surface. During the process of dyeing, further
quantities of indigo can be added as required. Cotton can be rapidly and
easily dyed in this manner; and in the case of wool, the dyer escapes the
many disadvantages of the hot vat and obtains brighter and clearer shades.
To print a fast blue the alkaline solution of the reduced indigo is
printed on with an excess of the reducing agent, aged for twelve to
twenty-four hours, washed and soaped. In comparison with the old process
there is a saving of indigo to the extent of 50 to 60 per cent.; the
shades are richer and the impressions sharper. The colour requires no
subsequent treatment, and can therefore be printed on simultaneously with
most other colours.

_Obs._ Wool, silk, linen, and cotton, may each be dyed blue in the indigo
vat. The goods, after being passed through a weak alkaline solution, are
subjected to the action of the vat for about fifteen minutes; they are
then freely exposed to the air; the immersion in the vat and the exposure
are repeated until the colour becomes sufficiently deep. Wood and madder
improve the richness of the dye. Other deoxidising substances, besides
those above mentioned, may be used to effect the solution of the indigo;
thus a mixture of caustic soda, grape sugar, indigo, and water, is often
employed on the Continent for this purpose; and orpiment lime, and
pearlash are also occasionally used. When properly prepared, the indigo
vat may be kept in action for several months by the addition of one or
other of its constituents, as required. An excess of either copperas or
lime should be avoided.

2. Solution of sulphate of indigo is added to water, as required, and the
goods, previously boiled with alum, are then immersed in it, and the
boiling and immersion are repeated until the wool becomes sufficiently
dyed.

_Obs._ With this every shade of blue may be dyed, but it is most commonly
employed to give a ground to logwood blues. The colouring matter has
affinity for woollen and silk with or without 'mordant,' but none for
cotton. A solution of soluble indigo (sulphindylate of potassa or soda),
in water very slightly acid with sulphuric acid, imparts a very fine blue
to cloth, superior in tint to that given by the simple sulphate. See
DYEING, &c.

=INDIGO PUR'PLE.= _Syn._ PH[OE]NICINE. The name given by Mr Crum to the
purple precipitate obtained by filtration from a solution of indigo in
fuming sulphuric acid, when largely diluted with water.

=INDIGO RED.= _Syn._ INDIGO RESIN, RED RESIN OF INDIGO. This is prepared
by boiling alcohol (sp. gr. .830), on powdered indigo previously exhausted
by digestion in dilute acids and in a strong alkaline solution. When
heated, it is converted into a white sublimate (deoxidised indigo red),
but recovers its red colour by the action of nitric acid.

=INDIGO WHITE.= _Syn._ INDIGOGENE, INDICYLE, REDUCED INDIGO, HYDROGENISED
I., HYDRATE OF I. Reduced or deoxidised indigo blue.

_Prep._ The yellow alkaline solution obtained by one or other of the
processes noticed under INDIGOTIN is carefully protected from the air,
both before and after precipitation with hydrochloric acid; and the
precipitate, after being rapidly washed with recently boiled distilled
water, or with very dilute sulphurous acid, is drained on a filter, dried
in vacuo, and then at once transferred to a well-stoppered bottle.

_Prop., &c._ A greyish-white mass of minute crystals, generally light blue
on the surface, and rapidly turning blue on exposure to the air; soluble
in alkalies, alcohol, and ether, to which it imparts a yellow colour.
These solutions deposit indigo blue on exposure to the air. A solution of
this substance constitutes the indigo vat of the dyer (see _above_).

=INDIGO'TIN.= _Syn._ CERULIN, INDIGO BLUE. This is the pure blue principle
of indigo. It appears to be the oxide of the same organic radical of which
indigo white is probably the hydrate.

_Prep._ 1. Indigo (in fine powder) is digested successively in dilute
hydrochloric acid, solution of potassa, and alcohol; the dried residuum is
crude indigotin.

2. Indigo (in fine powder), 1 part; green sulphate of iron, 2 parts;
hydrate of lime, 3 parts; water, 15 parts; mix, agitate occasionally until
the colour is destroyed, then decant the clear portion, precipitate with
dilute hydrochloric acid, and wash the powder first with water, and then
with boiling alcohol, until the latter ceases to acquire a yellow colour.

3. Caustic soda and grape sugar, of each 1 part; water, 20 parts; powdered
indigo, 5 parts; mix, and proceed as last. The above are essentially the
same as the indigo vat, but on the small scale.

4. The process for estimating the value of indigo given under INDIGO is a
good process for obtaining Indigotin.

_Obs._ The product from all the above exceeds 50% of the indigo operated
on.

5. (Taylor.) Powdered indigo, 2 parts; plaster of Paris, 1 part; water, q.
s. to reduce the mixture to a thin paste; spread the mass evenly upon an
oblong iron plate to the depth of about 1/8 inch, and dry it by a gentle
heat. It must then be held over the flame of a spirit lamp, when a
disgusting odour will be evolved, the mass will begin to smoke, and in a
few minutes will be covered with a heavy purple vapour, which will
condense into brilliant flattened prisms or plates of an intense copper
colour, forming a thick velvety coating over the surface immediately
exposed to the heat. Should the mass catch fire, it may be instantly
extinguished by a drop of water let fall upon it. _Prod._ 15 to 18%. See
INDIGO, &c.

=INDIUM.= IN. = 113.4. This very rare metal was discovered by means of the
spectroscope by Messrs Reich and Richter in a specimen of zinc-blende from
Freiberg, in 1863. Since then it has been found in the flue dust of some
zinc furnaces worked in the Hartz mountains, also in a black blende, known
as christophite, occurring in Saxony; in the Wolfranc of Zinnwald,
associated with zinc, as well as in Wolfranc alone; and also in the blende
met within steatite, near Schlaggenwald. In all of these substances the
indium is present in very minute quantity,[354] and is more or less
associated with lead, arsenic, cadmium, iron, and copper; its separation
from which is matter of no inconsiderable labour and difficulty.

[Footnote 354: In the flue dust of the zinc furnaces it is present to the
amount of about 0.1 per cent.; in christophite in the proportion of 0.0062
per cent.]

The following process for the detection of indium in zinc-blende, and its
extraction from the same source, is given by Winkler. Precipitate the
hydrochloric acid solution of the roasted ore with metallic zinc at the
boiling heat; dissolve the precipitate in nitro-hydrochloric acid; remove
the arsenic, cadmium, &c., by sulphuretted hydrogen, and precipitate the
indium as oxide by barium carbonate. Should this precipitate contain any
iron, it must be removed by resolution, heating with sodium sulphate, and
digestion with barium carbonate in a closed vessel. The indium may also be
precipitated from the original solution, either directly by barium
carbonate, or from a solution containing sulphuric acid, by neutralisation
with sodium carbonate, till a precipitate begins to form, and addition of
sodium acetate; it is then precipitated as a basic sulphate containing
zinc."[355]

[Footnote 355: Various other processes are given in 'Watts' Dictionary.']

Indium may be obtained in the metallic state from the reduction of its
oxide by means of hydrogen; charcoal or carbonaceous fluxes are not good
reducing agents, as their employment necessitates a very high temperature,
and loss from volatilisation occurs. Sodium is found to be the best
reducing agent when large quantities of the metal are required.

Boettger's method is to precipitate the indium by zinc, to press the spongy
metal so obtained in hot water, then to submit it to pressure in a screw
press between filtering paper, and finally to melt it with cyanide of
potassium.

_Prop._ Indium is a soft, white, durable metal, somewhat resembling
cadmium, wholly destitute of crystalline structure. Its specific gravity,
which is 7.421 at 16.8 deg. C., is not altered by rolling or hammering. When
heated in the air to 176 deg. C., it melts without becoming oxidised; at a
temperature above this, however, it becomes covered with a coating of
suboxide, becoming gradually changed into the yellow sesquioxide. Indium
is less volatile than either cadmium or zinc. It dissolves slowly in
dilute sulphuric and hydrochloric acids, hydrogen being given off. In
strong hydrochloric acid it dissolves rapidly. Nitric acid oxidises it,
evolving at the same time nitric oxide; whilst sulphuric acid converts it
into anhydrous sulphate.

When examined by means of the spectroscope, the flame of indium reveals
two brilliant bands--a violet and a blue one.

Indium is completely precipitated from a solution of its acetate, as well
as from neutral solutions of its salts in general, by sulphuretted
hydrogen. Ammonia, neutral sodium carbonate, and acid sodium carbonate,
throw down white precipitates insoluble in excess of the precipitant;
caustic potash and soda produce a white precipitate of indium hydrate,
soluble in excess. Barium carbonate precipitates it completely. Potassium
ferrocyanide gives a white precipitate.

_Estim._ "The most convenient method of estimating indium is by
precipitating it as hydrate with ammonia, dissolving the washed
precipitate in hot dilute nitric acid, evaporating, igniting, and weighing
the oxide thus obtained. Precipitation with sulphuretted hydrogen does not
give exact results on account of the solubility of the indium
sulphide."[356]

[Footnote 356: Watts.]

Indium forms compounds with bromine, chlorine, iodine, oxygen, and with
several of the organic and inorganic acids.

=INDURA'TION.= In _pathology_, an increase in the consistence of any
portion of the body, usually resulting from chronic inflammation,
pressure, or friction.

=IN'FANCY.= "The domestic treatment of infants and children is comprised
in the application of the laws of health to the mother as well as to the
child. The position of parent is one of serious responsibility, both
morally and physically, and the edict has gone forth that 'the sins of the
parent shall be visited on the children.' If we could ensure good mothers,
we could vastly improve the race of men. The nursing mother of a sick
infant must, by following faithfully the rules of health in respect of the
four great hygienic principles--food, clothing, exercise, and
ablution--give health with her milk to her offspring; she must also pay
close attention to her mind, avoid all sources of irritation and anxiety,
and remember that an angry mother sours her milk, and produces a fractious
and often a diseased infant. I am quite of opinion that if mothers were
sound in constitution, and bestowed the requisite care upon the
maintenance of their health, we should hear little of diseases of
children. In children, as well as in parent, the rules of health must be
carried out," and their neglect cannot fail to bring with it a heavy
retribution. (Eras. Wilson.) See EXERCISE, NURSING, &c.

=INFANT DEATH-RATE.= In England, according to Dr Farr, out of 1000 infants
born, 149 die annually before reaching their first year; and the same
authority tells us that 311 out of every 1000 die during the first month
in the same period. Amongst illegitimate children, the lives of one half
never exceed the first month.

The above figures represent the yearly average of infantile deaths
throughout the whole of England, when we come to the large cities the
mortality is notably higher. In Liverpool, for instance, out of 1000
children born, 239 died in their first year.

When we examine into the infant mortality prevailing amongst different
classes, we find the proportion existing between the death-rate of the
children of the nobility, and the general death-rate up to one year, to be
as 3 to 8.

In 1874, Mr Charles Ansell, jun., published a work entitled 'Statistics of
Families of the Upper and Professional Classes,' in which he showed, from
investigations into the deaths occurring amongst 48,000 children of the
wealthy, professional, and titled classes, that in the first year of life,
about 80 only of such children die out of every 1000. According to Dr
Farr, the northern countries of Europe show a much lower infant death-rate
than the southern ones. Infant mortality is lowest in Norway, and highest
in High Bavaria, where 404 infants per 1000 die in their first year. In
New York, in 1869, the mortality amongst infants under one year old was
27.4 per cent. and in 1873, 31.0 per cent.

Both in France and England the mortality prevailing amongst illegitimate
children up to the age of one year is very large. In 1860, the death-rate
amongst the foundlings of the Loire-Inferieure, was as much as 876 in the
1000, and it averages between 500 and 700 in France. In Wakefield, amongst
the same class of children, it was 26.22 per cent.; in Coventry, 40; in
Padstow, 50; and in Bantry, 80; in manufacturing towns the average is 35
per cent. In London the number of illegitimate children who die annually
under the age of a year is probably about 75 per cent.[357]

[Footnote 357: 'Proceedings of the Obstetrical Society for 1870.']

In the Montreal Foundling Asylum, out of 4060 infants, only 7 per cent.
lived one year. In the rural districts of England and also in Bavaria, the
average of deaths at one year is about the same for the illegitimate as
for the legitimate children.

In the 'Transactions of the Obstetrical Society for 1870' there is a
valuable and interesting report, throwing much light on the condition and
treatment of the children of the poor in England. The following is the
substance of this report, the information contained in which was collected
by various members of the society:--It was found that amongst the poorer
populations of villages 30 to 90 per cent. are attended by midwives, and
that this custom prevails to an almost equal extent in the large
provincial and manufacturing towns. Thus in Glasgow, 75 per cent., in
Coventry, 90 per cent.; and in Leeds and Sheffield, equally large numbers
of the population employ the services of these women. In Edinburgh the
midwife is rarely called on; neither is she in the West End of London; but
in the East End 30 to 50 per cent. of the accouchements are undertaken by
women.

Except in Glasgow, Sheffield, and London, the women are asserted to be
totally ignorant and incompetent to meet any difficulty that might arise.
In country districts the pernicious custom of giving an aperient to a
newly born babe was very general, but less prevalent in London and the
large towns. Amongst the married poor, suckling was found to be the rule;
and it seemed to be pretty conclusively proved that it is often
unreasonably prolonged for eighteen months or even two years, as a
preventive to renewed pregnancy. It was found, however, that illegitimate
children were rarely suckled, but almost always fed on artificial food.
Amongst the married poor also it appears universal to give the children
artificial food as well as the breast, and this from a very early and
tender age. Further, it was found that the food was generally unsuited to
the child both in quantity and quality. It consisted chiefly of bread
soaked in water and milk, and sweetened, of arrow-root, sago and corn
flour, and such like objectionable substances.

In one case the mother admitted to giving her infant (who was a few months
old only) a diet similar to that she herself partook of, viz.--cheese,
bread, meat, salt fish, heavy pastry, vegetables and beer. Amongst the
upper classes it was ascertained that there is an increasing tendency
amongst mothers to discontinue lactation, and to employ instead the
services of a wet nurse; and where this was not done, it was found that
the food partaken of by the babe was much more judiciously chosen than is
the case amongst the poorer women. Mr Curquiven and others observed that a
large number of women in London do not suckle their offspring, because of
a deficient secretion of milk. It is satisfactory to find that both in the
manufacturing and agricultural districts, the children of the poor are so
constantly in the open air; but equally unsatisfactory to learn that at
night they sleep in ill-ventilated and over crowded dormitories. The
infant is encouraged to sleep to the utmost, and should it fail in
securing renewed slumber (its waking being attributed to a desire for
food), is very often dosed with gin, syrup of poppies, and paregoric.
Another plan adopted for keeping infants quiet, consisted in letting them
remain in the cradles and allowing them to suck the nipple attached to the
empty feeding bottle, long after the food had been consumed; a practice
that gives rise to infantile dyspepsia.

As regards cleanliness, it was learnt that poor people's children are
tolerably well attended to in this respect, or rather that the baby
generally comes in for a larger share of ablution than the elder ones, who
are sometimes much neglected in the matter of soap and water. The clothing
of the little ones was much too scanty, and this was the case no matter
what the season of the year. A prevalent practice, except in the
agricultural villages, was that of giving the children cordials, spirits,
and medicines.

A still worse custom was found to be the systematic administration of
opiates. At Long Sutton, in Lincolnshire, which has a population of 6000,
one chemist alone sold 25-1/2 gallons yearly of Godfrey's cordial (a
mixture principally consisting of treacle and opium), whilst 6-1/2 pints
were got rid of weekly by another chemist in the same town. This
administration of anodynes was mostly confined to illegitimate infants,
and factory children placed out to nurse. A habit not unusual was that of
an intentional deferring sending for a doctor when the child was first
seized with illness, medical advice being only sought when in many cases
it could be of no avail. Desertion by fathers and mothers of their
children, especially of illegitimate ones, as well as concealment of birth
and infanticide, were found to be much more general in London and the
larger cities than in the country.

The causes of the high rate of infant mortality prevailing amongst the
poor, seem very clearly indicated in the above abstract. For instance, the
deaths of nearly half the children under one year of age are referable to
diarrh[oe]a, convulsions, atrophy, mesenteric disease, and allied
disorders; all of which maladies are caused by the grossly erroneous and
unsuitable diet upon which the children are fed. In the article "Infants'
Food," we have already pointed out that the proper and only safe aliment
for an infant up to the age of eight or nine months is the maternal milk,
and failing this, the pure and unadulterated milk of the cow; and we have
furthermore shown that the admission into the dietary of infants even
above nine months old, of farinaceous foods, should be regulated with
great caution. Yet we learn from the above report, that in the early days
of the infants' existence, amongst the poor the breast milk is in most
cases supplemented by large quantities of these very farinaceous matters,
which we have shown to be so prejudicial and dangerous. That the deaths
from these causes are clearly preventable, in a large measure, if not
wholly, is proved by the very much less extent in which they occur amongst
the higher classes, who use much greater judgment in the selection of
their children's food. Another important factor in the high infant
death-rate is the extensive use of narcotics, a practice there is no doubt
which yearly carries off a large number of infants, by poisoning, more or
less prolonged. Inadequate clothing is likewise another source of
mortality amongst the very young, whose tender frames easily succumb to
inclement weather, and the sudden changes of temperature occurring in our
variable climate. Hence we shall have no difficulty in understanding why
pneumonia, bronchitis, &c., should be so prevalent among poor children.
The habits of overcrowding and bad ventilation which prevail amongst the
poor must also be fertile sources of disease amongst their offspring--the
more immediate effect of such violations of sanitary principles resulting
in bronchitis. That the extensive recourse by the poor to uneducated and
unskilful midwives, also adds to infant mortality, seems indisputable.

In the report already alluded to, beyond reference to the fact that
infanticide was rare, we find no mention made as to the number of violent
deaths occurring amongst infants. It appears that about a sixteenth of the
mortality amongst infants under one year old is due to violence, mostly
accidental, the great majority of such deaths being caused by the mother
lying upon and smothering her babe. These misadventures are said to occur
mostly on Saturday nights, and raise the question as to whether a large
proportion of such deaths are not due to the drunkenness of the mothers,
who retire to rest in a state of alcoholic stupor.[358]

[Footnote 358: Blythe.]

The inference, we think, to be drawn from the above statements is, that
the preponderating mortality prevailing amongst the children of the poor
is due to ignorance and poverty, and not to intentional neglect or want of
parental affection. Bearing in mind that poor women much more frequently
suckle their babes than rich ones, it might perhaps be argued that this
was evidence of greater maternal solicitude, and that, therefore, the poor
mother exhibits more natural affection than the lady who consigns her
offspring to the arms of the wet-nurse; but, possibly, were the
circumstances of the two inverted, the lady might be found giving her
infant the breast, whilst the humbler wife might call in the services of
the wet-nurse; neither of them perhaps reflecting that, in choosing the
latter alternative, they were depriving another little human unit of the
maternal sustenance, and exposing it to the dangers of vicarious nurture
and supervision. What these dangers are that beset the children of the
poor when removed from their mother, the revelations of baby-farming and
the appalling statistics of illegitimate infant mortality serve very
forcibly to illustrate. For every 311 legitimate children of all classes
500 illegitimate out of every 1000 die each year under one month old, this
large increase being due to cruel neglect and substitution of bad,
insufficient, and improper food for the maternal milk. That in their own
homes they are exposed to the serious hardships arising from errors in
diet has already been shown, but in their own homes they die at little
more than half this rate; hence the deduction is unavoidable that half of
these poor little waifs perish because they are deprived of the care and
solicitude of the mother.

Writing on this subject M. Hanon says that of 59,927 infants born in
Paris, 20,049 are sent into the country to nurses. Of those children that
remain in Paris, and that are so rarely suckled by their mothers, no less
than 8250 die from 0-1 year, which gives a death-rate of 243 per 1000
births. As to the mortality of the unfortunate infants, 20,049 in number,
sent off to nurse, this amounts to 500 or 700 per 1000 in the first year
of life.

We extract the following from the 'Echo' of October 9th, 1878:

        "ALLEGED BABY-FARMING.

"Dr Hardwicke, the coroner for Central Middlesex, held an inquest at the
Islington Coroner's Court, Holloway Road, this morning, relative to the
death of the female child of Emily Corley, a servant at 49, Gower Street,
Euston Road. Mr Baby, the inspector under the Infants Life Protection Act,
watched the case. The mother of the child had gone to service as a wet
nurse after coming out of the workhouse, leaving it with one Ann Leach,
who said it was a very delicate child. She added that she had for a time
two children under one year of age with her, and had been told that this
was contrary to the Act. The inspector under the Infant Life Protection
Act pointed out that persons having more than one child to nurse under a
year old had to obtain a licence. The coroner characterised the Act
as a mere farce. It left children to take care of themselves after they
were twelve months old--the most critical time of their existence. He also
remarked on how prolific a source of prostitution such cases as the
present were, where mothers had to forsake their own illegitimate
offspring, depriving them of breast milk in order that they might sell it
to the rich. The jury found that the child died from exhaustion following
from diarrh[oe]a, accelerated by want of breast milk."

=INFANTS, Food for.= For the newly-born and very young of all mammiferous
animals, no food is so expressly and admirably adapted as that drawn from
the mother. In the nourishment of the babe from the maternal breast lies
the soundest condition for its physical well-being and growth, subject to
the qualification that the mother must be in good health, which, of
course, implies that she must be well fed. This latter essential
fulfilled, it is very wonderful to note how nature makes provision for the
proper nourishment of the offspring by converting even a weakly and
frequently ailing mother into a strong one during the period of suckling.

There may be, and doubtless are, many circumstances in which lactation
cannot be practised with safety either to mother or child; but, where such
circumstances do not exist, the practice of seeking the vicarious services
of the wet-nurse, or of having recourse to other than the maternal milk,
for many reasons, calls for remonstrance and reproof.

We may emphasise this by the following quotation from Dr West's admirable
work, 'Diseases of Infancy and Childhood.' He says: "The infant whose
mother refuses to perform towards it a mother's part, or who by accident,
disease, or death is deprived of the food that nature destined for it, too
often languishes and dies. Such children you may see with no fat to give
plumpness to their limbs--no red particles in their blood to impart a
healthy hue to the skin, their face wearing in infancy the lineaments of
age; the voice a constant wail; their whole aspect an embodiment of woe.
But give to such children the food that nature destined for them, and if
the remedy do not come too late to save them, the mournful cry will cease,
the face will assume a look of content, by degrees the features will
disclose themselves, the limbs will grow round, the skin pure red and
white."

But although the maternal aliment (or, failing this, that supplied from
the breast of a young and healthy wet-nurse, who has been recently
confined) is undoubtedly the best adapted for infantile nutrition, it
fortunately happens that in circumstances where the infant is unable to be
fed from either of these sources, we have a very valuable substitute in
the milk of the cow, the similarity of which, in composition to woman's
milk, will be seen at once by studying the following table arranged by Dr
Letheby:

  --------------+---------------------------+--------
                |      Woman's Milk.        |  Cow's
                |                           |  Milk.
  --------------+--------+--------+---------+--------
                |   Max. |   Min. | Average.| Average.
  Casein        |   4.36 |   2.97 |  3.52   |   3.64
  Butter        |   5.18 |   4.45 |  4.02   |   3.55
  Sugar of Milk |   4.43 |   3.29 |  4.27   |   4.70
  Various salts |   0.26 |   0.38 |  0.28   |   0.81
                +--------+--------+---------+--------
  Total solids  |  14.20 |  11.09 |  12.09  |  12.70
  Water         |  85.80 |  88.91 |  87.91  |  87.30
                +--------+--------+---------+--------
      Total     | 100.00 | 100.00 | 100.00  | 100.00
  --------------+--------+--------+---------+--------

The milk of the cow being rather richer in solids than that of woman, it
is considered desirable to somewhat dilute the former when it is used as
food for the infant. Dr Letheby recommends the addition to it of a third
of water, with a little sugar to sweeten it, and to render it more
acceptable to the baby palate. It cannot be too forcibly insisted upon
that immeasurably the best and safest food for an infant, next to human
milk, is the milk of the cow, _and nothing else_, until it reaches the age
of eight or nine months. It is perhaps needless to state that the milk
must be perfectly pure and unadulterated, and that it will fail of being
this if yielded by an unhealthy cow. The animal's food and habitat also
exercise an important influence on the quality of the milk, that given by
grass-fed cows roaming in open pastures undoubtedly being the best and
richest.

Different cows yield different qualities of milk; hence, when milk from
any particular cow suits an infant, it has been found desirable not to
change it.

The newer and fresher the milk the better is it adapted for the child's
use; that which has in the least become soured should be especially
rejected.

Sometimes even fresh and good milk is found to disagree with a child. When
this is the case it may be remedied by adding a little lime water to it
previous to its being drunk. If it were practicable, and within the means
of every family to keep their own cow, so that the infant could be fed
with the milk directly it came from the animal, nature's example in giving
it direct from the mother's breast might be followed. The writer
remembers, some years ago, the Princess of Wales travelling with her baby
on a voyage to and from Denmark, and being accompanied by her bovine
purveyor in the shape of an Alderney.

In hot weather, more particularly, if milk be kept even for a short time
it is liable to become acid, or "to turn," as it is called. It is,
therefore, always desirable to keep it in a cool cellar till required for
use, and in very hot weather it should be stood in ice.

The daily allowance of milk for a child during the first month of its life
is two or three pints. M. Guillot says 2-1/2 lbs. avoirdupois is the
least the babe can properly subsist on. He weighed several infants before
and after they had taken the breast, and found that they had gained in
weight, in quantities varying from 2 oz. to 5 oz.

Opinion is divided as to the value of condensed cows' milk as a food for
infants. Its chief merit seems to be that it affords a substitute for the
natural milk in cases where this latter is not obtainable, or where, in
consequence of disease amongst the cows of a neighbourhood, it cannot with
safety be consumed. Since the maternal fluid, without undergoing
alteration or modification, forms so perfect and model a food for infants,
it does not seem an unreasonable inference that the milk from the cow,
which so nearly approaches it in composition and qualities, should prove
most advantageous when partaken of under similar conditions. It has been
asserted that condensed milk is inferior in strengthening qualities to the
natural cows' milk. If this be the case it is certainly not due, according
to Mr Wanklyn, to any removal of the constituents of the latter. In his
useful little work on 'Milk Analysis' Mr Wanklyn says: "A year ago a
report was spread that these preserved milks were preserved skim-milk, and
not preserved new milk. I have myself examined the principal brands of
preserved and condensed milk, which are in the London market, and find
that the milk which has been condensed, or condensed and preserved, had
been charged with its due proportion of fat."

The physiological facts that in an early stage of infancy the digestion is
very feeble, and that until an infant has cut its first teeth there is but
little, if any, secretion of saliva, which latter is essential for the
conversion in the system of starch into sugar, point, therefore, to the
imprudence of feeding very young infants upon so-called "infants' foods,"
where these consist of amylaceous substances. The starch of which these
latter are composed not only fails to become assimilated, and therefore to
produce no nutrient effect, but clogs up the lower parts of the bowels,
and thus gives rise to a train of evils, amongst which may be included
indigestion, diarrh[oe]a, vomiting, and not infrequently convulsions and
death.

The difference in the mortality between infants under one year of age who
annually die of convulsions in England and Scotland is attributed to the
fact that whereas the English mother feeds her offspring on thick
spoon-food, the Scotch woman nourishes hers from the breast. In 'The
Fourteenth detailed Annual Report of the Registrar-General of Scotland' it
is stated that "The English practice of stuffing their babes with
spoon-meat occasioned the death by convulsions of 23,198 children under
one year of age during the year 1868, out of 786,858 births; in other
words, caused 1 death from convulsions in every 34 of the children born
during the year in England. In Scotland, during the same year, only 312
infants under one year of age fell victims to convulsions out of 115,514
children born during the year; in other words, 1 death from convulsions in
every 370 born during the year."

When a child has reached the age of eight or nine months the judicious use
of farinaceous foods is not only unobjectionable but desirable; but even
then it is most important to increase the quantity of the food very
cautiously with the age, as well as to see that it has been well baked and
afterwards boiled before being partaken of. In all cases it should be
mixed with the milk.

When the child has reached the age of twenty months Dr Letheby advises the
quantity of farinaceous food to be still further increased, and with a
little egg given in the form of pudding until it attains its third year.
At this period the child's diet may also include bread and butter, and at
the end of it well-boiled potato with a little meat gravy.

From the third to the fifth year he prescribes a small quantity of meat,
and at the end of the ninth year the usual food of the family. During all
these periods the use of milk as an important article of the dietary is
enforced.

The following table by the late Dr Edward Smith, exhibiting the
proportions between the daily quantities of carbon and nitrogen required
at different periods of human existence, illustrates the great
preponderance of nitrogen demanded by the infant over those who succeed
him in the scale of age:

                          Carbon.  Nitrogen.
  In infancy               69        6.72
  At ten years of age      48        2.81
  At sixteen years of age  30        2.16
  At adult life            23        1.04
  In middle life           25        1.13

See MILK.

=IN'FANTS' PRESER'VATIVE.= (Atkinson's.) Carbonate of magnesia, 6 dr.;
white sugar, 2-1/2 oz.; oil of aniseed, 20 drops; compound spirit of
ammonia and rectified spirit, of each 2-1/2 fl. dr.; laudanum, 1 fl. dr.;
syrup of saffron, 1 oz.; caraway water, q. s. to make the whole measure 1
pint. Antacid, anodyne, and hypnotic.

=INFEC'TION.= _Syn._ CONTAGION. The communication of disease, either by
personal contact with the sick or by means of effluvia arising from their
bodies. Attempts have been made to restrict the term contagion to the
former, and infection to the latter, but this distinction is now discarded
by the majority of writers. The following are the principal diseases which
are commonly regarded as contagious:--Chicken-pox, cholera, cow-pox,
dysentery, erysipelas, glanders, gonorrh[oe]a, hooping-cough, hydrophobia,
itch, measles, mumps, ophthalmia (purulent), plague, scald-head, scarlet
fever, smallpox, syphilis, yaws. See DISINFECTANT, &c.

=INFLAM'MABLE AIR.= See HYDROGEN.

=INFLAMMA'TION.= _Syn._ INFLAMMATIO, L. In _pathology_, a certain state of
disease. The common symptoms of inflammation are pain, swelling, heat, and
redness, attended with fever, and general constitutional derangement when
severe.

The treatment of inflammations, whether trifling; or serious, is
essentially the same in principle, and only differs in degree. This
consists in the adoption of the usual means for lowering the force of the
circulation and the frequency of the pulse; of which leeching, purging, a
low diet, and the use of refrigerant drinks and lotions, form the most
important part. The constitutional derangement or symptomatic inflammatory
fever, and inflammatory condition of the blood always accompany local
inflammation, and progress with its intensity. In inflammations of a more
purely local character, cupping or leeching the part immediately affected,
or the parts adjacent to it, is in general more appropriate and
successful. In these cases the application of refrigerant or sedative
lotions, baths, &c., generally proves of much advantage. In cases in which
there is induration or dryness of the part, the use of warm embrocations
is indicated.

Inflammation often arises from apparently very trifling causes,
particularly in persons of a full or bad habit of body, or who indulge in
the free use of malt liquors. In some persons a very trifling local
injury, as a slight abrasion, cut, prick, or sprain, produces a
considerable amount of tumefaction, attended with severe constitutional
excitement. Punctured wounds, sprains, and dislocations commonly furnish
the most serious cases of inflammation that depend on mere external
injury.[359] See ABSCESS, FEVER, TUMOUR, &c.

[Footnote 359: In all inflammatory cases of a serious nature, the reader
is strongly advised to commit himself to the care of a medical
practitioner.]

=Inflammation of the Bowels.= The common causes are incautious exposure to
cold, the use of improper food, and the presence of acrid substances or
hardened faeces in the bowels. The more constant symptoms are pain over the
abdomen, thirst, heat, and extensive restlessness and anxiety; sickness,
obstinate constipation, and a hard, small, quick pulse. In the later
stages the pain and tenderness of the abdomen, especially around the
navel, become excessive, and there is difficult micturition. In some cases
the pain suddenly ceases, the belly becomes tumid, the pulse scarcely
perceptible, the countenance ghastly, and the patient dies in a few hours.
The treatment consists in blisters, leeches to the abdomen, hot bath and
fomentations, aperient clysters, and mercurial purges; with effervescing
draughts and opium to allay sickness, followed by diaphoretic salines and
gentle aperients. See STOMACH AFFECTIONS, &c.

=INFLAMMATORY FE'VER.= See FEVER and INFLAMMATION.

=INFLUEN'ZA.= See CATARRH.

=INFU'SION.= _Syn._ INFUSUM, INFUSIO, L. A liquid medicine, prepared by
macerating vegetable or animal substances in water, at any temperature
below that of ebullition.

The mode of preparing infusions is, with most substances, precisely
similar to that pursued for making the almost universal beverage--TEA. The
ingredients are commonly placed in a stoneware pot or vessel (an 'infusion
pot'), previously made hot; boiling water is then poured over them, and
the cover being placed on, the whole is allowed to digest together, at
first, for a short time, in a warm situation, as on the hob or the fender,
and afterwards (the vessel being removed from the heat) until the whole
becomes cold. The liquid is then poured from the ingredients, and the
latter, being slightly pressed, if necessary, the infusion is strained
through a piece of clean linen or a hair sieve for use. During the
digestion the ingredients should be occasionally stirred, an important
matter often neglected, and not even referred to by most pharmaceutical
writers.

The substances employed for making infusions receive the same preliminary
treatment as those intended for making DECOCTIONS. Shavings, leaves, and
flowers require no previous preparation beyond being pulled asunder; but
roots, woods, and other solid substances must be bruised or sliced, if in
the green or recent state, or bruised or coarsely pulverised, if dry, for
the purpose of exposing as large a surface as possible to the action of
the menstruum.

The substances extracted by water from vegetables by infusion are chiefly
gum, mucus extractive, tannin, certain vegetable acids, the bitter and
narcotic principles, gum-resin, essential oil, and alkaloids. Some of
these substances are only sparingly soluble in water at ordinary
temperatures; but more readily so in hot water, and freely soluble in
boiling water. The temperature of the water should be therefore
proportioned to the nature of the vegetable matter operated on. For mere
'demulcent infusions,' in which starch and gum are the chief substances
sought to be dissolved out, and when the active principle is scarcely
soluble in water, unless at nearly the boiling temperature, boiling water
alone should be employed; but when the medicinal virtues of vegetables are
soluble in water at lower temperatures, it is better to employ hot water
(165 deg. to 175 deg. Fahr.), and to allow a little longer period for the
digestion. In many cases temperate water (from 60 deg. to 70 deg. Fahr.), or tepid
water (from 80 deg. to 90 deg. Fahr.), may be used with advantage, especially in
the preparation of 'aromatic bitter infusions,' and in most cases where it
is wished that the product should contain as little inert matter as
possible; but when water at low temperatures is employed, the period of
the maceration must be proportionately increased. By adopting the method
of maceration in vacuo, or in an atmosphere of carbonic acid, the
menstruum may be allowed to lay in contact with the vegetable matter for
an unlimited period, without decomposition taking place.

Infusions, like decoctions, are liable to undergo spontaneous
decomposition by keeping, especially in warm weather, when a few hours are
often sufficient for their passage into a state of active fermentation;
they should, therefore, when possible, be prepared for use daily, as
beyond twenty-four hours they cannot be depended on. The London College
directs a pint only to be made at a time, thus very properly regarding
them as extemporaneous preparations.

CONCENTRATED INFUSIONS, now so common in the shops, and, unfortunately, so
generally used in dispensing, are either made by taking 8 times the
quantity of the ingredients ordered in the pharmacop[oe]ia, and then
proceeding in the usual manner, or by the method of displacement; or, by
carefully and rapidly concentrating the simple infusions, by evaporation
in a steam or salt-water bath, until reduced to about 1-7th of the
original quantity. In either case the liquid is put into a strong bottle,
without being filtered, and 10 to 12% of rectified spirit added to it,
whilst still hot. The cork is then put in and secured down, and the whole
agitated for some minutes, after which it is set aside for a week, when
the clear portion is carefully decanted from the sediment for sale.
Another method, which answers well with the aromatic bitter vegetables, is
to take 8 times the usual quantity of the ingredients, and to exhaust them
with a mixture of rectified spirits, 1 part, and distilled water, 3 parts;
by digestion, or, better still, by percolation. Concentrated infusions
made in this way keep well, and deposit scarcely any sediment. Many houses
that are remarkable for the 'brilliancy' and beauty of these preparations,
employ 1/3 spirit of wine and 2/3 water as the menstruum. It may, however,
be taken, as a general rule, that for vegetable substances that abound in
woody fibre, and contain little extractive matter soluble in water (as
quassia, for instance), 1/6 to 1/5 part of spirit is sufficient for their
preservation; whilst for those abounding in mucilage or fecula, or that
readily soften and become pulpy and glutinous in weak spirit (as rhubarb),
1/5 to 1/3 is required.

By adopting the method originally suggested by Mr Alsop, infusions may be
preserved, uninjured, for a year or longer, without the addition of spirit
or any other substance. The only precaution necessary is to keep them in
bottles, perfectly filled and hermetically sealed.[360] Our own plan is to
put a few bruised cloves or seeds of black mustard into the bottles, which
must be only 2-3rds filled, then completely fill them with a condensed
atmosphere of carbonic acid gas; and, lastly, to stopper them and seal
them over, so as to perfectly exclude the air. A pint of decoction of
sarsaparilla and 1/2 pint of infusion of calumba, treated in this way,
kept good for fully 9 years. By simply macerating in the infusion as much
bruised mustard seed as can be added without flavouring the liquor, along
with a little bruised cloves, we find that most vegetable infusions may be
preserved in bottles which are occasionally uncorked, without either
fermenting or becoming mouldy, by the use of very little spirit (1/9 or
1/10).

[Footnote 360: 'Pharm. Journ.,' i, 57.]

Before adding the spirit to infusions made with cold water, or with water
which is only tepid, it is advisable to heat the liquid to about 185 deg.
Fahr., in a water bath, and after keeping it at that temperature for a few
minutes, and allowing it again to become cold, to separate it from the
precipitated matter, either by filtration or decantation.

It is often very difficult to render vegetable infusions and decoctions
perfectly transparent, a quality always expected in the concentrated
preparations. Defecation by repose is always better than filtration, owing
to the more or less viscidity of the suspended matter. When this is not
sufficient, they may be clarified with white of egg (2 or 3 to the gall.),
previously beaten up with 5 or 6 fl. oz. of water. Most of the vegetable
infusions and decoctions will readily pass the filter, after a very small
quantity of acetic, nitric, or sulphuric acid has been added to them. The
most obstinate may be rendered 'brilliant,' or 'candle bright,' as the
'cellarmen' call it, by shaking them up, first with about a drachm of
dilute sulphuric acid, and afterwards with the whites of 3 or 4 eggs,
previously mixed with a few ounces of water, for each gallon of the
liquid. This plan is, however, objectionable for many medicinal
preparations.

As many infusions which are occasionally employed in medicine must
necessarily escape being separately noticed in this work, it may be as
well to remark that the infusions of all vegetables that do not exert a
very powerful action on the human frame as ordinary herbs and roots may be
made by pouring 1 pint of boiling water on 1 oz. of the vegetable matter,
and allowing it to macerate for 1/2 an hour to an hour. The decoctions of
the same vegetables may be made by simply boiling the above ingredients,
in the same proportions, for 10 or 15 minutes, instead of operating by
mere infusion. With substances of somewhat greater activity, only half the
above quantity should be taken; whilst, with the narcotic plants and those
possessing great activity, 1 to 2 dr. to water, 1 pint, will be the proper
quantity. The ordinary dose of such infusions and decoctions is 1/2 to 1
wine-glassful (1 to 2 fl. oz.), two, three, or four times a day, as the
case may indicate.

Infusion is preferred for all bodies of a delicate texture, which readily
yield their active principles to water; and especially when these are
either volatile or liable to be injured by the heat of ebullition.

The simple infusions are now less frequently made by the druggist than
formerly. In most cases he merely furnishes the ingredients, and the
infusions are prepared by either the nurse or patient, by whom they are
commonly called 'TEAS,'

[asterism] The following list embraces most of the infusions used in
prescribing or noticed in books. Where the proportions of the ingredients
are not given, 1 oz. of the medicinal substance and 1 pint of boiling
water are to be taken, and the dose is that referred to above.

=Infusion of Agrim'ony.= _Syn._ AGRIMONY TEA; INFUSUM AGRIMONII, L. From
the fresh tops before the flowers are formed. Vermifuge.--_Dose._ A
teacupful 3 or 4 times a day; also used as an astringent gargle and
lotion. For internal use, an equal weight of liquorice root (sliced) is
commonly added.

=Infusion of Al'kaline.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ALKALINUM, L. _Prep._ (Beasley.)
Hickory ash, 1 pint; wood soot, 1/4 pint; boiling water, 1 gall.; in 24
hours decant the clear. "A popular remedy in America for dyspepsia with
acidity."

=Infusion of Alkaline.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ALKALINUM. _Prep._ Hickory ash, 1
lb.; wood soot, 1/4 lb.; boiling water, 1/2 gall. Let them stand 24 hours,
and decant. A wine-glassful three or four times a day. This is simply
another form of the previous preparation.

=Infusion of Al'oes.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ALOES, D. _Prep._ 1. From hepatic or
Socotrine aloes (in powder), 2 dr.; carbonate of potassa, 1-1/2 dr.;
boiling water, 1 pint.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM ALOES COMPOSITUM, L.)--_a._ As the COMPOUND
DECOCTION OF A. (Ph. L.), but using only a pint of boiling water.

_b._ (Fothergill.) Calumba and rhubarb, of each, 1 oz.; aloes, 2 dr.; lime
water, 16 fl. oz.; spirit of horseradish, 1 fl. oz.; macerate in the cold
for 12 hours, and strain. The last three, like the decoction, are
aperient, antacid, stomachic, tonic, and emmenagogue.--_Dose_, 1
tablespoonful to a small wine-glassful, in water. The last one is an
admirable medicine in dyspepsia, loss of appetite, and troublesome
constipation.

=Infusion of Amer'ican Calum'ba.= _Syn._ INFUSUM FRASERAE, L. From the
dried root of American calumba (_Frasera Carolinensis_). A pure, powerful,
and excellent bitter, destitute of aroma, and fully equal to gentian.
(Lindley.)

=Infusion of Amer'ican Cen'taury.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SABATII, L. From the
herb (_Sabbatia angularis_). A pure bitter tonic, without astringency or
aroma.

=Infusion of Amer'ican Sen'na.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CASSIAE MARYLANDICAE, L.
_Prep._ (Martin.) Leaves of American or wild senna (_Cassia Marylandica_),
1-1/2 oz.; coriander seed, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint. Purgative.

=Infusion of Angel'ica.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ANGELICAE, L. From the root of
garden angelica. A warm stomachic and diaphoretic; and, in large doses,
aperient. It is a popular remedy in dyspepsia, flatulent colic, and
heartburn.

=Infusion of Aniseed.= _Syn._ ANISEED TEA; INFUSUM ANISI, L. Carminative;
an excellent adjunct to purgatives, to prevent griping; given to infants
to relieve colic, &c. Dr Prout recommends the use of water at 120 deg. or 125 deg.
Fahr.

=Infusion, Antiscorbu'tic.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ANTISCORBUTICUM, MISTURA
ANTISCORBUTICA, L. _Prep._ Water trefoil (_Menyanthes trifoliata_), 1 oz.;
orange peel, 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 quart; infuse for 8 or 10 hours,
strain, and add of compound spirit of horseradish, 5 fl. oz. In scurvy.

=Infusion of Ar'nica.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ARNICAE, L. 1. From the flowers of
mountain arnica or German leopard's bane (_Arnica montana_). Cottereau
orders 1 oz., Dr Pereira 1/2 oz., and Dr A. T. Thomson, 1/4 oz. of the
flowers to the pint. The first is the usual quantity. The dose of the
first is a tablespoonful; of the second, 1/2 to 1 fl. oz.; of third, 1/2
to 1 wine-glassful.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM ARNICAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Ph. Copenh.) Flowers of
arnica, 1 dr.; peppermint, 2 dr.; chamomiles, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1/2
pint.--_Dose_, 1 fl. oz. As the last.

=Infusion of Arnica-root.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ARNICSAE RADICIS, L. _Prep._ (Ph.
Castr. Ruth.) Arnica root, 40 gr.; water, 1 lb.--_Dose_, 1 fl. oz. As the
above.

=Infusion, Astrin'gent.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ASTRINGENS, MISTURA A., L. _Prep._
1. From oak-bark.

2. Infusion of cusparia, 17 fl. oz.; tincture of catechu or kino, 1 fl.
oz.; powdered ipecacuanha, 1 dr.; powdered opium, 12 gr.; mix. In
diarrh[oe]a, &c. It must be well shaken before pouring out the dose.

=Infusion of Balm.= _Syn._ INFUSUM MELISSAE, L. _Prep._ (Plenck.) Fresh
herb, 5 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse for fifteen minutes.

=Infusion of Aya-pana, Compound= (Dr Camera). _Syn._ INFUSUM AYAE-PANAE
COMPOSITUM. _Prep._ Leaves of Brazilian aya-pana, 2 dr.; aniseed, 1 dr.;
boiling water, 2 pints.

=Infusion of Bar'berry.= _Syn._ INFUSUM BARBERIS, L. _Prep._ (Dr Copland.)
From the bark of the barberry shrub (_Berberis vulgaris_). In jaundice,
biliary fluxes, and other cases where heat and acrimony prevail; either
alone or combined with a little carbonate of soda or potassa, and tincture
of calumba.

=Infusion of Bark.= See INFUSION OF CINCHONA.

=Infusion of Bay-leaves.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LAURI, I. LAURI NOBILIS, L. From
the leaves or the berries of the sweet bay (_Laurus nobilis_). Aromatic,
stimulant, and emmenagogue; in very large doses, emetic and poisonous. It
is chiefly given in colic, flatulence, paralysis of the extremities, and
obstructed menstruation.

=Infusion of Bearberry= (B. P.) _Syn._ INFUSUM UVAE URSI. _Prep._ Infuse
bearberry leaves, bruised, 1/2 oz.; in boiling distilled water, 10 oz.; in
a covered vessel for 2 hours, and strain.

=Infusion of Beef.= See ESSENCE, TEA, &c.

=Infusion of Belladon'na.= _Syn._ INFUSUM BELLADONNAE. L. _Prep._ 1. (Dr
Paris.) Leaves of deadly nightshade (dried), 4 gr.; boiling water, 2 fl.
oz.; for a dose.

2. (Compound;--Dr Saunders.) Leaves (dried), 1/2 dr.; boiling water, 12
fl. oz.; infuse, strain, and to every 7 fl. oz. of the infusion add of
compound tincture of cardamoms, 1 fl. oz.

=Infusion of Bis'tort.= _Syn._ INFUSUM BISTORTAE, L. _Prep._ (Radius.)
Bistort or snake-weed root (_Poligonum Bistorta_), 1/2 oz.; boiling water,
1 pint; infuse 2 hours, and strain. In passive haemorrhages.

=Infusion of Black Snake-root.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CIMICIFUGAE RACEMOSAE, L. In
dropsy, rheumatism, and chest complaints.

=Infusion of Blessed Thistle.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CARDUI BENEDICTI, L. From
the whole herb. In small doses it is diaphoretic; in larger ones, tonic,
stomachic, and deobstruent; taken warm, it is occasionally given to
promote the action of emetics. The properties of carduus benedictus "are
such as to lead us to the belief that it has been superseded by other not
more efficacious remedies." (Lindley.)

=Infusion of Blood-root.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF PUCCOON; INFUSUM SANGUINARIAE,
L. _Prep._ Blood-root (_Sanguinaria Canadensis_), 1/2 oz.; boiling water,
1 pint. Stimulant and emetic.

=Infusion of Blue Flag.= _Syn._ INFUSUM IRIDIS VERSICOLORIS, L. _Prep._ 1.
From the flowers of blue flag (_Iris versicolor_).--2. From the root of
rhizomes. The first is used chiefly for its rich colour, as a test, &c.;
the second is diuretic and cathartic, and apt to produce distressing
nausea and prostration.

=Infusion of Bone'set.= _Syn._ INFUSUM EUPATORII, L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. U.
S.) From the dried leaves and flowers of boneset or thorough-wort
(_Eupatorium perfoliatum_). Diaphoretic, nauseant, and emetic when warm;
tonic when cold.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM EUPATORII COMPOSITUM, L.--Ellis.) Boneset and sage,
of each 1/2 oz.; cascarilla, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; infuse
until cold, and strain. In hectic fever. A wine-glassful of either of the
above, given hourly, in these diseases, until perspiration and nausea are
induced, has been highly recommended in influenza.

=Infusion of Braz'il-wood.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LIGNI BRASILINSIS, L. From
ground or rasped Brazil wood. When wanted to keep, rectified spirit, 3 fl.
oz., is added to every pint. Used for colouring, and as a test.

=Infusion of Broom.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SCOPARII, L. See DECOCTION OF BROOM.

=Infusion of Bu'chu.= _Syn._ INFUSUM BUCHU (B. P.), I. BUCKU (Ph. E.), I.
DIOSMAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) From bruised buchu leaves, 1 oz.; boiling
distilled water, 1 pint; infuse for an hour and strain. Diuretic,
sudorific, tonic; in dyspepsia, &c.; but chiefly in chronic affections of
the bladder and urethra attended with copious secretion.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
oz.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM BUCHU COMPOSITUM, I. DIOSMAE C., L.--(Radius.) Leaves
of buchu and whortleberry, of each 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 8 oz. (say 1/2
pint); digest for half an hour, strain, and add of syrup of senega, 1/2
fl. oz.--_Dose_, 1 or 2 table-spoonfuls every hour; in atony of the
bladder and mucous discharges.

=Infusion of Buck'bean.= _Syn._ INFUSUM MENYANTHIS, L. From the herb or
root of buckbean or marsh trefoil (_Menyanthes trifoliata_). Bitter,
stomachic, tonic, and diuretic; in large doses, purgative, vermifuge, and
emetic. It has been recommended in agues, gout, dropsy, scurvy, worms, &c.
The chief consumption of this plant is by the brewers; "2 oz. being equal
to 1 lb. of hops." (Gray.)

=Infusion of Bur'dock.= _Syn._ INFUSUM BARDANAE, L. From the root of common
burdock. Aperient, diuretic, diaphoretic, and tonic; in gout, rheumatism,
skin diseases, &c. See DECOCTION and EXTRACT.

=Infusion of Calum'ba.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CALUMBAE (B. P.) L. _Prep._ 1. (B.
P.) Calumba, in coarse powder, 1 oz.; cold distilled water, 2 oz.;
macerate one hour, and strain. Infusion of calumba is a good tonic and
stomachic bitter.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 fl. oz.; in dyspepsia, &c., and for
restraining vomiting and diarrh[oe]a during pregnancy or dentition. It is
preferably joined with small doses of the carbonates of soda, potassa,
ammonia, or magnesia, when there is acidity; or with chalybeates, when
there is paleness and a low pulse; with all of which substances it may be
mixed without suffering any sensible alteration.

2. (Concentrated; INFUSUM CALUMBAE CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._ Calumba, in
coarse powder, 5-1/2 oz.; cold distilled water, 12 fl. oz.; digest with
frequent agitation, for 3 or 4 hours, then express the liquor, and repeat
the digestion with 5-1/2 fl. oz. more of tepid water; after another hour,
express this portion also, using as much force as possible; next mix the
liquors, heat them quickly to the boiling-point in a shallow vessel, and
pour the infusion, whilst still hot, into a strong bottle, and when it has
cooled a little add of rectified spirit, 4 fl. oz., secure down the
stopper or cork, and agitate well for a few minutes; the bottle must now
be set aside for a week, after which the clear portion is to be decanted
from the dregs. Very superior.

_b._ (Wholesale.) From calumba (reduced to coarse powder), 5-1/4 lbs.;
rectified spirit, 5 pints; (diluted with) water, 12 pints; digest for a
week, or precede by displacement. Should there be any difficulty in
obtaining it free from cloudiness, the whites of 4 or 5 eggs, previously
mixed with about a 1/4 pint of cold water, may be added to the infusion,
which, after being well agitated for about ten minutes, must be allowed to
repose for 7 or 8 days, and then decanted from the dregs. Should it not be
perfectly transparent, it may be filtered through blotting
paper.--_Product_, 20 lbs.

_Obs._ The concentrated infusion produced by the above formulae is of very
superior quality, and has acquired an extensive sale in the wholesale
trade. 1 part added to 5-1/4 parts of water makes a perfectly transparent
liquid, possessing exactly similar virtues to the INFUSION OF CALUMBA--B.
P.

=Infusion of Canthar'ides.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF SPANISH FLIES; INFUSUM
CANTHARIDIS, I. LYTTAE, L. _Prep._ (Soubeiran.) Spanish flies (powdered) 20
gr.; boiling water, q. s. (about 3-1/2 fl. oz.) to yield 3 fl. oz., after
expression and filtration.

=Infusion of Cap'sicum.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CAPSICI, L. _Prep._ 1. (Pereira.)
Capsicum (powdered), 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint.--_Dose_, 1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Stephen's 'PEPPER MEDICINE'--Pereira.) Red pepper (_Capsicum
fructescens_), 2 table-spoonfuls (or 3 of cayenne pepper); common salt, 2
teaspoonfuls; boiling water, 1/2 pint; to the strained liquor, when cold,
add of very sharp vinegar, 1/2 pint.--_Dose_, 1 table-spoonful, slowly
swallowed, every half hour, in cholera, malignant sore throat, scarlatina,
&c.

=Infusion of Car'away.= _Syn._ CARAWAY TEA; INFUSUM CARUI, L. _Prep._ From
bruised caraway seed, 3 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint. In the flatulent colic
of infants, and as an adjunct to aperient medicine.

=Infusion of Car'rot Seed.= _Syn._ INFUSUM DAUCI, I. CAROTAE, L. Diuretic;
in dropsy and nephritic complaints; 1/2 to 1 pint being taken daily.

=Infusion of Cascaril'la.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CASCARILLAE (B. P.), L. _Prep._
1. (B. P.) Cascarilla, in coarse powder, 1 oz.; boiling distilled water,
10 oz.; infuse for one hour in a closed vessel and strain.--_Dose._ 1 to 2
oz., usually combined with carbonate of soda and tincture of cascarilla.
It is an excellent medicine in dyspepsia, debility, diarrh[oe]a, &c.

2. (Concentrated; INFUSUM CASCARILLAE CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._ Cascarilla
(good and fragrant, bruised), 6-1/2 lbs.; rectified spirit of wine, 3
pints; cold water, 6 pints; macerate in a close vessel for 14 days,
express the liquor, and filter.

_b._ As the last, but proceeding by the process of percolation.

_Obs._ If the preceding processes are well managed, the product is 10
lbs., and resembles brandy in colour and transparency, and is delightfully
fragrant. 1 part of this infusion mixed with 6-1/2 parts of water makes a
preparation exactly resembling the INFUSION OF CALUMBA--B. P.

3. (Alkaline; INFUSUM CASCARILLAE ALKALISATUM, L.--Ph. Palat.) Cascarilla,
3 oz.; carbonate of potassa, 2 dr.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz. Antacid and
tonic.--_Dose_, l tablespoonful.

=Infusion of Cas'sia.= _Syn._ CASSIA TEA; INFUSUM CASSIA FISTULAE, L.; EAU
DE CASSE, Fr. _Prep._ (Soubeiran.) Cassia pods (bruised), 4 oz.; boiling
water, 1-1/2 pint. Laxative.

=Infusion of Cate'chu.= _Syn._ COMPOUND INFUSION OF CATECHU; INFUSUM
CATECHU (B. P.), L. _Prep._ (B. P.) Catechu in coarse powder, 160 gr.,
cinnamon, bruised, 40 gr., boiling water, macerate for half an hour in a
covered vessel, and strain. Astringent in diarrh[oe]a.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.
three or four times a day, or after every liquid dejection.

=Infusion of Catmint.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CATARIAE. _Prep._ Dry catmint, 2 oz.;
boiling water, 1 pint.

=Infusion of Cayenne Pep'per.= See INFUSION OF CAPSICUM.

=Infusion of Cen'taury.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CENTAURI, L. From the flowering
tops of common or lesser centaury (_Erythaea centaurium_). Bitter,
febrifuge, stomachic, and vermifuge. A popular remedy in obstructions,
jaundice, debility, dyspepsia, &c.; and externally, for the itch, and to
destroy pediculi. An infusion is also made of the root, which is about one
half more powerful than the tops. The plant is "a valuable native
medicine; in the places where it grows it is carefully collected for use
in rustic pharmacy." (Lindley.)

=Infusion, Cephal'ic.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CEPHALICUM, L. _Prep._ (Edin. Hosp.)
Valerian root, 2 oz.; rosemary tops, 4 dr.; boiling water, 1 quart, infuse
12 hours, strain, and add aromatic water, 4 fl. oz. As an antispasmodic,
and in various affections of the head.

=Infusion of Cham'omile.= _Syn._ CHAMOMILE TEA; INFUSUM ANTHEMIDIS (B. P.)
I. CHAMAEMELI, L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Chamomile flowers, 1/2 oz.; boiling
water, 10 oz.; infuse for fifteen minutes, and strain.

Tonic, bitter, and stomachic; also emetic. It should be drunk cold, as it
is emetic when warm.--_Dose._ As a stomachic, 1 to 3 oz.; as an emetic, 5
to 10 oz.

2. (Concentrated; INFUSUM ANTHEMIDIS CONCENTRATUM, L. From chamomiles,
5-1/2 oz., water; 1 pint; boil till the mixture weighs exactly 21 oz.,
express the liquor by means of a powerful tincture-press, cool, and add of
essential oil of chamomile, 15 drops, dissolved in rectified spirit, 5 fl.
oz. agitate well, let it repose until the next day, then decant the clear,
and filter. Strongly bitter and odorous, and beautifully transparent.
5-1/2 times as strong as the ordinary INFUSION--B. P.

=Infusion of Chamomile and Orange= (Dr Percival). _Syn._ INFUSUM
ANTHEMIDIS ET AURANTII. _Prep._ Chamomile flowers, 1 oz.; dried orange
peel, 1/2 oz.; cold water, 3 lbs.; macerate for 24 hours.

=Infusion of Cher'ry-laurel.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LAURO-CERASI, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Cheston.) Fresh leaves of the common or cherry-laurel (_Cerasus
Lauro-cerasus_). 2-1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse, strain, and add
of clarified honey, 2-1/2 oz. As a lotion in cancer of the lip, and as a
wash for malignant ulcers.

=Infusion of Chiret'ta.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CHIRATAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.)
Chiretta, cut small, 1 oz.; distilled water, at 120 deg. F., 40 oz.; infuse
half an hour, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

_Obs._ Chiretta is a pure tonic bitter, closely allied to gentian, and has
been long esteemed in the East Indies as a remedy for acidity, flatulence,
and dyspepsia, especially when occurring in gouty or debilitated habits.
It is usually given in combination with carbonate of soda or salts of
iron. The whole of the plant is employed.

2. (Concentrated; INFUSUM CHIRETTAE CONCENTRATUM, L.) From Chiretta, 4 oz.;
for each pint of the product, prepared as either CONC. INFUSION OF CALUMBA
or CASCARILLA. Eight times as strong as the common infusion.

=Infusion of Cincho'na.= _Syn_. INFUSION OF BARK, INFUSUM CINCHONAE, L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Yellow cinchona (calisaya) bark, in coarse powder, 1
oz.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint; infuse for two hours in a covered
vessel, and strain.

_Obs._ Infusion of bark is tonic and stomachic, and in very large doses
febrifuge. It is an extremely useful medicine in dyspepsia, debility, and
during convalescences, and is often a valuable adjunct to more active
remedies. Like the decoction, it is most energetic when strained whilst
hot. The addition of 1 fl. dr. of diluted sulphuric acid to the water
before pouring it on the bark increases its solvent power, and,
consequently the strength of the infusion.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 fl. oz.

2. (Concentrated; INFUSUM CINCHONAE CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._ Yellow bark
(coarsely powdered), 4 lbs.; boiling water, 8 lbs.; digest for 12 hours,
express the liquid, add rectified spirit, 2 lbs., and after 24 hours'
repose decant the clear portion.

_b._ Yellow bark (in coarse powder), 4 lbs.; cold water, 8 lbs.; rectified
spirit, 2 lbs.; dilute sulphuric acid, 4 fl. oz.; mix the fluids, and
either macerate the bark in them for a week in a closed vessel, or proceed
by the method of displacement. Very superior.

_Obs._ 1 fl. dr. of either of the above, added to 7 fl. dr. of water,
produces an extemporaneous infusion of cinchona resembling that of the
pharmacop[oe]ia. The concentrated preparation of the Ph. L. being more
than 8 times the usual strength, is placed amongst LIQUORS.

3. From PALE BARK:--_a._ (Ph. L., INFUSION OF PALE CINCHONA; INFUSUM
CINCHONAE PALLIDAE--Ph. L.) From pale bark, as INFUSION OF CINCHONA--Ph. L.

_b._ (Ph. D.; INFUSUM CINCHONAE--Ph. D.) Crown or pale bark, 1 oz.; boiling
water, 1/2 pint; infuse 1 hour in a covered vessel, and strain through
paper.

_Obs._ "This infusion is inferior to the preceding" (from yellow bark) "in
activity, and is a very unnecessary one. It is said to oppress the stomach
less than that of the other cinchona bark; the reason is obvious--it is
weaker." (Pereira.)

_c._ Concentrated; INFUSUM CINCHONAE PALLIDAE CONCENTRATUM, L. As
CONCENTRATED INFUSION OF CINCHONA, but using pale bark. The concentrated
preparation of the Ph. L. will be found under LIQUORS.

=Infusion of Cin'namon.= _Syn._ CINNAMON TEA; INFUSUM CINNAMOMI, L. In
flatulence, dyspepsia, and nervous colics.

=Infusion of Cloves.= _Syn._ CLOVE TEA; INFUSUM CARYOPHYLLORUM, I.
CARIOPHYLLI (B. P.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Cloves (bruised), 1 oz.;
boiling distilled water, 20 oz.; infuse for half an hour, and strain.
Aromatic, stimulant, and stomachic, either alone or in combination; in
colic, dyspepsia, gout, &c.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Concentrated: INFUSUM CARYOPHYLLI CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._ Bruised
cloves, 3 oz.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz.; infuse as above and strain; when
cold, add of rectified spirit 1/4 pint, and filter.

_b._ Bruised cloves, 1-3/4 lb.; rectified spirit, 1 quart; cold water, 3
quarts; macerate for 7 days, and express the liquid; sprinkle the marc
with water, 12 fl. oz., and after the lapse of an hour again submit it to
the press; lastly filter the mixed liquors. Very fine. The above are about
eight times the strength of the INFUSION OF CLOVES.--Ph. L.

=Infusion of Cof'fee.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CAFFEI, L. _Prep._ (Dr McBride.)
Unroasted coffee berries (bruised), 30 in no.; cold water, 1 quart;
macerate 2 or 3 hours. In calculus, &c.--_Dose_, 1/2 pint every morning.

_Obs._ Sir J. Floyer and Sir J. Pringle cured asthma with a strong
solution of roasted coffee. M. Bouchardat prescribes a strong infusion
made by displacement (percolation), and mixed with a little brandy, in
poisoning by opium and other like narcotics, after the administration of
emetics and ioduretted water. M. Honore also employs very strong-made
coffee in albuminuria. Clausen gives it in gout, and Parker employs it as
a nervous stimulant in lieu of ammonia and wine, for persons of a slightly
sensitive and excitable temperament.

=Infusion of Contrayer'va.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CONTRAYERVAE, L. _Prep._
(Pereira.) Contrayerva (in powder), 1 oz.; boiling water, 12 fl. oz.
Stimulant, tonic, and diaphoretic; in low fevers, &c.

=Infusion of Copal'che Bark.= _Syn._ INFUSUM COPALCHI CORTICIS, L. _Prep._
(Dr Stark.) Bark of copalche bush (_Croton pseudo-China_), 1/2 oz.;
boiling water, 1 pint; digest 2 hours, and strain. A warm bitter and
stomachic.

=Infusion of Cor'sican Moss.= _Syn._ INFUSUM HELMINTHOCORTI, L. _Prep._
(Farr.) Corsican moss, 5 dr., boiling water, 1 pint; macerate for 10 or 12
hours, and strain. _Ad libitum_ in cancer. See DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Cotula.= _Syn._ INFUSUM COTULAE. From dried flowers of
Anthemio cotula, as infusion of chamomiles.

=Infusion of Cuspa''ria.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF ANGOSTURA BARK; INFUSUM
CUSPARIAE (B. P.), I. ANGUSTURAE, L. _Prep._ (B. P.) Cusparia, in coarse
powder, 1 oz.; distilled water, at 120 deg., 20 oz.; infuse 2 hours, and
strain. Stimulant and tonic; in typhus fever, bilious diarrh[oe]a,
dysentery, &c.

=Infusion of Daf''fodil.= _Syn._ INFUSUM NARCISSI PSEUDO-NARCISSI, L.
_Prep._ (Dufresnoy.) Flowers of daffodil (_Narcissus pseudo-Narcissus_), 3
to 16 in no.; boiling water, 1 pint. Expectorant, nauseant, and emetic. In
hooping-cough.

=Infusion of Dah''lia Pe'tals.= From the violet or blue varieties. Used
for its colour and as a test.

=Infusion of Dandeli'on.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF TARAXACUM; INFUSUM TARAXACI,
L. 1. From the sliced root. Stimulant, resolvent, and tonic.

2. (Concentrated; INFUSUM TARAXACI CONCENTRATUM, L.) From the root
(sliced), 1 lb.; exposed to a current of warm dry air until crisp, then
coarsely pulverised, and digested for a week in a mixture of rectified
spirit, 12 fl. oz.; cold water, 1-1/2 pint. 8 times the usual strength.

3. (Compound; INFUSUM TARAXACI COMPOSITUM, L.--Meigs.) Infusion of
dandelion, 4 fl. oz.; extract of do., 2 dr.; sesquicarbonate of soda, 1/2
dr.; tartrate of potassa, 3 dr.; tincture of rhubarb, 3 fl. dr.; tincture
of henbane, 20 drops. In dropsical and visceral affections.--_Dose._ One
third part thrice daily. See DECOCTION, EXTRACT, &c.

=Infusion of Digita'lis.= See INFUSION OF FOXGLOVE.

=Infusion, Diuret'ic.= _Syn._ INFUSUM DIURETICUM, L. _Prep._ 1. Broom
tops, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse 1 hour, strain, cool, and add
of sweet spirits of nitre, 3 fl. dr.--_Dose._ A wine-glassful every other
hour.

2. Infusion of foxglove, 1 fl. oz.; tincture of foxglove, 1/2 fl. dr.;
acetate of potassa, 1 dr.; laudanum, 10 drops.--_Dose_, 1 table-spoonful
twice or thrice a day, carefully watching the effects.

3. Juniper berries, 2 oz.; aniseed, 1/4 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse
1 hour; strain, and when cold, add of compound spirit of juniper, 2 fl.
oz.; tincture of squills, 1 fl. dr.; nitre, 1 dr.--_Dose_, 1/2 a teacupful
frequently. All the above are used as diuretics in dropsy. See INFUSIONS
OF BROOM, FOXGLOVE, and JUNIPER.

=Infusion of Dog'wood.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CORNUS FLORIDAE, L. From the bark of
American dogwood (_Cornus Florida_). See DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Dulcamara= (B. P.). _Syn._ INFUSUM DULCAMARAE. _Prep._ Infuse
bruised dulcamara, 1 oz.; in 10 fluid ounces of boiling water in a covered
vessel for 1 hour; and strain.--_Dose_, 1 oz. to 2 oz.

=Infusion of El'der Flowers.= _Syn._ ELDER-FLOWER TEA; INFUSUM SAMBUCI
FLORUM, L. From the picked flowers, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint.
Pectoral, expectorant, and diaphoretic, either alone or sweetened with
honey.

=Infusion of Elecampane.= _Syn._ INFUSUM INULAE. _Prep._ Elecampane root, 5
dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse for two hours, and strain.

=Infusion of Elm-bark.= _Syn._ COMPOUND INULAE, L. Diaphoretic,
expectorant, and tonic. FUSION OF ELM-BARK; INFUSUM ULMI COMPOSITUM, L.
_Prep._ (Cadet.) Elm-bark, bitter-sweet, burdock, and fumitory, of each 2
dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; digest for 4 hours, strain, and add of syrup
of sarsaparilla, 1 oz. The whole to be taken in 24 hours, in divided doses
in the chronic exanthemata. See DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Er'got of Rye.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ERGOTAE (B. P.). L. _Prep._ 1.
(B. P.) Ergot, 1, in coarse powder, 1 oz.; boiling distilled water, 40
oz.; infuse 1/2 an hour in a covered vessel, and strain. Should be made
fresh when required.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz. every 1/2 hour or hour, as a
parturient. Also as an injection for gleet.

2. (Concentrated.) See LIQUOR OF ERGOT.

=Infusion of Eucalyptus.= (Griffiths.) _Syn._ INFUSUM EUCALYPTI GLOBULI.
_Prep._ Cut leaves of Eucalyptus globulus, 2 dr.; boiling water, 4 oz.;
infuse and strain. Take morning and evening.

=Infusion of Fen'nel.= _Syn._ FENNEL TEA; INFUSUM F[OE]NICULI, L. _Prep._
From sweet fennel-seeds, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint. In griping and
windy colic of infants; a few drops to 1/2 a teaspoonful for a dose, or a
little by way of enema.

=Infusion of Flax-seed.= See INFUSION OF LINSEED.

=Infusion of Fleabane.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ERIGEROMIS CANADENSIS. _Prep._
Canadian fleabane, 1 oz.; boiling water, 16 oz. Diuretic and astringent.

=Infusion of Fox'glove.= _Syn._ INFUSUM DIGITALIS (B. P.), L. _Prep._ 1.
(B. P.) Digitalis, dried, 30 gr.; distilled water, 10 oz.; infuse 1 hour,
and strain.--_Dose_, 1/4 to 1/2 oz.

2. (Ph. E.) Foxglove (dried), 2 dr.; boiling water, 18 fl. oz.; spirit of
cinnamon, 2 fl. oz.

3. (Ph. D.) Foxglove (dried and reduced to a coarse powder), 1 dr.;
boiling water, 9 fl. oz.; infuse 1 hour. The product should measure about
8 fl. oz. The last two are of double the strength of the infusion Ph. L.,
and the dose must consequently be only 2 to 4 fl. dr. "I believe this,
when properly made, to be the most effectual of the preparations of
foxglove." (Pereira.) See FOXGLOVE.

=Infusion of Fu'mitory.= _Syn._ INFUSUM FUMARIAE, L. From the herbaceous
portion of common fumitory (_Fumaria officinalis_). Aperient and
diaphoretic; in obstinate skin diseases and chronic obstructions of the
liver.

=Infusion of Galls.= _Syn._ INFUSUM GALLAE, L. 1. From Aleppo galls,
coarsely powdered. In diarrh[oe]a, haemorrhages, &c.; also freely, in cases
of poisoning by the alkaloids; and diluted with 3 or 4 times its volume of
water, for injections, embrocations, gargles, &c.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM GALLAE COMPOSITUM, MISTURA GALLAE, L.--Ellis.)
Infusion of galls, 4 fl. oz.; prepared chalk, 1/2 oz.; powdered gum, 1
dr.; tincture of opium, 1/2 fl. dr.--_Dose_, 1 table-spoonful every 2
hours, in diarrh[oe]a, &c.

=Infusion of Gar'lic.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ALLII, L. _Prep._ (White.) Garlic
(recent), 1/2 lb.; water, 4 lbs.; place them in a covered pot, set it in a
very slow oven for 3 or 4 hours, and when cold, express the fluid
portion.--_Dose._ In epilepsy, 2 teaspoonfuls before and after every meal;
in chronic diarrh[oe]a, a teaspoonful after every motion.

=Infusion of Gen'tian.= _Syn._ INFUSUM GENTIANAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Beral.)
Gentian (bruised), 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse 5 or 6 hours, and
strain. Stomachic.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM GENTIANAE COMPOSITUM--B. P.)

_Prep._ _a._ (B. P.) Gentian, sliced, 1 oz.; orange peel, cut small, 1
oz.; lemon peel (fresh), 2 oz.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint; infuse
for an hour in a covered vessel, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

_b._ (Ph. E.) Sliced gentian root, 1/2 oz.; bitter orange peel (dried and
bruised) and coriander seeds, of each 1 dr.; proof spirit, 4 fl. oz.;
digest for 3 hours, then add of cold water, 16 fl. oz., and in 12 hours
more strain.

_c._ (Ph. D.) Gentian and dried orange peel, of each 2 dr.; boiling water,
1/2 pint; macerate 1 hour, and strain.--_Dose_ of the last two, 1/2 to 1
fl. oz.

3. (Concentrated Compound; INFUSUM GENTIANAE COMP. CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._
Gentian root (bruised), 4-1/2 lbs.; boiling water, q. s. to cover it;
infuse with occasional agitation for 2 hours, express the liquor, wash the
marc with a little boiling water, and evaporate to 13 quarts; when cold,
strain through flannel, add of rectified spirit, 1 gall., and pour the
mixed fluids on dried orange peel, 4-1/2 lbs., and fresh lemon peel, 9
lbs.; macerate for 1 week, then express the liquor in a powerful press,
and filter through paper.

_b._ Gentian and dried orange peel, of each 4-1/2 lbs.; fresh lemon peel,
9 lbs.; cold distilled water, 13 quarts; rectified spirit, 1 gall.;
macerate for 14 or 15 days, with frequent agitation, then express the
liquid, add 1 dr. each of the essential oils of lemon and orange, agitate
well, and filter through paper.

_c._ Gentian, 1-1/4 lb.; essence of lemon, 1 dr.; essence of orange, 1/2
dr.; essence of cedrate, 15 drops; rectified spirit, 1 quart; cold water,
3 quarts; digest for 10 days and filter.

4. (With RHUBARB; INFUSUM GENTIANAE ET RHEI, MISTURA STOMACHICA, L.) From
gentian and rhubarb (bruised), of each 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint;
digest 1 hour, and strain; to the cold infusion add of sesquicarbonate of
ammonia, 1 dr. An admirable medicine in dyspepsia, hysteria, loss of
appetite, constipation, chronic rheumatism, &c.

=Infusion of Gin'ger.= _Syn._ GINGER TEA; INFUSUM ZINGIBERIS, L. From the
best unbleached Jamaica ginger, freshly bruised or grated. In flatulence,
colic, and indigestion.

=Infusion of Gin'seng.= _Syn._ GINSENG TEA; INFUSUM GINSENG, I. RADICIS
G., L. _Prep._ Ginseng (the root of _Panax Schinseng_), 1/2 oz.; ginger
(grated), 1 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; macerate 1 hour, then add of
cinnamon (bruised), 1/2 dr.; infuse for another hour, and strain. Ginseng
tea, made according to the above formula, has a wonderful reputation in
China, as a stimulant, restorative, and aphrodisiac. In Europe, however,
it is merely regarded as an aromatic demulcent.

_Obs._ American ginseng (the root of _Panax quinquefolium_) may be
substituted for the Asiatic product.

=Infusion of Gold'thread.= _Syn._ INFUSUM COPTIS, L. From the root of
_Coptis trifolia_. Bitter, stomachic; in dyspepsia, and as a mouth-wash in
thrush.

=Infusion of Gua'co.= _Syn._ INFUSUM GUACO, L. From the bruised leaves and
stems of guaco or huaco (_Mikania guaco_). Sudorific and vulnerary;
reputed in South America to be a powerful remedy for the bites of venemous
serpents and for hydrophobia, but the trials in this country do not show
it to be of any value in such cases.

=Infusion of Guaiac'um.= _Syn._ COMPOUND INFUSION OF GUAIACUM, I. OF THE
WOODS; INFUSUM GUAIACI COMPOSITUM, AQUA BENEDICTA COMPOSITA, L. _Prep._
(Ph. D. 1826.) Guaiacum shavings, 6 oz.; bruised liquorice root, 1 oz.;
sassafras bark, 1/2 oz.; coriander seeds, 3 dr.; lime water, 96 fl. oz.
(say 5 pints); infuse for 2 days, and strain. _Dose_, 3 to 4 fl. oz.,
twice or thrice a day, in scrofula, rheumatism, gout, eruptions, &c.

=Infusion of Gum.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ACACIAE, L. From gum acacia and lump
sugar, of each 2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; macerate until dissolved,
then cool, and add of orange-flower water, 1/2 fl. oz. A pleasant
demulcent in coughs, hoarseness, &c.

=Infusion of Hedge Hys'sop.= _Syn._ INFUSUM GRATIOLAE, L. _Prep._ (A. T.
Thomson.) Hedge hyssop (_Gratiola officinalis_), dried, 2 dr.; boiling
water, 8 fl. oz. Cathartic, diuretic, emetic, and vermifuge.--_Dose_, 3 to
6 fl. dr.; in dropsies, gout, jaundice, &c. See EXTRACT.

=Infusion of Hem'lock.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CONII, I. CONII MACULATI, L.
_Prep._ (Guy's Hosp.) Dried leaves of hemlock, and coriander seeds, of
each 2 dr.; boiling water, 8 oz.; infuse for 2 hours. Combined with
acetate of ammonia, tincture of henbane, and syrup of poppies, in
pulmonary complaints, &c.

=Infusion of Henbane.= _Syn._ INFUSUM HYOSCYAMI, L. _Prep._ 1. From fresh
leaves, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint. As a lotion for painful ulcers,
swelled face, &c.

2. (Compound; HENBANE FOMENTATION; INFUSUM HYOSCYAMI COMPOSITUM,
L.--Radius.) Henbane leaves, poppy heads, and mallows, of each 1 oz.;
boiling water, 2 quarts. For painful ulcers, and in facial neuralgia, &c.

=Infusion of Hops.= _Syn._ HOP TEA; INFUSUM HUMULI, I. LUPULI (Ph. L.), L.
_Prep._ (Ph. L.) Hops, 6 dr.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint; macerate
for 4 hours in a covered vessel (press), and strain. Tonic and anodyne.
Well-hopped mild ale is a good substitute.

=Infusion of Hore'hound.= _Syn._ HOREHOUND TEA; INFUSUM MARRUBII, L. From
the leaves; demulcent, pectoral; a popular remedy in coughs, colds,
hoarseness, and chest affections generally, taken freely.

=Infusion of Horserad'ish.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ARMORACIAE, L. 1. From
horseradish alone. Diuretic and stomachic.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM ARMORACIAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Ph. L.) Horseradish
(sliced) and mustard seed (bruised), of each 1 oz.; boiling distilled
water, 1 pint; macerate for 2 hours in a covered vessel, strain, and add
of compound spirit of horseradish, 1 fl. oz. Stimulant, stomachic, and
diuretic; in dropsies, paralysis, scurvy, chronic rheumatism, &c.

=Infusion of Hys'sop.= _Syn._ HYSSOP TEA; INFUSUM HYSSOPI, L. 1. From the
leaves of _Hyssopus officinalis_ (Linn.) Stimulant, stomachic,
emmenagogue, and expectorant; in dyspepsia, flatulency, hysterical
affections, &c.; also used by boxers as a wash for black eyes.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM HYSSOPI COMPOSITUM, L.--Ratier). Hyssop leaves,
2-1/2 dr.; liquorice, 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 quart. As a demulcent drink
in catarrhal affections.

=Infusion of Indian Sarsaparil'la.= _Syn._ INFUSUM HEMIDESMI, L. From
Indian or scented sarsaparilla (_Hemidesmus Indicus_). Dr Ashburner orders
it to be made with lime water (cold); but this plan is seldom
followed.--_Dose_ and _uses_, same as those of infusion of sarsaparilla.

=Infusion of I'ron (Bitter).= _Syn._ INFUSUM FERRI AMARUM, L. _Prep._ (Dr
R. E. Griffith.) Iron filings, 3 oz.; gentian and ginger, of each bruised,
1 oz.; orange peel, 1/2 oz.; strong old cider, 1 pint; infuse for a month,
frequently stirring, and filter.--_Dose_, 1/2 to 1 dr., 3 or 4 times
daily, as a chalybeate tonic.

=Infusion of Ju'niper.= _Syn._ INFUSUM JUNIPERI, I. BACCAE J., L. 1. From
the berries alone. As a stimulant diuretic, in dropsies &c.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM JUNIPERI COMPOSITUM, L.)--_a._ (Guy's Hosp.) Juniper
berries, 2-1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; to the strained solution, when
cold, add, of compound spirit of juniper, 10 fl. dr.; bitartrate of
potassa, 1 dr.

_b._ (Parrish.) Ginger, juniper berries, and mustard, of each bruised, 1/2
oz.; horseradish and parsley root, of each bruised, 1 oz.; cider, 1 quart;
infuse, and strain with expression. All the above are used in dropsies.

=Infusion of Ki'no.= _Syn._ INFUSUM KINO, L. From kino, 5 dr.; boiling
water, 1 pint. In diarrh[oe]a, and diluted with 4 or 5 times its bulk of
water, as an injection in chronic gonorrh[oe]a.

=Infusion of Justitia.= _Syn._ INFUSUM JUSTICIAE. _Prep._ Root of painted
justicia, 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse for 1 hour.

=Infusion of Kousso (B. P.)= _Syn._ INFUSUM CUSSO. _Prep._ Infuse kousso
in fine powder, 1/2 oz.; in boiling distilled water, 8 fl. oz., in a
covered vessel for 15 minutes. Must not be strained.

=Infusion of Lime Flowers.= _Syn._ LINDEN-FLOWER TEA; INFUSUM TILLAE, L. 1.
From the flowers of the lime or linden tree (_Tilia Europaea_).
Antispasmodic, diaphoretic, and cephalic.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM TILLAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Foy.) Chamomiles, linden
flowers, and orange leaves, of each 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 quart; infuse,
strain, and add of syrup, 2 fl. oz. In nervous headaches, &c. The above
are much used on the Continent.

=Infusion of Lin'seed.= _Syn._ LINSEED TEA, FLAXSEED T.; INFUSUM LINI (B.
P.), L. _Prep._ (B. P.) Linseed (bruised). 160 gr.; fresh liquorice root
(sliced), 60 gr.; boiling distilled water, 10 oz.; infuse for 4 hours and
strain. A cheap and useful demulcent in pulmonary and urinary irritation;
especially in catarrhs, gonorrh[oe]a, &c.; _ad libitum_. Dr Pereira
recommends the addition of sliced lemon and sugar-candy, to render it more
palatable. See DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Liq'uorice.= _Syn._ INFUSUM GLYCYRRHIZAE, L. From the fresh
root, sliced. Demulcent and laxative; taken _ad libitum_.

=Infusion of Lit'mus.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LACMI, L. Used for its colour, and
as a liquid test, and to make test-paper.

=Infusion of Lobelia.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LOBELIAE, I. L. INFLATAE. From lobelia
or Indian tobacco. In asthmas chiefly.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 table-spoonfuls
every half-hour, until it occasions nausea.

=Infusion of Log'wood.= _Syn._ LOGWOOD TEA; INFUSUM HAEMATOXYLI, L. From
logwood chips. One of the best remedies known for simple diarrh[oe]a
arising from weakness; also used as a colour and test. See DECOCTION,
EXTRACT, &c.

=Infusion (Maiden-hair).= _Syn._ INFUSUM ADIANTI, L. From either common
maiden-hair (_Adiantum capillus Veneris_), or Canadian maiden-hair
(_Adiantum pedatum_). They are both slightly bitter, aromatic, and
pectoral. The infusion forms an excellent demulcent drink in catarrhs.

=Infusion of Malam'bo Bark.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CORTICIS MALAMBO, L. _Prep._
(Ure.) Bark (from _Croton Malambo_), 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint. An
aromatic tonic and astringent.

=Infusion of Mallow Flowers.= _Syn._ INFUSUM MALVAE FLORUM, L. Pectoral and
laxative. Chiefly used as a test.

=Infusion of Malt.= _Syn._ MALT TEA, SWEET WORT; INFUSUM BYNES, I. MALTI,
L. Prepared with hot water (165 deg. to 170 deg. Fahr.). Demulcent and laxative. A
useful drink in sore throat, inflammatory fevers, &c. Some persons flavour
it with sliced lemon.

=Infusion of Ma''rygold.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CALENDULAE, L. From the flowers of
the common marygold (_Calendula officinalis_). Carminative, diaphoretic,
and emmenagogue. It has been recently recommended in cancerous affections,
both internally and as a lotion. Radius adds syrup of orange peel to
flavour it.

=Infusion of Mat'ico.= _Syn._ INFUSUM MATICONIS, I. MATICAE, I. MATICO, L.
1. From the leaves of the matico plant (_Artanthe elongata_). Aromatic,
bitter, stimulant, and reputed haemostatic; in internal haemorrhages and
mucous discharges. The Indians of South America use it as an aphrodisiac.
(Martius.)

2. Compound; INFUSUM MATICONIS COMPOSITUM, L.--Watmough.) Matico and
senna, of each 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint. In haemorrhagic and other
discharges, piles, &c.; a wine-glassful repeatedly.

=Infusion of May-weed.= _Syn._ INFUSUM COTULAE, L. From the dried flowers
of may-weed or stinking chamomile (_Anthemis cotula_). Bitter, stomachic,
and diaphoretic; in large doses, emetic and sudorific; chiefly in
hysterical affections, scrofula, &c.

=Infusion of Mea'dow Rue.= _Syn._ INFUSUM THALICTRI FLAVI, L. From the
herb meadow rue (_Thalictrum flavum_). In hydrophobia, taken plentifully.

=Infusion of Mil'foil.= _Syn._ YARROW TEA; INFUSUM MILLEFOLII, L. In
dropsies, and as a fomentation to bruises. See EXTRACT, &c.

=Infusion of Mint.= _Syn._ MINT TEA. 1. (Ph. D.--INFUSUM MENTHAE SIMPLEX.)
From the dried leaves of green or spearmint. Carminative and stomachic;
chiefly used as a vehicle for other medicines. A wine-glassful _ad
libitum_.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM MENTHAE COMPOSITUM.) To mint tea 6 fl. oz., add of
oil of spearmint, 3 drops, previously triturated with lump sugar, 2 dr.,
and dissolved in compound tincture of cardamoms, 1/2 fl. oz. A useful
remedy in colic, flatulence, &c.; as the last.

=Infusion of Mu'dar.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF MUDAR-BARK; INFUSUM CORTICIS
MUDARIS, L. From the root bark of _Calotropis gigantea_. Resembles
infusion of ipecacuanha.--_Dose_, 1 to 3 teaspoonfuls, as an alterative; a
wine-glassful as an emetic. In the East Indies it is highly esteemed in
epilepsy, hysteria, syphilis, convulsions, and various spasmodic diseases.

=Infusion of Net'tle Seed.= _Syn._ INFUSUM URTICAE SEMINUM, L. _Prep._
(Garde.) Seed of common nettle (_Urtica dioica_), 2-1/2 dr.; boiling
water, 18 fl. oz.; infuse 3 hours, strain, and add of syrup, 2 fl. oz.
Astringent, diuretic, and pectoral.

=Infusion of Nux Vom'ica.= _Syn._ INFUSUM NUCIS VOMICAE, L. _Prep._ (Hosp.
F.) Nux vomica (ground or rasped), 1 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; digest 3
hours, and strain. It must be taken with caution, and the effects watched.
See EXTRACT, NUX VOMICA, and STRYCHNINE.

=Infusion of Or'ange Peel.= _Syn._ INFUSUM AURANTII, B. P. _Prep._ 1.
Dried bitter orange peel, cut small, 1 oz.; boiling water, 20 oz.; infuse
for 15 minutes, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz. Bitter and stomachic.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM AURANTII--Ph. E., I. A. COMPOSITUM--Ph. L. & D.,
L.)--_a._ (Ph. L. & E.) Dried bitter orange peel, 1/2 oz.; fresh lemon
peel, 2 dr.; cloves (bruised), 1 dr.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint;
macerate for 15 minutes in a covered vessel, and strain.

_b._ (Ph. D.) Dried orange peel, 3 dr.; cloves, 1/2 dr.; boiling water,
1/2 pint; macerate half an hour. An agreeable stomachic. It is chiefly
employed as a vehicle for other medicines.

_c._ (B. P.) Dried bitter orange peel, cut small, 1/2 oz.; fresh lemon
peel, 120 gr.; cloves (bruised), 60 gr.; boiling water, 20 oz. Infuse for
15 minutes, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

3. (Concentrated Compound; INFUSUM AURANTII CONCENTRATUM, I. A. COM.
CONC., L.)--_a._ Seville orange peel (dried), 3-1/4 lbs.; fresh lemon
peel, 1-1/2 lb.; bruised cloves, 3/4 lb.; boiling water, 9 pints; infuse
for 20 minutes, press out the liquor, and, when cold, add of rectified
spirit, 1 quart, and filter.

_b._ Dried orange peel, 18 oz.; fresh lemon peel, 1/2 lb.; bruised cloves,
1/4 lb.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; cold water, 3 pints; macerate for 1
week, press, and filter. Very superior.

_Obs._ 1 fl. dr. of either of the above, added to 7 fl. dr. of water,
makes a similar (preferable) preparation to the COMPOUND INFUSION OF
ORANGE PEEL.--Ph. L.

=Infusion of Parei'ra.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PAREIRAE (Ph. E. & D.), I. P. BRAVAE,
L. _Prep._ 1. (Ph. E.) Velvet leaf or pareira brava root, 6 dr.; boiling
water, 1 pint; macerate for 2 hours in a lightly covered vessel, and
strain.

2. (Ph. D.) Pareira (bruised and torn), 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 9 fl. oz.;
macerate 1 hour, and strain. In irritation and mucous discharges from the
urinary organs. The corresponding preparation of the Ph. L. will be found
among the DECOCTIONS.

=Infusion of Pars'ley Root.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PETROSELINI, L. From the root
of garden parsley. Aromatic, diuretic, and slightly aperient. It has been
highly recommended by Dr Chapman and others in dropsy, in the strangury
arising from blisters, &c.; taken freely, either alone or combined with a
little sweet spirit of nitre.

=Infusion of Peach Leaves.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PERSICAE, I. P. FOLII, L.
_Prep._ (Pereira.) Peach leaves (dried), 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint;
macerate an hour, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 table-spoonfuls, twice or
thrice a day; to allay irritation of the bladder and urethra, and as a
vermifuge.

=Infusion, Pectoral.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PECTORALE, L. _Prep._ (Hosp. F.)
Linseed (bruised), 3/4 oz.; coltsfoot leaves, 1/2 oz.; liquorice root
(sliced) and poppy-heads, of each 1/4 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; digest
two hours, and strain. In coughs, colds, hoarseness, &c., accompanied with
a dose of aperient medicine. See SPECIES, &c.

=Infusion of Pennyroy'al.= _Syn._ PENNYROYAL TEA; INFUSUM PULEGII, I.
MENTHAE PULEGII, L. A popular remedy for nausea, flatulence, colds,
hooping-cough, hysterical affections, obstructed menstruation, &c.

=Infusion of Pep'permint.= _Syn._ PEPPERMINT TEA; INFUSUM MENTHAE PIPERITAE,
L. In flatulence, colic, griping, &c., and as a vehicle for other
medicines.

=Infusion of Periwin'kle.= _Syn._ INFUSUM VINCAE MINORIS, L. From the
leaves of lesser periwinkle (_Vinca minor_). Astringent and tonic; in
diarrh[oe]a, dysentery, &c. Mr Weathers employs it in passive haemorrhages,
and others have recommended it as an external tonic applied to the
perinaeum, &c., in piles, relaxation of the genitals, &c.

=Infusion of Persim'mon.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PERSIMMONIS, L. From the bark of
persimmon (_Diospyrus Virginiana_). Astringent; very valuable in
diarrh[oe]a, haemorrhages, agues, &c.; and as a gargle in ulcerated sore
throat.

=Infusion of Peru'vian Bark.= See INFUSION OF BARK.

=Infusion of Pink'root.= _Syn._ PINKROOT TEA, WORM T.; INFUSUM SPIGILIAE,
L. 1. From Indian pinkroot. Vermifuge; either combined with or followed by
a purge after the third or fourth dose. The dose for a child 3 to 5 years
old is 1 to 2 table-spoonfuls.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM SPIGILIAE COMPOSITUM, I. S. CUM SENNA, L.--Ellis.)
Pinkroot, 1/2 oz., senna, 2 dr.; fennel seed, 3 dr.; manna, 1 oz.; boiling
water, 1 pint.--_Dose_, 1/2 wine-glassful to a child 2 or 3 years old; in
worms. See EXTRACT.

=Infusion of Pleu'risy Root.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ASCLEPIADIS TUBEROSAE, L. From
the root of butterfly weed or pleurisy root (_Asclepias tuberosa_).
Expectorant and diuretic; in large doses, purgative; in colds, pleurisy,
pneumonia, &c. According to Bigelow, it is a valuable mild tonic and
stimulant.

=Infusion of Pois'on-oak.= _Syn._ INFUSUM RHOIS TOXICODENDRI, L. _Prep._
From the dried leaves of the poison-oak (_Rhus toxicodendron_), 3 dr.;
boiling water, 1 pint. Stimulant and narcotic; chiefly in palsy and mania.

=Infusion of Pop'py-heads.= _Syn._ POPPY TEA; INFUSUM PAPAVERIS, L. From
poppy-heads (capsules of _Papaver somniferum_). Soothing, anodyne.
Sweetened with honey, it is a popular remedy for tickling cough,
restlessness, &c.; also used hot, as an embrocation, in painful tumours,
inflammations, &c. See INFUSION OF RED POPPY.

=Infusion of Pur'ging Flax.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LINI CATHARTICI, L. From the
dried leaves of purging flax (_Linum catharticum_). Cathartic. The dose
should be repeated at intervals of an hour or an hour and a half, until it
operates.

=Infusion of Quas'sia.= _Syn._ QUASSIA TEA; INFUSUM QUASSIAE (B. P., Ph. L.
E. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Quassia, in chips, 60 gr.; cold distilled
water, 10 oz.; infuse for half an hour, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Quassia (sliced), 40 gr.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint;
infuse for 2 hours in a covered vessel, and strain.

3. (Ph. E.) Quassia, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint.

4. (Ph. D.) Quassia (rasped), 1 dr.; boiling water, 8-1/2 fl. oz.

5. (Ph. U. S.) Quassia, 2 dr.; cold water, 16 fl. oz.; macerate for 12
hours, and strain. As a bitter tonic, in loss of appetite, dyspepsia, &c.;
either combined with alkaline carbonates or chalybeates. Sweetened with
moist sugar or honey, it forms a common FLY-WATER or FLY-POISON.

6. (Compound; INFUSUM QUASSIAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Ellis.) Quassia, serpentary,
and dried orange peel, of each 1/4 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint. A stimulant
stomachic.

=Infusion of Red Cab'bage.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF BLUE CABBAGE. Used as a
colour, and to make test-paper. It will not keep without the addition of
about 1-10th of its weight of rectified spirit.

=Infusion of Red Pop'py.= _Syn._ RED-POPPY TEA; INFUSUM RH[OE]ADOS, L.
From the petals of the red or corn poppy. Anodyne and pectoral. Sweetened
with sugar or honey, it is a popular remedy in catarrhal affections: but
the use of this, as well as of INFUSION OF POPPY-HEADS, should be
accompanied by a dose of aperient medicine.

=Infusion of Rhat'any.= _Syn._ INFUSUM KRAMERIAE (B. P.), INFUSUM RHATANIAE,
I. KRAMERIAE (Ph. L. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Rhatany, bruised, 1 oz.;
boiling distilled water, 20 oz.; infuse 1 hour, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to
2 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Rhatany root, 1 oz.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint; macerate
for 4 hours in a covered vessel, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Rhatany, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 9 fl. oz.; macerate 1 hour,
and strain. Astringent and tonic; chiefly in chronic diarrh[oe]a.

4. (Concentrated; INFUSUM KRAMERIAE CONCENTRATUM, L.) From 8 times the
usual quantity of ingredients, as INFUSION OF CASCARILLA.

=Infusion of Rhododen'dron.= _Syn._ INFUSUM RHODODENDRI, L. From the
leaves of yellow rhododendron (_Rhododendron chrysanthum_), 1/2 oz.;
boiling water, 1/2 pint. Highly recommended by Pallas and Koelpin in gout,
chronic rheumatism, and syphilis. It has marked narcotic properties.

=Infusion of Rhubarb=. _Syn._ INFUSUM RHEI (B. P., Ph. L. E. & D.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Rhubarb (in thin slices), 1 oz.; boiling distilled
water, 40 oz.; infuse for 1 hour, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Rhubarb (sliced), 3 dr.; boiling distilled water, 1 pint;
macerate for 2 hours in a covered vessel, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Rhubarb, 2 dr.; boiling water, 9 fl. oz.; macerate 1 hour.

4. (Ph. E.) Rhubarb (in coarse powder). 1 oz.; boiling water, 18 fl. oz.;
infuse for 12 hours, add of spirit of cinnamon, 2 fl. oz,; and strain
through linen or calico. Stomachic and purgative; along with neutral salts
or aromatics.

_Obs._ The infusion of the Ph. E. being fully double as strong as that of
the Ph. L. & D., must be taken in proportionate doses.

5. (Concentrated; Infusum rhei concentratum, L.)--_a._ Rhubarb (in coarse
powder), 10 oz.; rectified spirit, 1 pint; cold distilled water, 1 quart;
digest 10 days, with frequent agitation, then express the liquor, and
filter it; or proceed by the method of displacement.

_b._ Rhubarb, 3 lbs. 5 oz.; cold distilled water, 11 pints; rectified
spirit, 5-1/2 pints; as the last.

_Obs._ 1 fl. dr. of either of the above, added to 7 fl. dr. of water,
forms 1 fl. oz. of liquid, resembling, and in many points preferable to,
the infusion of the Ph. L. The above is the only way a fine,
rich-coloured, and transparent concentrated preparation can be made, that
will keep well. Should it not prove perfectly limpid, it may be clarified
in the way already mentioned.

6. (Alkaline; INFUSUM RHEI ALKALINUM, I. R. CUM POTASSA, L.--Copland.)
Rhubarb, 2 dr.; carbonate of potassa, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1/2 pint;
macerate for 4 hours, strain, and add of tincture of cinnamon, 1/2 fl. oz.
In dyspepsia, acidity, heartburn, &c.

=Infusion of Ro'ses.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ROSAE, L., 1. (Simple.) From the
petals of red roses. Used as colouring and for a test; mixed with vinegar
and sweetened with honey, it forms a popular gargle in sore throat.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM ROSAE--Ph. E. I. ROSAE COMPOSITUM--Ph. L., I. R.
ACIDUM--B. P., Ph. D.) _Prep._--_a._ Red rose petals (broken up), 1 oz.;
dilute sulphuric acid, 1/2 oz.; boiling distilled water, 40 oz.; infuse
for half an hour with the acid and water, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

_b._ (Ph. L.) Petals of the red or damask rose (dried and pulled asunder),
3 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; mix, and add of dilute sulphuric acid, 1-1/2
fl. dr.; macerate for 2 hours, strain off the liquor, and dissolve in it
white sugar, 6 dr. The Edinburgh form is nearly similar.

_c._ (Ph. D.) Petals, 2 dr.; boiling water, 1/2 pint; infuse 1 hour,
strain, and add of dilute sulphuric acid, 1 fl. dr.

_Obs._ A vessel or glass of stoneware should be used to make the infusion
in, as metallic vessels injure the colour of the liquid, and are also
attacked by the acid. The best plan is to add the dilute sulphuric acid to
the water before pouring it on the leaves. The infusion may be squeezed
out of the leaves with the hands.

The COMPOUND INFUSION OF ROSES is principally used as a vehicle for
sulphate of quinine, saline purgatives, and some other medicines. It is
astringent and refrigerant, and, when diluted with water, forms a pleasant
drink in febrile disorders, phthisical sweats, haemorrhages, diarrh[oe]a,
&c. It also makes a very useful astringent gargle.--_Dose_, 1 to 4 fl.
oz.; either alone or diluted with water. It is incompatible with the
alkalies and earths, and their carbonates and their bicarbonates.

3. (Concentrated; INFUSUM ROSAE CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._ Rose petals, 10
oz.; boiling distilled water, 3 pints; infuse for 2 hours, with frequent
agitation, express the liquid, strain through a clean hair sieve, and add
of dilute sulphuric acid, 4-1/2 fl. oz.; after agitation for 5 or 6
minutes, and repose for 2 or 3 hours, decant the clear portion, and filter
through paper supported on calico; next, dissolve in the liquid 1-1/4 lb.
of the finest white sugar, broken up into small lumps, but perfectly free
from dust and dirt; lastly, pour the infusion into clean, stoppered,
green-glass bottles, and, as much as possible, keep them from the light,
and in a cool place.

_b._ Rose petals, 3-1/4 lbs.; boiling water, 2 gall.; diluted sulphuric
acid, 24 fl. oz.; finest white sugar, 6-1/2 lbs.; as the last.

_c._ The same quantity of dilute sulphuric acid and cold water, as before;
mix, and infuse the rose leaves in the liquid for 48 hours, then express,
filter, and add the sugar. Product very fine, and keeps well without
becoming gelatinous.

_Obs._ This preparation is 8 times as strong as that of the Ph. L. (2,
_a_). Great care should be taken that the utensils are perfectly clean,
especially the press, if one is employed; and earthenware glazed with lead
should be avoided. The pressing should also be conducted as rapidly as
possible, to avoid the colour being injured by the iron. Clean wrought
iron does not readily injure the colour of infusion of roses before the
addition of the acid. When the last formula is adopted, strong pressure of
the leaves with the hands can alone be safely had recourse to. If the
infusion does not filter quite clear through paper, it should be set aside
for a few days, when, in general, it will be found to filter more readily
and satisfactorily. Should it be wanted for immediate sale, the addition
of the whites of 2 or 3 eggs, diluted with 2 or 3 ounces of water,
followed by violent agitation of the liquid for a few minutes, and repose
for an hour or two, will usually render it 'fine,' when it may be either
decanted, or filtered should it require it. It will now pass rapidly
through ordinary filtering paper, and at once run clear.

=Infusion of Rue.= _Syn._ RUE TEA; INFUSUM RUTAE, L. Carminative,
antispasmodic, emmenagogue, and vermifuge. It is a popular and useful
remedy in flatulent colic, infantile convulsions, epilepsy, hysteria,
suppressed menstruation, &c.

=Infusion of Rupture-wort.= _Syn._ INFUSUM HERNIARIAE. _Prep._ Rupture
wood, 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint.

=Infusion of Safflower.= _Syn._ INFUSUM CARTHAMI. _Prep._ Safflower, 2
dr.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz.; infuse for an hour.--_Dose._ A
wine-glassful, as a diaphoretic.

=Infusion of Sage.= _Syn._ SAGE TEA; INFUSUM SALVIAE, L. 1. From the leaves
of common garden sage. Carminative and stomachic. In flatulence and
dyspepsia, and diluted with water as a drink, to lessen the nightsweats in
phthisis and fever, and to stop the secretion of milk after weaning.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM SALVIAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Ellis.) Sage and boneset, of
each 1/2 oz.; cascarilla, 1 dr.; boiling water, 1-1/2 pint; infuse until
cold. A wine-glassful every 3 or 4 hours in hectic fever.

=Infusion of Sarsaparil'la.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SARZAE, I. SARSAPARILLAE (Ph. U.
S.), L. 1. From the bruised root. Dr Hancock adds 1/2 fl. dr. of
hydrochloric acid to each pint of the water employed, as a menstruum, by
which he says the efficacy of the infusion is greatly increased. At St.
George's Hospital a little liquorice root and solution of potassa is added
for the same purpose.

2. (Compound; INFUSUM SARSAPARILLAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Ph. D. 1826.)
Sarsaparilla root (washed clean with a little cold water, and sliced), 1
oz.; lime water (cold), 16 fl. oz.; macerate for 12 hours, and strain.
Inferior to the simple infusion, since both earths and alkalies lessen the
solvent action of water on sarsaparilla. Use of both the above, similar to
that of the DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Sas'safras.= _Syn._ SASSAFRAS TEA; INFUSUM SASSAFRAS, L. From
sassafras chips. Alterative, stimulant, and sudorific; a popular remedy in
various cutaneous, rheumatic, scrofulous, and syphilitical affections.
Hufeland recommends the addition of a little liquorice root.

=Infusion of Sav'ine.= _Syn._ SAVINE TEA; INFUSUM SABINAE, L. _Prep._
(Pereira.) Fresh savine leaves or herb, 1 dr.; boiling water, 8 fl. oz.;
infuse in a covered vessel. Stimulant, emmenagogue, and vermifuge; in
chlorosis, and suppressed menstruation depending on a torpid action of the
uterine vessels; in chronic rheumatism, worms, &c.--_Dose_, 1 to 2
table-spoonfuls, cautiously administered.

=Infusion of Sax'ifrage.= _Syn._ SAXIFRAGE TEA; INFUSUM PIMPINELLAE, L.
From the root of burnet saxifrage (_Pimpinella Saxifraga_). Astringent; in
diarrh[oe]a, and externally as a wash to remove freckles.

=Infusion of Scutella''ria.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SCUTELLARIAE, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Spalding.) Dried herb of _Scutellaria lateriflora_, in powder, 1-1/2
teaspoonful; boiling water, 1 pint. By teacupfuls, thrice daily, to
prevent hydrophobia.

=Infusion of Sen'ega.= _Syn._ INFUSION OF RATTLE-SNAKE ROOT, SENEKA TEA;
INFUSUM SENEGAE (B. P., Ph. E.), I. POLYGALAE (Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B.
P.) Senega, bruised, 1 oz.; boiling distilled water, 20 oz.; infuse 1
hour, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. E.) Senega snake-root (bruised), 10 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint;
infuse for 4 hours in a covered vessel, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Polygala root, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 9 fl. oz. Stimulant,
expectorant, and diuretic, either alone or combined with ammonia; in
catarrhs, &c. See DECOCTION, EXTRACT, &c.

=Infusion of Sen'na.= _Syn._ SENNA TEA; INFUSUM SENNAE (B. P., Ph. E.), I.
SENNAE COMPOSITUM (Ph. L. & D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Senna, 1 oz.;
ginger, sliced, 30 gr.; boiled distilled water, 10 oz.; infuse 1 hour, and
strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Senna, 15 dr.; ginger (bruised), 4 scruples; boiling water, 1
pint; macerate for an hour in a covered vessel, and strain.

3. (Ph. E.) Senna, 1-1/2 oz.; ginger, 4 scrup.; boiling water, 1 pint.
(See No. 9, _below_.)

4. (Ph. D.) Senna, 1/2 oz.; ginger, 1/2 dr.; boiling water, 1/2 pint.
Purgative.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 wine-glassfuls. It is usually given in doses of
1 to 1-1/2 fl. oz., combined with 3 to 6 dr. of Epsom salts, or other
saline purgative, under the name of 'BLACK DRAUGHT,'

_Obs._ This infusion is very apt to spoil in warm weather, to prevent
which Mr Squire recommends the addition of 1 gr. of nitrate of potassa to
each ounce.

5. (Concentrated; INFUSUM SENNAE CONCENTRATUM, L.)--_a._ Senna, 2 lbs. 1
oz.; tepid water, 1 quart, macerate for 12 hours, frequently stirring with
a stick, and express the liquor; to the 'marc,' add of tepid water 1-1/4
pint, repeat the maceration for 3 hours, and again express the liquor with
powerful pressure; mix the infusions, and after 2 hours' repose decant the
clear portion, and evaporate it as rapidly as possible, by steam or a
chloride of sodium bath, until it measures 1-1/2 pint; pour this into a
strong bottle, and when nearly cold, add of rectified spirit, 1/2 pint;
bruised ginger, 3-1/2 oz.; macerate a week with frequent agitation, and
after repose for a few days decant the clear portion, and add dilute
spirit (1 to 4), q. s. to make the whole measure exactly a quart.

_b._ Take 8 times the quantity of senna and ginger ordered in the Ph. L.,
put them into a displacement apparatus, either alone or mixed with clean
washed sand, and transmit water, mixed with 1/4th part of rectified
spirit, through the mass, until the proper quantity of infusion is
obtained.

_c._ (Wholesale.) Alexandrian senna (best), 7 lbs.; unbleached Jamaica
ginger (finest, bruised), 3 lbs.; rectified spirit and water, of each 1
gall.; macerate for 14 days, press out the fluid, filter, and set it aside
in a well-corked bottle; then take of good East India senna, 25 lbs.; and
the 'pressings' or 'marc' from the tincture, and macerate in the least
possible quantity (10 or 12 galls.) of cold distilled water, for 12 or 14
hours, employing frequent agitation with a wooden spatula; next press out
the liquid, and again macerate the 'marc' in cold distilled water (5 or 6
galls.) for 2 hours; press, mix the two liquors, strain, heat gradually to
the boiling point, carefully separate the coagulated albumen and
afterwards evaporate as quickly as possible to exactly 9 quarts; put the
liquid at once into a vessel capable of holding 5 gallons, bung close to
exclude the air, and when nearly cold add the 'tincture' obtained from the
Alexandrian senna and the ginger; the whole must now be well agitated
together, and allowed to stand for a week, when the clear portion must be
carefully decanted into bottles (Winchester quarts) for sale.

_d._ As the last, but employing hot water, and limiting the period of the
infusions to 2 hours and 1 hour.

_Obs._ The preceding formulae are at present employed in the wholesale
trade, by nearly all those houses that are most noted for the superior
quality of their 'CONCENTRATED INFUSIONS,' The products of the whole are
excellent. That from _c_ is very beautiful, and contains all the valuable
active matter that it is possible to extract from the ingredients, under
the circumstances. It also keeps well. The last one, like all preparations
of senna made with hot water, is apt to drop a large deposit on standing,
from which the last portion of the infusion is obtained with difficulty.
They each furnish a liquid, of which 1 fl. dr. added to 7 fl. dr. of pure
water forms 1 fl. oz. of a preparation precisely similar in medicinal
qualities to the INFUSUM SENNAE COMP.--Ph. L.

From the extreme bulkiness of senna, it has become a practice with certain
unprincipled druggists to employ only 1/3 or 1/4 of the proper quantity of
that drug, and to add burnt sugar or treacle to bring up the consistence
and colour, and alkaline solution of gamboge to impart the necessary
purgative quality. CONCENTRATED INFUSION OF SENNA, as generally met with,
is nearly worthless. This arises from either the employment of inferior
senna, or the destruction of its active principle, by the lengthened
exposure to heat and atmospheric oxygen during its manufacture.

6. (With COFFEE; INFUSUM SENNAE CUM CAFFEA, L.)--_a._ (Foy.) Senna, 2 dr.;
roasted coffee (ground), 1 dr.; boiling water and hot milk, of each 3 fl.
oz.; infuse for 12 hours (4?), and strain. For an adult; to be taken in
the morning fasting.

_b._ (Guersand and Blake.) Senna, 10 to 30 gr. (according to age); hot
coffee and hot milk at will; infuse, and when cold strain, and sweeten it
with sugar, q. s. As a purge for children.

7. (With LEMON JUICE; INFUSUM SENNAE) LIMONIATUM, L.) From senna, 1-1/2
oz.; fresh lemon peel, 1 oz.; lemon juice, 1 fl. oz.; boiling water, 16
fl. oz.; infuse.

8. (With RHUBARB; INFUSUM SENNAE ET RHEI, L.--Ellis.) Senna, 6 dr.; manna,
1 oz.; rhubarb and cardamoms, of each (bruised), 2 dr.; boiling water, 1
pint; infuse 1 hour and strain.

9. (With TAMARINDS; INFUSUM SENNAE COMPOSITUM--Ph. E., SENNAE CUM
TAMARINDIS, L.--Ph. E.) Senna, 3 dr.; tamarinds, 1 oz.; coriander seeds, 1
dr.; sugar, 1/2 oz. (if brown, 1 oz.); boiling water, 8 fl. oz.; infuse
for four hours, with agitation, and then strain through calico. Pleasanter
than the ordinary infusion of senna.

10. (With TARTAR; INFUSUM SENNAE TARTARIZATUM, L.) From senna, 1-1/2 oz.;
coriander seeds, 4 dr.; cream of tartar, 2 dr.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz.

=Infusion of Ser'pentary.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SERPENTARIAE (B. P., Ph. L. &
E.), L. _Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Serpentary, bruised, 1 oz.; boiling distilled
water, 40 oz.; infuse 2 hours, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Serpentary or Virginian snake-root, 1/2 oz.; boiling distilled
water, 1 pint; macerate for 4 hours in a closed vessel, and strain. The
form of the Ph. E. is similar. As a stimulating expectorant and
diaphoretic; in chronic catarrhs, low fevers, agues, &c.

3. (Compound; INFUSUM SERPENTARIAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Guy's Hosp.) Virginian
snake-root and contrayerva, of each 5 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; macerate
2 hours, strain; and when cold add of tincture of serpentary 2 fl. oz. As
the last.

=Infusion of Simaru'ba.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SIMARUBAE (B. P., Ph. E. & D.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Simaruba, bruised, 3 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse
2 hours, and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. E. & Ph. L., 1836.) Bark of the bitter simaruba or mountain
damson, 3 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; macerate 2 hours, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Simaruba bark, 2 dr.; boiling water, 9 fl. oz. Tonic, and, in
large doses, emetic; in chronic diarrh[oe]a and dysentery, either alone or
combined with opium; and in agues, dyspepsia, &c.

4. (Compound; INFUSUM SIMARUBAE COMPOSITUM, L.--Foy.) Simaruba bark and
wormwood, of each 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse for 15 minutes,
strain, and add of syrup of gentian, 1 fl. oz. In agues and dyspepsia.

=Infusion of Slip'pery Elm.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ULMI (Ph. U. S.), I. U. FULVAE,
L. _Prep._ (Ph. U. S.) Inner bark of slippery elm (_Ulmus fulva_), 1 oz.;
boiling water, 16 fl. oz.; infuse for 2 hours, and strain. Demulcent.

=Infusion of Soap-wort.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SAPONARIAE, L. From soap-wort root
(_Saponaria officinalis_). Aperient and demulcent; also reputed alterative
and antisyphilitic.

=Infusion of South'ernwood.= _Syn._ SOUTHERNWOOD TEA; INFUSUM ABROTANI, L.
From the herb southernwood or old man (_Absinthium Abrotanum_).
Antispasmodic, tonic, and vermifuge; in hysteria, difficult and painful
menstruation, worms, &c.

=Infusion, Stim'ulant.= _Syn._ INFUSUM STIMULANS, L. _Prep._ (Dr Paris.)
Black mustard seed (bruised), and dittander, of each 1/2 oz.; boiling
water, 16 fl. oz.; macerate for 1 hour, strain, and when cold add of
spirit of sal-volatile, 1 fl. dr.; spirit of pimento, 1/2 fl. oz.--_Dose_,
2 table-spoonfuls 3 times a day; in palsy.

=Infusion of Stink'ing Hel'lebore.= _Syn._ INFUSUM HELLEBORI F[OE]TIDI, L.
_Prep._ (Woodville.) Dried leaves of setter-wort or _Helleborus
f[oe]tidum_, 1/2 dr. (or green herb, 2 dr.); boiling water, 16 fl. oz.;
macerate 1 hour, and strain. Aperient and vermifuge; and emetic, in large
doses. It is chiefly used against the large round worms of children and
females, taken fasting.

=Infusion of Suc'cory.= _Syn._ CHICORY TEA; INFUSUM CHICORII, L. From the
dried root. Aperient, deobstruent, and tonic; either alone or sweetened
with honey or sugar.

=Infusion of Sweet Flag.= _Syn_. CALAMUS TEA, SWEET-FLAG T.; INFUSUM
ACORI, I. CALAMI AROMATICI, L. An aromatic stimulant, tonic, and
stomachic. See SWEET FLAG.

=Infusion of Tam'arinds.= _Syn._ INFUSUM TAMARINDI, L. Cooling and
laxative; in sore throat, febrile affections, &c., taken _ad libitum_. See
INFUSION OF SENNA.

=Infusion of Tan'sy.= _Syn._ TANSY TEA; INFUSUM TANACETI, L. From the
dried herb, or the green herb using double the quantity. Aromatic, bitter,
tonic, and vermifuge.

=Infusion of Tar.= _Syn._ TAR WATER, TAR TEA; INFUSUM PICIS LIQUIDAE, AQUA
P. L. (Ph. D.), L. _Prep._ 1. (Bishop Berkeley.) Wood tar, 1 quart; cold
water, 1 gall.; stir with a stick for 15 minutes, then allow the tar to
subside, strain, and keep it in well-stoppered jars.

2. (Ph. D.) As the last. Taken to the extent of a pint daily in chronic
catarrhal and nephritic affections; also used as a lotion in chronic
cutaneous diseases, especially those of the scalp in children. See
DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Tarax'acum.= See INFUSION OF DANDELION.

=Infusion of Tobac'co.= _Syn._ TOBACCO WATER; INFUSUM TABACI, L. _Prep._
(Ph. D. 1826.) Tobacco leaves, 1 dr.; boiling water, 16 fl. oz.; macerate
for an hour. Used for enemas; in strangulated hernia, obstinate colic,
&c., observing not to administer more than one half at a time; also as a
wash to kill pediculi.

=Infusion, Ton'ic.= See INFUSIONS OF CALUMBA, CASCARILLA, GENTIAN, &c.,
also MIXTURES.

=Infusion of Sessamum.= (Dr Wood.) _Syn._ INFUSUM SESAMI. _Prep._ Two
fresh leaves of sessamum (Venne) infused in 8 oz. of cold water, form a
mucilaginous demulcent drink. Dried leaves require hot water.

=Infusion of Silk-weed.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ASCLEPIADIS. _Prep._ Bark of the
common silk-weed, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint.-_Dose_, 1 oz. to 1-1/2 oz.
In cough and dyspn[oe]a.

=Infusion of Tre'foil.= See INFUSION OF BUCKBEAN.

=Infusion of Tu'lip-tree Bark.= _Syn._ INFUSUM LIRIODENDRI, L. From the
bark of the tulip tree (_Liriodendron tulipifera_). Diaphoretic,
stimulant, stomachic, and tonic; in dyspepsia, fevers, &c.; also used to
flavour liquors.

=Infusion of Tur'meric.= _Syn._ INFUSION CURCUMAE, L. Used as a test and to
prepare test-paper. When required for keeping, about 1-7th of its volume
of rectified spirit must be added.

=Infusion of Valer'ian.= _Syn._ INFUSUM VALERIANE (B. L., Ph. L. & D.), L.
_Prep._ 1. (B. P.) Valerian, bruised, 120 gr.; boiling distilled water, 10
oz.; infuse 1 hour and strain.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 oz.

2. (Ph. L.) Valerian root, 1/2 oz.; boiling distilled water, 1 part;
infuse for an hour in a covered vessel, and strain.

3. (Ph. D.) Valerian, 2 dr.; boiling water, 9 fl. oz. Antispasmodic and
nervine; in hysteria, hypochondriasis, epilepsy, and low fevers.

4. (Compound; INFUSUM VALERIANAE COMPOSITUM, L.) Yellow cinchona bark, 1
oz.; valerian, 1/2 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint; as before. In debilitated
nervous habits.

=Infusion of Vanil'la.= _Syn._ VANILLA TEA; INFUSUM VANILLAE, L. _Prep._
Vanilla, 1-1/2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint. A stimulant antispasmodic; in
hysteria, rheumatism, anaphrodisia, &c.; but chiefly used as a flavouring
for liqueurs, confectionery, &c.

=Infusion of Vittie Vayr.= _Syn._ VITTIE VAYR TEA; INFUSUM VETIVERIAE, L.
From the roots of _Andropogon muricatus_ (VETIVER, VITTIE VAYR, or
CUSCUS). Antispasmodic, diaphoretic, and stimulant, and, when warm,
diaphoretic and emmenagogue; in rheumatism gout, slight febrile cases,
&c.; and as a prophylactic of cholera. See ESSENCE.

=Infusion of Wall-pel'litory.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PARIETARIAE, L. From the
dried herb (_Parietaria officinalis_). Aperient, diuretic, and pectoral;
in asthmas, dropsies, calculous affections, &c.

=Infusion of Wal'nut Leaves.= _Syn._ WALNUT-LEAF TEA; INFUSUM JUGLANDIS,
L. From the fresh leaves of the common walnut (_Juglans regia_); also from
the inner wood-bark, and the green rind of the fruit. See DECOCTION and
EXTRACT.

=Infusion of Water-fen'nel.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PHELLANDRI, L. _Prep._ (Bird.)
Seeds of water-fennel, 5 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint.--_Dose_, 3 to 4 fl.
dr.; to check excessive expectoration.

=Infusion of Whor'tleberry.= _Syn._ INFUSUM UVAE URSI, L. With alkalies,
henbane, or opium, in diseases of the urinary organs; and with sulphuric
acid and foxglove, in affections of the lungs. See DECOCTION and EXTRACT.

_Note._--Infusum Uvae Ursi of the Brit. Pharmacop[oe]ia.

=Infusion of Wild-cherry Bark.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PRUNI VIRGINIANAE (Ph. U.
S.), L. _Prep._ (Ph. U. S.) Wild cherry-tree bark (_Prunus Virginiana_ or
_Cerasus Serotina_), 1/2 oz.; cold water, 16 fl. oz.; infuse 24 hours, and
strain. A valuable tonic and febrifuge. Wild-cherry bark also exercises a
sedative action on the circulatory and nervous system, and is much used in
America in a variety of diseases.

=Infusion of Wild Gin'ger.= _Syn._ INFUSUM ASARI CANADENSIS, L. From the
root of wild ginger or Canada snake-root (_Asarum Canadense_). A warm
stimulant diaphoretic, in the same cases as INFUSION OF VIRGINIAN
SNAKE-ROOT.

=Infusion of Wil'low Bark.= _Syn._ INFUSUM SALICIS, L. From the bark of
the white or common willow (_Salix alba_). Astringent, tonic, and
febrifuge; often used instead of INFUSION OF CINCHONA.

=Infusion of Win'ter Green.= _Syn._ INFUSUM PYROLAE, I. CHIMAPHILAE, L.
Astringent, tonic, and diuretic; in dropsy, nephritic pains, and chronic
affections of the urinary organs. It blackens the urine, like uva ursi.
See DECOCTION.

=Infusion of Wood Soot.= _Syn._ SOOT TEA; INFUSUM FULIGINIS LIGNI, L.
Antacid and stimulant. A similar preparation is also made from coal-soot,
which is reputed antispasmodic and vermifuge.

=Infusion of Worm'wood.= _Syn._ WORMWOOD TEA, INFUSUM ABSINTHII, L. From
the fresh tops of the plant, or from only half the quantity of the dried
herb. In loss of appetite, dyspepsia, amenorrh[oe]a, leucorrh[oe]a, gout,
worms, &c. See BITTERS.

=INHALA'TION.= _Syn._ Inhalatio, L. In _medicine_, the drawing in or
inspiring of vapour with the breath. Inhalations (INHALATIONES) are
vapours or gases imbibed for the purpose of medicating the mucous membrane
of the air-passages. The substances that are to furnish the vapours or
fumes are put into a vessel called an 'inhaler' (see INHALER), which may
be simply a small covered pot or mug of metal or glass, furnished with a
short flexible tube, terminating in a small mouth-piece. In many cases
even this simple apparatus may be dispensed with, and the fumes inhaled by
holding the head over a vessel containing a little of the substance
furnishing them; or, as with chloroform, a little may be dropped on a
handkerchief or napkin, which is then held to the nose.

The following are the principal substances that are employed for
inhalations at the present day:--

1. Carbonic acid gas and nitrous oxide; occasionally used in phthisis, by
means of a bladder and mouth-piece.

2. Chlorine gas; exhibited by adding 5 or 6 drops of aqueous chlorine to
the water (tepid) of the inhaler, which should be, in this case, of glass;
employed in France for phthisis, but seldom used in England.

3. Chloroform; as an anaesthetic.

4. Vapour of iodine, administered in the same way as chlorine;
occasionally used in phthisis.

5. Oxygen and hydrogen gases, either alone or diluted with air; employed
in asthma and phthisis, by means of a bladder and mouth-piece.

6. Tar vapour, obtained by heating tar, mixed with a little carbonate of
potash, over a spirit lamp, occasionally employed in bronchitis, and
recommended by Sir A. Crighton in phthisis, but appears of little value in
the latter.

7. Steam of hot water; in bronchitis, and to allay the cough in phthisis;
small quantities of the seeds of henbane, opium, poppy-heads, &c., are
frequently added to produce an anodyne effect. See CIGARS (in pharmacy),
DISINFECTANTS, FUMIGATION, VAPOURS, &c.

=INJEC'TION.= _Syn._ INJECTIO, L. In _medicine_, any liquid medicine
thrown into a cavity of the body by means of a syringe or an elastic bag.
Those thrown into the rectum are commonly called 'clysters' or 'enemata,'
and are noticed under the head of ENEMA. The following are the principal
injections employed in medical practice at the present day:--

=Injection of Ac'etate of Ammo''nia.= _Syn._ INJECTIO AMMONIAE ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ (Ph. Chirur.) Solution of acetate of ammonia (Ph. L.), 1 part;
water, 3 parts. Refrigerant.

=Injection of Ac'etate of Cop'per.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CUPRI ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ From verdigris, 10 gr.; oil of almonds (hot), 4-1/2 oz.; triturate
until dissolved, and strain. Detergent.

=Injection of Ac'etate of Lead.= _Syn._ INJECTIO PLUMBI ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Sugar of lead, 1/2 dr.; distilled water, 1/2 pint.

2. (Dr Collier.) Acetate of lead, 40 gr.; rose water, 8 fl. oz. Astringent
and sedative. See SEDATIVE INJECTION.

=Injection of Ac'etate of Zinc.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ZINCI ACETATIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Ellis.) Acetate of zinc, 8 gr.; rose water, 4 fl. oz.

2. (Brodie.) Sulphate of zinc, 1 dr.; sugar of lead, 80 gr.; water, 1
pint; dissolve separately, mix, and filter. Astringent.

=Injection, Alkaline.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ALKALINA, I. LITHONTRIPTICA, L.
_Prep._ (Chevallier.) Carbonate of soda, 1 dr.; Castile soap, 2 dr.;
water, 12 fl. oz.; dissolve. In certain forms of calculus.

=Injection of Aloes.= (Bories.) _Syn._ INJECTIO ALOES. _Prep._ Aloes, 10
gr.; muriate of ammonia, 10 gr.; honey of roses, 1 oz.; fennel water, 6
oz.

4. (Dr Reece). Alum, 1 dr.; acetate of lead, 1-1/2 dr.; triturate with 6
oz. of boiling water, and in an hour filter.

=Injection of Al'um.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ALUMINIS, L. _Prep._ 1. (Dr
Collier.) Alum, 18 gr.; rose-water, 6 fl. oz.; dissolve. For the urethra.

2. (Collier.) Alum, 3 dr.; water, 1 quart. For the vagina.

3. (Ph. Ch.) Alum, 4 gr.; rose-water, 4 fl. oz. The above are all
astringent.

=Injection of Ammo''nia.= _Syn._ INJECTIO AMMONIAE, L. _Prep._ 1. (Dr
Ashwell.) Liquor of ammonia, 1 to 2 fl. dr.; milk, 1 pint. In obstructed
menstruation.

2. (Lavagna.) Liquor of ammonia, 8 to 20 drops; milk, 2 fl. oz. As the
last, thrice daily, beginning with the least quantity of ammonia.

3. Liquor of ammonia, 1 fl. dr.; mucilage, 1 oz.; water, 9 fl. oz. As the
last.

=Injection of Ammo''nio-Sulphate of Cop'per.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CUPRI
AMMONIATI, L. _Prep._ (Swediaur.) Ammonio-sulphate of copper, 5 gr.;
rose-water, 8 fl. oz. In chronic gonorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Bichlo''ride of Mer'cury.= _Syn._ INJECTIO HYDRARGYRI
BICHLORIDI, L. _Prep._ 1. Corrosive sublimate, 2 gr.; rose water, 5 fl.
oz.; hydrochloric acid, 1 drop.

2. Corrosive sublimate and sal ammoniac, of each 5 to 10 gr.; water, 1
pint.

3. Sublimate, 5 gr.; rose water, 2-1/2 fl. oz. Used to promote healthy
action, and to prevent infection.

=Injection of Cal'omel.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CALOMELANOS, I. HYDRARGYRI,
CHLORIDI, L. _Prep._ (St. B. Hosp.) Calomel, 1 dr.; mucilage, 1 fl. oz.;
water, 1/2 pint. Some persons order 'quince mucilage.'

=Injection of Carbolic Acid.= (Throat Hosp.) _Syn._ INJECTIO ACIDI
CARBOLICI. _Prep._ Carbolic acid, 5 gr.; water, 1 oz.; mix. Antiseptic.

=Injection of Car'bonate of Lead.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CERUSSAE, I. PLUMBI
CARBONATIS, L. _Prep._ (Hosp. F.) Carbonate of lead (finely levigated),
1/2 dr.; sulphate of zinc, 8 gr.; mucilage, 1 oz.; rose water, 5 oz.
Cooling and astringent.

=Injection of Chlo''ride of Lime.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CALCIS HYPOCHLORIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Chloride of lime, 1/2 dr.; water, 1/2 pint; agitate well
together, and filter. To prevent infection.

2. (Detmold.) Chloride of lime, 2 dr.; decoction of rhatany, 13 fl. oz.;
dissolve, and filter. In foul discharges, especially in ozaena, or f[oe]tid
ulceration of the nose.

3. (Rousse.) Chloride of lime, 20 gr.; water, 7 fl. oz.; wine of opium, 1
fl. oz. In foul discharges, and to allay irritation.

=Injection of Chlo''ride of So'da.= _Syn._ INJECTIO SODAE HYPOCHLORIS, L.
_Prep._ From solution of chloride of soda, 1 fl. dr.; rose water, 3 fl.
oz. As the last.

=Injection of Chlo''ride of Zinc.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ZINCI CHLORIDI, L.
_Prep._ From chloride of zinc, 2 gr.; rose water, 3 fl. oz.; hydrochloric
acid, 1 drop. In gonorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Copai'ba.= _Syn._ INJECTIO COPAIBAE, L. _Prep._ 1.
(Abernethy.) Copaiba 2 dr.; thick mucilage, 5 dr.; lime water, 6 fl. oz.;
make an emulsion.

2. (Plenck.) Copaiba, 1/2 oz.; yolk of egg, q. s.; lime water, 6 fl. oz.;
honey of roses, 3 oz. As the last.

3. (Ricord.) Copaiba, 6 dr.; yolk of egg, q. s.; decoction of poppies, 3
to 4 fl. oz. In ulcers of the rectum, vagina, and urethra; and in
gonorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Cre'asote.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CREASOTI, L. _Prep._ (Dr
Allnatt.) Creasote, 20 drops; white sugar, 2 dr.; liquor of potassa, 2 fl.
dr.; triturate, and add of water, 8 fl. oz. In leucorrh[oe]a and piles.

=Injection of Cu'bebs.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CUBEBAE, L. _Prep._ (Soubeiran.)
Cubebs (in powder), 1 oz.; extract of belladonna, 1 dr.; boiling water, 16
fl. oz.; infuse in a covered vessel, and strain. Stimulant and narcotic.
In gonorrh[oe]a and leucorrh[oe]a.

=Injection for the Ear.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ACOUSTICA, L. _Prep._ 1. Ox-gall,
3 dr.; balsam of Peru, 1 dr.; mix. In hardened wax, dryness of membranes,
&c.

2. Oil of almonds or cloves, 2 oz.; oil of amber, 20 drops; tincture of
castor, 1 fl. dr.; spirit of camphor, 1/2 dr.; laudanum, 3 drops; mix. In
ear-ache and chronic deafness.

3. (Alibert.) Balsam of Peru, 2 dr.; tincture of musk, 4 or 5 drops; otto
of roses, 1 or 2 drops; decoction of St. John's wort (warm), 16 fl. oz.;
agitate together, and after repose decant the clear. In discharges from
the ear.

_Obs._ Mr Yearsley states that drops and injections for the ear should be
used with very great caution, and only under proper advice, as they
otherwise often aggravate the ailment, instead of curing it.

=Injection of Er'got.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ERGOTAE, I. SECALIS CORNUTI, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Boudin.) Ergot, 1 dr.; boiling water, 8 fl. oz.; infuse
until cold. When the urethra is highly sensitive.

2. (Descrolles.) Powdered ergot, 1 oz.; boiling water, 1 pint. Both the
above are used in chronic inflammation of the vagina, and in gonorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Gal'lic Acid.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ACIDI GALLICI, L. _Prep._
(Dunglison.) Gallic acid, 1/2 dr.; water, 1 pint. In leucorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Galls.= _Syn._ INJECTIO GALLAE, L. _Prep._ From galls
(bruised), 2 dr.; boiling water, 1 pint; infuse 1 hour, and strain.
Astringent; in leucorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Hydrochlo''ric Acid.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ACIDI HYDROCHLORICI,
L. _Prep._ From hydrochloric acid, 10 drops; soft water, 5 fl. oz. To
prevent and to remove recent infection; also to remove particles of lime
and iron from the eye.

=Injection of Hydrocyan'ic Ac'id.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ACIDI HYDROCYANICI, L.
_Prep._ Medicinal hydrocyanic acid, 1 fl. dr.; soft water or almond
emulsion, 1 pint. Anodyne; to allay excessive irritability, both in
chronic ophthalmia and gonorrh[oe]a, and to relieve chordee; but in all
cases it must be used with caution, and at first largely diluted with
water.

=Injections, Hypodermic.= _Syn._ INJECTIONES HYPODERMICAE, INJECTIONES
SUBCUTANEAE.

=1. Hypodermic Injection of Ergotine.= (Dr Hildebrandt.) Aqueous extract
of ergotine, 3 parts; distilled water and glycerin, of each 7-1/2 parts;
for uterine fibroid tumours (Dr Drasch), 5 gr. of ergotine in 1 dr. of
glycerin; 1/5th to be injected, according to circumstances, once or twice
a day, in the region of the pectoral muscles; in internal haemorrhage,
haemoptysis, and epistaxis.

=2. Hypodermic Injection of Iodic Acid.= Dr Luton uses this in goitre, 1/2
dr. of solution containing 1/5th of acid injected at once into the midst
of the tumour.

=3. Hypodermic Injection of Perchloride of Mercury.= (Dr Staub.)
Perchloride of mercury and chloride of ammonium, of each 20 gr.; chloride
of sodium about 62 gr.; distilled water, 20 gr. After filtration the whole
is mixed with solution of the white of one egg, and 4-1/2 dr. of water.
The solution contains 1/33rd of a gr. of perchloride to every 20 drops.
1/6th of a grain of perchloride to be injected each day.

=4. Hypodermic Injection of Morphia.= (B. P.) Hydrochlorate of morphia 88
gr.; solution of ammonia, acetic acid, distilled water of each, q. s.
Dissolve the hydrochlorate in 2 oz. of distilled water by a gentle heat,
then add the solution of ammonia, so as to precipitate the morphia, and
render the liquid slightly alkaline; allow it to cool; collect the
precipitate on a filter, wash with distilled water, and allow it to drain;
then transfer the morphia to a porcelain dish, and add acetic acid until
the morphia is dissolved, and a very slightly acid solution is formed. Now
add distilled water, q. s. to make the solution measure 2 fl. oz. For
subcutaneous injection, 1 to 6 minims.

5. Sulphate of morphia is a very good soluble salt.

=6. Hypodermic Injection of Quinine.= Three to 6 gr. of _neutral_ sulphate
of quinine placed on a watch glass, previously warmed, without acid; to
this add 12 minims of distilled water, and apply a moderate heat by a
spirit lamp for a second, or two. The syringe should be warmed before
being used.

Dr Rosenthal advocates the use of glycerin as a medium for the solution of
various substances used for subcutaneous injection. The glycerin must be
very pure. By gradual elevation of temperature it can be made to take up a
large number of certain alkaloids and salts, and will retain them
dissolved for a year. 1 fl. dr. will dissolve one scruple of sulphate of
quinine, and 10 gr. of hydrochlorate of morphia. Dr Rosenthal states that
the injection of quinine has been found very useful in intermittents.

=Injection of Io'dide of I'ron.= _Syn._ INJECTIO FERRI IODIDI, L. _Prep._
1. (Ricord.) Iodide of iron, 6 gr.; water, 5 fl. oz. In gonorrh[oe]a,
gradually increasing the quantity of iodide.

2. (Soubeiran.) Iodide of iron, 3 to 4 dr.; water, 1 pint. In suppressed
and painful menstruation, leucorrh[oe]a, &c. Both are astringent and well
adapted to scrofulous patients.

=Injection of I'odide of Potas'sium.= _Syn._ INJECTIO POTASSII IODIDI, L.
_Prep._ (Foy.) Iodide of potassium, 3 gr.; pure water, 1 pint. As a
stimulant to fistulous sinuses and ulcers in persons of scrofulous habits.

=Injection of I'odine.= _Syn._ IODURETTED INJECTION; INJECTIO IODURETA, I.
IODINII, L. _Prep._ 1. (M. Ameuille.) Tincture of iodine, 1 part; water, 5
or 6 parts. In refractory fistulae.

2. (M. Bonnet.) Iodine, 1 part; iodide of potassium, 2 parts; water, 10
parts. In scrofulous hydrarthrosis, &c.

3. (Bransby Cooper.) Compound tincture of iodine, 2 fl. dr.; water, 6 fl.
dr. In hydrocele.

4. (Guibourt.) Iodine, 4 gr.; iodide of potassium, 8 gr.; water, 1 pint.
To stimulate fistulous sinuses.

5. (Velpeau.) Tincture of iodine, 1 fl. dr.; water, 3 fl. dr. In
hydrocele.

=Injection, Lithontrip'tic.= _Syn._ INJECTIO LITHONTRIPTICA, I. VESICALIS,
L. _Prep._ (Dr Hoskins.) Nitro-saccharate of lead, 1 gr.; saccharic acid,
5 drops; rub together, then add of distilled water, 1 fl. oz. As a solvent
for phosphatic calculi. See INJECTION ALKALINE.

=Injection, Mercu''rial.= _Syn._ INJECTIO MERCURIALIS, I. HYDRARGYRI, L.
_Prep._ 1. Quicksilver, 1 dr.; gum mucilage, 1-1/2 oz.; triturate until
the globules disappear, and gradually add of water, 1-1/2 fl. oz.

2. (Hosp. F.) Quicksilver and balsam of copaiba, of each 4 dr.; yolk of an
egg; rose water, 1/2 pint. An awkward and useless preparation.

=Injection of Mor'phia.= _Syn._ INJECTIO MORPHIAE, L. _Prep._ (Brera.)
Morphia, 2 gr.; oil of almonds (warm), 1 oz.; triturate together until
united. Anodyne and emollient. To ease the pain in ear-ache, acute
gonorrh[oe]a, piles, &c.

=Injection of Night Shade, Black.= (P. C.) _Syn._ INJECTIO FOLIARUM SOLANI
NIGRUM. _Prep._ Dried leaves of black night shade, 1-3/4 oz.; boiling
water, 36 oz. Infuse 1 hour, and strain.

=Injection of Nitrate of Sil'ver.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ARGENTI NITRATIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. (Acton.) Nitrate of silver, 3 gr.; distilled water, 1/2 pint;
dissolve.

2. (Dr Arnott.) Nitrate, 12 gr.; water, 1 fl. oz.

3. (Dr Collier.) Nitrate, 2 gr.; rose water, 1 fl. oz.

4. (Dr Culverwell.) Nitrate, 20 to 30 gr.; water, 1 fl. oz.

5. (Dr Jewell.) Nitrate, 12 gr.; water, 6 fl. oz.

6. (Ricord.) Nitrate, 8 gr.; water, 1 fl. oz.

7. (West. Hosp.) Nitrate, 1-1/2 gr.; diluted nitric acid, 1-1/4 minim;
distilled water, 1 fl. oz.

_Obs._ The weaker solutions are used in chronic gonorrh[oe]a, gleet, and
leucorrh[oe]a; those of an intermediate strength to prevent an attack of
gonorrh[oe]a following the incipient symptoms of that disease; and the
strongest, chiefly in spermatorrh[oe]a. Their use requires great caution.

=Injection of Oak Bark.= _Syn._ INJECTIO QUERCUS. _Prep._ (Univ. Hosp.)
Alum, 6 gr.; decoction of oak bark, 1 fl. oz. For the vagina. Astringent.

=Injection, Oleaginous.= _Syn._ INJECTIO OLEOSA. _Prep._ Oil of almonds, 4
oz.; liquid subacetate of lead, 8 drops.

=Injection of O''pium.= _Syn._ INJECTIO OPII, I. OPIATA, L. _Prep._ 1.
Tincture of opium or wine of opium, 1 to 2 fl. dr. (according to
circumstances); water, 5 fl. oz. As an anodyne, in gonorrh[oe]a.

2. (Foy.) Extract of opium, 6 gr.; extract of belladonna, 1-1/2 dr.;
decoction of wild lettuce, 16 fl. oz. In neuralgia and haemorrhages.

=Injection of Opium with Lead.= (Wendt.) _Syn._ INJECTIO PLUMBI OPIATA.
_Prep._ Extract of opium, 1-1/2 gr.; distilled water, 2 oz.; mucilage, 2
dr.; liquid subacetate of lead, 4 drops.

=Injection of Pancreas.= (Merkel.) _Syn._ INJECTIO PANCREATINI. _Prep._
One bullock's pancreas; glycerin, 8 oz. Rub the finely minced pancreas
with the glycerin, mix one third of this mixture with from 4 to 5 oz. of
finely minced meat, and inject into the rectum. Said to be easily
digested.

=Injection of Platino-Chloride of Soda.= (H[oe]ffer.) _Syn._ INJECTIO
PLATINO-CHLORIDI SODII. _Prep._ Decoction of poppy, 8 oz.; chloride of
platinum and sodium, 1/2 dr.

=Injection, Sed'ative.= _Syn._ INJECTIO SEDATIVA, L. _Prep._ (Hosp. F.)
Oil of almonds, 1 oz.; solution of diacetate of lead, 20 drops. Cooling,
sedative, and emollient.

2. (Wendt.) Aqueous extract of opium, 1-1/2 gr.; mucilage, 2 dr.; solution
of diacetate of lead, 4 drops; water, 2 fl. oz. Cooling, sedative, and
anodyne.

3. (Gassincourt.) Simple emulsion, 5 fl. oz.; decoction of poppies, 16 fl.
oz.; white of 1 egg; mix. In acute gonorrh[oe]a.

=Injection, Stim'ulating.= _Syn._ INJECTIO STIMULANS, L. _Prep._ (St.
Marie.) Myrrh, 1 oz.; quicklime, 2 oz.; water, 1 quart; digest for 2 or 3
days, and decant the clear portion. In fistulous ulcers.

=Injection of Sul'phate of Cop'per.= _Syn._ INJECTIO CUPRI SULPHATIS, L.
_Prep._ 1. Sulphate of copper, 5 gr.; rose water, 4 fl. oz. In chronic
gonorrh[oe]a.

2. (Hunter.) Sulphate of copper, 3 gr.; water, 4 fl. oz. As the last.

3. (Swediaur.) Sulphate of copper, 6 gr.; water, 4 fl. oz.; dissolve, and
add solution of diacetate of lead, 20 drops. In phimosis.

=Injection of Sul'phate of Ir'on.= _Syn._ INJECTIO FERRI SULPHATIS, L.
_Prep._ (Berends.) Sulphate of iron and mucilage, of each 1/2 dr.; sage
water, 4 fl. oz.; dissolve. In nasal and uterine haemorrhages.

=Injection of Sul'phate of Zinc.= _Syn._ INJECTIO ZINCI SULPHATIS. _Prep._
1. (Hosp. F.) Sulphate of zinc, 2 gr.; water, 1 fl. oz.

2. (King's Coll.--INJECTIO COMMUNIS.)--_a._ Sulphate of zinc, 3 gr.;
solution of lead, 20 drops; water, 1 fl. oz. For a man. _b._ Sulphate of
zinc, 10 gr.; alum, 10 gr.; decoction of oak bark, 1 fl. oz. For a woman.

=Injection of Sul'phuret of Potas'sium.= _Syn._ INJECTIO POTASSII
SULPHURETI, L. _Prep._ (Wedekind.) Sulphuret of potassium, 1 dr.; water,
1/2 pint. In gonorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Tan'nic Acid.= _Syn._ INJECTIO TANNINI, I. ACIDI TANNICI, L.
_Prep._ (Beral.) Tannin, 1/2 dr.; distilled water, 8 fl. oz. (or better,
1/2 pint). In gleet and leucorrh[oe]a.

=Injection of Tea.= _Syn._ INJECTIO THEAE, L. _Prep._ (Hosp. F.) Green tea
(or rough black tea), 1 dr. (say 2 teaspoonfuls); boiling water, 1/2 pint.
Astringent; in gleet and fluor albus.

=Injection of Turpentine.= (St. Bart.'s Hosp.) _Syn._ INJECTIO
TEREBINTHINAE. _Prep._ Oil of turpentine, 1-1/2 fl. oz.; olive oil, 12 fl.
oz.

=Injection, Vi'nous.= _Syn._ INJECTIO VINI RUBRI, I. VINOSA, L. _Prep._
(Earle.) Red wine, 1 part; water, 2 or 3 parts. In hydrocele.

=Injection of Wood-soot.= _Syn._ INJECTIO FULIGINIS. (Rognetta). Decoction
of wood-soot, 16 oz.; alum 1/2 oz.; water, 6 oz. In leucorrh[oe]a.

=Ink.= _Syn._ ATRAMENTUM, L. Coloured liquid employed for writing with a
pen. Ink is made of various substances and colours; but at present we
shall confine our attention to the tanno-gallic compounds, to which the
term, when standing alone, is almost exclusively applied.

_Prep._ 1. Aleppo galls (well bruised), 4 oz.; clean soft water, 1 quart;
macerate in a clean corked bottle for 10 days or a fortnight, or even
longer, with frequent agitation, then add of gum Arabic (dissolved in a
wine-glassful of water), 1-1/4 oz.; lump sugar, 1/2 oz.; mix well, and
afterwards further add of sulphate of iron (green copperas, crushed
small), 1-1/2 oz.; agitate occasionally for 2 or 3 days, when the ink may
be decanted for use, but is better if the whole is left to digest together
for 2 or 3 weeks. When time is an object, the whole of the ingredients may
at once be put into a bottle, and the latter agitated daily until the ink
is made; and boiling water instead of cold water may be employed.
_Product._ 1 quart of excellent ink, writing pale at first, but soon
turning intensely black.

2. Aleppo galls (bruised), 12 lbs.; soft water, 6 galls.; boil in a copper
vessel for 1 hour, adding more water to make up for the portion lost by
evaporation; strain, and again boil the galls with water, 4 galls.; for
1/2 an hour; strain off the liquor, and boil a third time with water,
2-1/2 galls., and strain; mix the several liquors, and while still hot,
add of green copperas (coarsely powdered), 4-1/2 lbs.; gum arabic (bruised
small), 4 lbs.; agitate until dissolved, and after defecation strain
through a hair sieve, and keep it in a bunged-up cask for use. _Product._
12 galls.; very fine and durable.

3. Aleppo galls (bruised), 14 lbs.; gum, 5 lbs; put them in a small cask,
and add of boiling soft water, 15 galls.; allow the whole to macerate,
with frequent agitation, for a fortnight, then further add of green
copperas, 5 lbs., (dissolved in) water, 7 pints; again mix well, and
agitate the whole once daily for 2 or 3 weeks. _Prod._ Fully 15 galls.
Resembles No. 1.

4. Galls (bruised), 9 lbs.; logwood chips (best Campeachy), 3 lbs.; boil
as in No. 2; to the strained mixed liquors, add of gum arabic and green
copperas, of each (bruised small), 4 lbs.; simmer or digest until
dissolved, and at once strain through a hair sieve into the store-cask or
jars. _Prod._ 16-1/2 galls. Excellent, but inferior to the preceding.

5. Galls (bruised), 2 lbs.; logwood chips, green copperas, and gum, of
each 1 lb.; water, 7 galls.; boil 2 hours, and strain. _Prod._ 5 galls. A
superior ink for retail.

6. Galls (bruised), 1 lb.; logwood, 2 lbs.; gum (common), 1 lb.; green
copperas, 3/4 lb.; water, 8 galls.; proceed as last. _Prod._ 6 galls.
Common, but fit for all ordinary purposes.

The following formulae are for some of the advertised inks, or are those
recommended by the authorities whose names are attached to them:--

7. (ANTI-CORROSIVE.) Same as 'Asiatic ink.'

8. (ASIATIC.) Galls, 4 lbs.; logwood, 2 lbs.; pomegranate peel, 2 lb.;
soft water, 5 galls; boil as in No. 2, then add to the strained and
decanted liquor, when cold, of gum Arabic, 1 lb.; lump sugar or sugar
candy, 1/4 lb.; dissolved in water, 3 pints. _Product._ 4-1/2 galls.
Writes pale, but flows well from the pen, and soon gets black.

9. (Brande.) Galls, 6 oz.; green copperas and gum Arabic, of each 4 oz.;
soft water, 3 quarts; by decoction.

10. (Chaptal.) As No. 4 (nearly), adding sulphate of copper, 1/2 lb. Full
coloured, but less durable and anticorrosive than the preceding.

11. (Desormeaux.) Galls, 1 lb.; logwood chips, 4 oz.; water, 6 quarts;
boil 1 hour, strain 5 quarts, add of sulphate of iron (calcined to
whiteness), 4 oz.; brown sugar, 3 oz.; gum, 6 oz.; acetate of copper, 1/4
oz.; agitate twice a day for a fortnight, then decant the clear, bottle,
cork up for use. Writes a full black, and otherwise resembles No. 10.

12. (Elsner.) Galls (powdered), 42 oz.; gum Senegal (powdered), 15 oz.;
distilled or rain water, 18 quarts; sulphate of iron (free from copper),
18 oz.; liquor of ammonia, 3 dr.; spirit of wine, 24 oz.; mix these
ingredients in an open vessel, stirring frequently until the ink attains
the desired blackness. This formula is said to give a deep black, neutral
ink that does not corrode steel pens.

13. (EXCHEQUER.) Galls (bruised), 40 lbs. (say 4 parts); gum, 10 lbs. (say
one part); green sulphate of iron, 9 lbs. (say one part); soft water, 45
galls., (say 45 parts); macerate for 3 weeks, employing frequent
agitation. "This ink will endure for centuries."

14. (Guibourt.) Galls (in powder), 50 parts; hot water, 800 parts; digest
24 hours, strain, and add of green sulphate of iron and gum Arabic, of
each 25 parts; when dissolved, add the following solution and mix
well:--Sal ammoniac, 8 parts; gum, 2 parts; oil of lavender, 1 part;
boiling water, 16 parts. Said to be indelible.

15. (JAPAN.) This is a black and glossy kind of ink, which may be prepared
from either of the above receipts by calcining the copperas until white or
yellow, or by sprinkling it (in powder) with a little nitric acid before
adding it to the decoction (preferably the former), by which the ink is
rendered of a full black as soon as made. The glossiness is given by using
more gum. It flows less easily from the pen than other inks, and is less
durable than ink that writes paler and afterwards turns black. It is
unfitted for steel pens.

16. (Lewis.) Bruised galls, 3 lb.; gum and sulphate of iron, of each 1
lb.; vinegar, 1 gall.; water, 9 quarts; macerate with frequent agitation
for 14 days. To produce 3 galls. Fine quality, but apt to act on steel
pens.

17. (PREROGATIVE COURT.) Galls, 1 lb.; gum Arabic, 6 oz.; alum, 2 oz.;
green vitriol, 7 oz.; kino, 3 oz.; logwood raspings, 4 oz.; soft water, 1
gall.; macerate at last. Said to write well on parchment.

18. (Ribaucourt.) Galls, 1 lb.; logwood chips and sulphate of iron, of
each 1/2 lb.; gum 6 oz.; sulphate of copper and sugar candy, of each, 1
oz.; boil the first two in soft water, 2-1/2 galls., to one half, then add
the other ingredients. Full coloured, but somewhat corrosive, as No. 10.

19. (Dr Ure.) Galls, 12 lbs.; green copperas and gum Senegal, of each 5
lbs.; as No. 2 (nearly). To produce 12 galls.

20. (Dr Wollaston.) Galls, 1 oz.; sulphate of iron, 3 dr.; gum, 1/4 oz.;
cold water 1/2 pint; put into a bottle and shaken together every day for a
fortnight or longer. A good durable ink, which will bear diluting.

21. (_Pharmaceutische Zeitung._) By adding ferrocyanide of potassium to
ordinary ink, an indelible writing ink may be obtained. The removal of
such an ink by an acid would result in the production of Prussian blue.

_General Commentary._ According to the most accurate experiments on the
preparation of black ink, it appears that the quantity of sulphate of iron
should not exceed 1/3rd part of that of the galls, by which an excess of
astringent vegetable matter, which is necessary for the durability of the
colour, is preserved in the liquid. Gum, by shielding the writing from the
action of the air, tends to preserve the colour; but if much is employed,
the ink flows languidly from quill pens, and scarcely at all from steel
pens. The latter require a very limpid ink. The addition of sugar
(especially of moist sugar) increases the flowing property of the liquid,
but makes it dry more slowly, and frequently to pass into an acetous
state, in which condition it acts injuriously on the pen. Vinegar, for a
like reason, is not calculated for the menstruum, as it rapidly softens
quill or horn, and corrodes iron and steel.

To ensure the permanency of the colour of the tanno-gallic inks, the best
Aleppo or blue nut-galls must alone be used. No second or inferior quality
should be employed. A contrary practice, often adopted for the sake of
economy, is nearly always followed by unpleasant results and often by
considerable loss.

The only improvement of importance which has been made in the manufacture
of writing ink from the common materials, during the last few years, is
the practice of first roasting the gall-nuts, which is now adopted by a
few of the houses most celebrated for their COPYING INK. In this way a
portion of pyrogallic acid is formed, which is very soluble in water, and
strikes an intense bluish-black colour with the protosulphate or green
sulphate of iron. From galls so treated an ink may be made to write black
at once. Care must, however, be taken to avoid any loss of materials by
volatilisation.

To prevent any tendency to mouldiness in ink, a few bruised cloves, or a
little oil of cloves, or, still better, a few drops of creasote (carbolic
acid) may be added. The last two should be previously dissolved in a small
quantity of strong vinegar, or rectified spirit. With the same intention
some of the large makers allow the ink to become covered with a skin of
'mould' in the cask, to render it less liable to undergo the same change
when subsequently bottled. Formerly the practice was to add a little
spirit for the same purpose.

Sumach, logwood, and oak-bark are frequently substituted for galls in the
preparation of common ink. When such is the case, only about 1/6 or 1/7th
of their weight of copperas should be employed. Inks so made possess
little durability.

The very general use of steel pens of late years has caused a
corresponding demand for easy-flowing inks, many of which are now vended
under the titles of WRITING-FLUIDS, STEEL-PEN INK, ANTICORROSIVE INK, &c.
The greater number of these are prepared from galls in the preceding
manner; but a less quantity of gum is employed, and greater attention is
paid than heretofore to avoid every source of 'greasiness' among which
smoke and dirty utensils are, perhaps, the principal. The blue 'writing
fluids,' which either maintain their colour or turn black by exposure to
the air, are, in general, prepared from ferrocyanide of potassium, or from
indigo, and are fully noticed in another place. COPYING INK, another
variety of ink of recent introduction, is characterised by its
suitableness to metallic pens, and by furnishing a transcript by means of
the 'copying press' or 'copying machine.' (See _below_.)

The inks prepared by the first four of the above formulae are very durable
and limpid, and will bear dilution with nearly an equal bulk of water, and
still be superior in quality to the ordinary inks of the shops. See GALLS,
IRON, WRITING FLUID, and _below_.

=Ink, Blue and Blue black.= See WRITING FLUID.

=Ink, Brown.= 1. A strong decoction of catechu; the shade may be varied by
the cautious addition of a little weak solution of bichromate of potash.

2. A strong decoction of logwood, with a very little bichromate of potash.

=Ink, Carbon.= Dissolve real Indian ink in common black ink, or add a
small quantity of lampblack previously heated to redness, and ground
perfectly smooth, with a small portion of the ink.

=Ink, Carmine.= Heat a scruple of carmine with 3 oz. of water of ammonia
for some minutes, a little below boiling, and add 15 to 20 gr. of gum.
(The inkstand must be kept well closed.)

=Ink, Chrome.= See GREEN INK and WRITING FLUID.

=Ink, Coloured.= Inks of various colours may be made from a strong
decoction of the ingredients used in dyeing, mixed with a little alum or
other substance used as a mordant, and gum Arabic. Any of the ordinary
water-colour cakes employed in drawing, diffused through water, may also
be used as coloured ink. See BROWN, GREEN, and RED inks, &c.

INK, COPYING. This is usually prepared by adding a little sugar or other
saccharine matter to ordinary black ink, which for this purpose should be
very rich in colour, and preferably made from galls prepared by heat, as
noticed above. Writing executed with this ink may be copied within the
space of 5 or 6 hours, by passing it through a press (COPYING PRESS) in
contact with thin unsized paper (BANK-POST), slightly damped, enclosed
between two sheets of thick oiled or waxed paper, when a reversed
transcript will be obtained, which will read in proper order when the back
of the copy is turned upwards. In the absence of a press a copy may be
taken, when the ink is good and the writing very recent, by rolling the
sheets, dully arranged on a ruler, over the surface of a flat smooth
table, employing as much force as possible, and avoiding any slipping or
crumbling of the paper. Another method is to pass a warm flat-iron over
the paper laid upon the writing. The following proportions are employed:

1. Sugar candy or lump sugar, 1 oz.; or treacle or moist sugar, 1-1/4 oz.;
rich black ink, 1-1/2 pint; dissolve.

2. Malt wort, 1 pint; evaporate it to the consistence of a syrup, and then
dissolve it in good black ink, 1-1/4 pint.

3. Solazza juice, 2 oz.; mild ale, 1/2 pint; dissolve, strain, and
triturate with lampblack (previously heated to dull redness it a covered
vessel), 1/4 oz.; when the mixture is complete, add of strong black ink,
1-1/2 pint, mix well, and in 2 or 3 hours decant the clear.

_Obs._ After making the above mixtures, they must be tried with a common
steel pen, and if they do not flow freely, some more unprepared ink should
be added until they are found to do so.

=Ink, Gold.= From gold in the state of a impalpable powder, ground up with
a little gum water. The brilliancy of the writing performed with this ink
is considerable, and may be increased by burnishing.

=Ink, Green.= 1. From sap green dissolved in very weak alum water.

2. A strong solution of binacetate of copper in water, or of verdigris in
vinegar.

3. (Klaproth.) Verdigris, 2 oz.; cream of tartar, 1 oz.; water, 1/2 pint;
boil to one half, and filter.

4. (Winckley.) Bichromate of potassa, 3 parts; hot water, 8 parts;
dissolve, add of rectified spirits, 4 parts, mix, and further add of
sulphuric acid, q. s. to liberate the chromic acid, avoiding excess; next
evaporate to one half, dilute with water, filter, and add to the filtrate
rectified spirit, 4 parts together with 3 or 4 drops of sulphuric acid (if
required), to precipitate any remaining potash salt; lastly, decant and
preserve the liquid until it assumes a rich green colour.

5. A solution of recently precipitated hydrated oxide of chromium in
liquor of ammonia, diluted with distilled water, q. s. A magnificent
dark-green liquid, perfectly anti-corrosive.

=Ink, Horticultural.= _Prep._ Chloride of platinum, 1/4 oz.; soft water, 1
pint; dissolve, and preserve it in glass. Used with a clean quill to write
on zinc labels. It almost immediately turns black, and cannot be removed
by washing. The addition of gum and lampblack, as recommended in certain
books, is unnecessary, and even prejudicial to the quality of the ink.

2. Verdigris and sal ammoniac, of each 1/2 oz.; levigated lampblack, 1/2
oz.; common vinegar, 1/4 pint; mix thoroughly. Used as the last, for
either zinc, iron, or steel.

3. Blue vitriol, 1 oz.; sal ammoniac, 1/2 oz. (both in powder); vinegar,
1/4 pint; dissolve. A little lampblack, or vermilion, may be added, but it
is not necessary. As No. 1; for iron, tin, or steel plate. Some of the
preparations described below under '_Incorrodible ink_' are also used by
gardeners and nurserymen.

=Ink, Incorro''dible.= This name has been given to several preparations of
a resinous character, capable of resisting the action of damp and acids.

_Prep._ 1. Boiled linseed oil, ground with lampblack and Prussian blue, of
each q. s. to impart a deep black colour. It may be thinned with oil of
turpentine.

2. Good copal or amber varnish, coloured with either plumbago or
vermilion.

3. Trinidad asphaltum (genuine), 1 part; oil of turpentine, 4 parts;
colour (as last) q. s.

4. (Close.) Cobalt (in powder), 25 gr.; oil of lavender, 200 gr.; dissolve
by a gentle heat, and add of lampblack, 3 gr.; indigo 1 gr. (both in
impalpable powder); or vermilion, q. s.

5. (Hausmann.) As No. 3 (nearly). Resists the action of iodine, chlorine,
alkalies, and acids.

6. (Sheldrake.) Asphaltum dissolved in amber varnish and oil of
turpentine, and coloured with lampblack.

Coarsely powdered anacardium nuts (the fruit of the _Anacardium
orientale_) are macerated in a well-closed bottle with petroleum ether,
for some time. Upon allowing the latter to evaporate spontaneously, a
syrupy residue is left, and this, when applied to linen or cotton cloth,
imparts to them a brownish-yellow colour, which instantly changes to a
deep black on the addition of ammonia or lime water. (Boettger.)

_Obs._ The above are also frequently called 'indelible' or 'indestructible
inks.' They are employed for writing labels on bottles containing strong
acids and alkaline solutions. The last five are very permanent, and are
capable of resisting the action of iodine, chlorine, alkaline lyes, and
acids, together with all the operations of dyeing and bleaching, and at
once offer a cheap and an excellent material for marking linen, &c., as
they cannot be dissolved off by any menstrua that will not destroy the
fabric. They must be employed with stamps, types, or stencil plates, by
which greater neatness will be secured than can be obtained with either a
brush or pen. See HORTICULTURAL INK, INDELIBLE INK, &c.

=Ink, Indel'ible.= _Syn._ INDESTRUCTIBLE INK. _Prep._ 1. Lampblack
(previously heated to dull redness in a covered vessel), 1/4 oz.;
triturate with good black ink (gradually added), 1 pint. Resists chlorine,
weak acids, and weak alkaline lyes, in the cold.

2. (Bezanger.) Lampblack ground in a lye of caustic soda, combined with a
mixture of gelatin and caustic soda. Said to be indelible, and to resemble
genuine China ink.

3. (Braconnot.) Dantzic potash, 4 parts; tanned leather parings, 2 parts;
sulphur, 1 part; water, 20 parts; boil them in an iron vessel to dryness,
then raise the heat (constantly stirring with an iron rod) until the whole
forms a soft mass, observing that it does not ignite; next dissolve the
mass in water, q. s., and filter the solution through a cloth. Flows
freely from a pen, and resists the action of many chemical substances.

4. (CARBON INK.) Genuine Indian ink, rubbed down with good black ink until
it will flow easily from a pen. Resists chlorine, oxalic acid, and
ablution with a hair pencil or sponge.

5. (Coathupe.) Borax, 1 oz.; shell-lac, 2 oz., water, 18 fl. oz.; boil in
a covered vessel until dissolved, strain, add of thick mucilage, 1 oz.,
and triturate it with levigated indigo and lampblack, of each q. s., to
give a good colour. After 2 hours' repose, decant it from the dregs, and
bottle for use. Resists moisture, chlorine, and acids.

6. (FRENCH.)--_a._ From Indian ink, diffused through water acidulated with
hydrochloric acid. For quills.--_b._ From Indian ink diffused through
water slightly alkalised with liquor of potassa. For metallic pens.

7. (Herberger.) Wheat gluten (free from starch), q. s., is dissolved in
weak acetic acid of good pure vinegar, 4 fl. oz.; lampblack (best), 10 or
12 gr.; indigo, 2 or 3 gr.; and oil of cloves, 1 or 2 drops, are then
added, and the whole is thoroughly incorporated together. The product is
inexpensive, has a beautiful black colour, and resists the action of
water, chlorine, and weak acids.

_Obs._ The products of the above formulae, though called 'indelible ink'
and 'indestructible ink,' are in reality only indelible as compared with
common writing ink, as they may all be removed with more or less facility
by chemical reagents, assisted by mechanical means. They are intended
chiefly for paper, pasteboard, and parchment. No 5 is also used for glass
and metal. See MARKING INK.

=Ink, In'dian.= _Syn._ CHINA INK; ATRAMENTUM INDICUM, L. _Prep._ 1.
Lampblack (finest) is ground to a paste with very weak liquor of potassa,
and this paste is then diffused through water slightly alkalised with
potassa, after which it is collected, washed with clean water, and dried;
the dry powder is next levigated to a smooth, stiff paste, with a strong
filtered decoction of carrageen or Irish moss, or of quince seed, a few
drops of essence of musk, and about half as much essence of ambergris
being added, by way of perfume, towards the end of the process; the mass
is, lastly, moulded into cakes, which are ornamented with Chinese
characters and devices, as soon as they are dry and hard.

2. A weak solution of fine gelatin is boiled at a high temperature in a
Papin's digester for 2 hours, and then in an open vessel for 1 hour more;
the liquid is next filtered and evaporated to a proper consistence, either
in a steam or salt-water bath; it is, lastly, made into a paste, as
before, with pure lampblack which has been previously heated to dull
redness in a well-closed crucible. Neither of the above gelatinise in cold
weather, like the ordinary imitations.

3. (Gray.) Pure lampblack made up with asses'-skin glue, and scented with
musk.

4. (Merimee.) Dissolve superfine glue in water, add a strong solution of
nut-galls, and wash the precipitate in hot water; then dissolve it in a
fresh solution of glue, filter, evaporate to a proper thickness, and form
it into a paste as before, with purified lampblack.

5. (Proust.) As No. 1 (nearly).

6. Seed-lac, 1/2 oz.; borax, 1-1/2 dr.; water, 1/2 pint; boil to 8 oz.,
filter, and make a paste with pure lampblack, as before. When dry, it
resists the action of water.

_Obs._ The Chinese do not use glue in the preparation of their ink, but an
infusion or decoction of certain seeds abounding in a glutinous
transparent mucilage, which at once imparts brilliancy and durability to
the colour. Starch converted into gum by means of sulphuric acid, or
'British gum,' has been recommended as a substitute. (M. Merimee.) Indian
ink is chiefly employed by artists, but it has been occasionally given as
a medicine, dissolved in water or wine, in haemorrhages and stomach
complaints.--_Dose_, 1 to 2 dr.

[_For continuation of the article on Inks, see Vol. II._]

                            END OF VOL. I.






                       Transcriber's Amendments