SOCIAL LIFE

Or

The Manners and Customs of Polite Society

Containing

The Rules of Etiquette for All Occasions and
Forming a Complete Guide to Self-Culture
in Conversation, Dress, Deportment,
Correspondence, the Care of
Children and the Home.

by

MAUD C. COOKE,

The Well-Known and Popular Author.

Embellished with Colored Phototypes.







Buffalo, N.Y.
The Matthews-Northrup Co.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1896, by
J. R. Jones,
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington, D.C.
All Rights Reserved.

[Illustration: GOOD MORNING.]




PREFACE.


There is much truth and force in the old saying, that "Manners make
the man." All persons should know how to appear to the best advantage
in polite society. This very attractive volume furnishes rules of
etiquette for all occasions, and is a complete guide for daily use in
all matters pertaining to social intercourse.

The first department treats of Introductions and Salutations. The
rules given under this head are those constantly observed in the best
society. The same is equally true of all the instructions throughout
the book, which is the most complete work on this subject ever issued.

The next department treats of the very important Art of Conversation.
It has been said, with truth, that "a good talker is always a social
success." The reader is here taught how to converse agreeably and with
ease. To be a bright, witty, interesting talker, is a most charming
accomplishment. This volume is a help in this respect, the value of
which cannot be overestimated.

Visiting Cards and Customs are next treated, and all the perplexing
questions which they occasion are fully answered. With this very
comprehensive volume at hand, no person will be guilty of blunders and
humiliating mistakes.

Invitations, Formal and Informal, Acceptances and Regrets, form
another topic. The work furnishes full information and is authority
upon all matters of social etiquette.

All young persons, and some older ones, are deeply interested in the
Etiquette of Courtship and Marriage, Weddings and Wedding
Anniversaries. These subjects are treated in a manner at once
practical and instructive.

The usages of the best society in giving Parties, Dinners, Teas,
Receptions, Breakfasts, Luncheons, etc., are minutely described. Also,
Home Etiquette and Etiquette for Children. With this volume in the
home, parents can easily teach the young polite and winning manners.

Miscellaneous Entertainments form a department that is bright and
sparkling. The dark side of life is not overlooked, Etiquette of
Funerals forming a separate topic. How the young lady should "come
out" is stated in full, with invaluable instructions to her parents
and herself.

Then we come to Etiquette of Public Places, followed by that of
Walking, Riding, Boating, Driving, etc. Etiquette for Bicycle Riders
receives full attention. Here are Hints for Travelers, for Hostess and
Guest, General Etiquette and Delsarte Discipline, Musicales, Soirées,
Lawn Parties, etc. Washington Etiquette is described and all the
proper titles for professional and public men are given.

The Art of Dress receives exhaustive treatment, and the rules to be
observed by those who would dress tastefully are very complete. They
who are well dressed have already made a favorable impression upon
others. Suggestions and rules upon this subject are important to all
who would shine in social life.

Letter-Writing makes constant demands upon nearly all persons, yet its
difficulties are perplexing. Here are plain directions upon this
subject, which should be studied and followed by all who would succeed
in the great art of elegant correspondence. It is essential often to
have the best Forms for Letters, happily expressed, choice in the use
of words and easy and correct in grammatical construction.

Artistic Home Decorations are fully treated, showing how to have a
pretty, tasteful and inviting home at least expense. This subject is
receiving great attention everywhere, and this delightful volume
should be in every household in the land, as it furnishes just the
information needed. Fireplaces and Windows, Stairways, Woodwork,
Doors, Lighting, Decorating, Furniture and Paintings, are among the
topics treated in this part of the volume.

In short, this work is a treasury of rules and information on every
subject of Social Etiquette, Self-Culture and Home Life.

An entirely new and very important feature is the beautiful Phototype
Engravings in rich colors. The publishers consider themselves
fortunate in being able to present these new and admirable
embellishments, which have been pronounced gems of art.




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

TITLE-PAGE                                                 i

PREFACE                                                  iii

CONTENTS                                                   v

THE ESSENCE OF ETIQUETTE                                  17

INTRODUCTIONS AND SALUTATIONS                             23

ART OF CONVERSATION                                       37

VISITING CARDS                                            51

VISITING CUSTOMS                                          69

INVITATIONS, FORMAL AND INFORMAL                          83

ACCEPTANCES AND REGRETS                                  107

ETIQUETTE OF COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE                      116

WEDDINGS AND WEDDING ANNIVERSARIES                       143

HOME ETIQUETTE                                           165

ETIQUETTE FOR CHILDREN                                   180

DINNER GIVING                                            189

TABLE ETIQUETTE                                          211

EVENING PARTIES, RECEPTIONS AND SUPPERS                  227

BALLS, DANCING AND MASQUERADES                           241

SOIRÉES, MUSICALES AND LAWN PARTIES                      261

BREAKFASTS, LUNCHEONS AND TEAS                           274

MISCELLANEOUS ENTERTAINMENTS                             296

CHRISTENINGS, CONFIRMATIONS AND GRADUATIONS              315

ETIQUETTE OF FUNERALS AND MOURNING                       323

ETIQUETTE OF PUBLIC PLACES                               328

WALKING, RIDING, BOATING, DRIVING                        334

BICYCLE ETIQUETTE                                        343

CLUB ETIQUETTE                                           352

SOCIETY                                                  358

GENERAL ETIQUETTE                                        364

WASHINGTON ETIQUETTE                                     374

DELSARTEAN DISCIPLINE                                    378

ART OF DRESS                                             388

COLORS AND COMPLEXIONS                                   398

DRESS FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS                              408

LETTER WRITING                                           429

FORMS FOR LETTERS                                        452

ARTISTIC HOME DECORATIONS                                467

HOW TO BE BEAUTIFUL                                      492

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE SUMMER OUTING--A MORNING CALL.]




THE ESSENCE OF ETIQUETTE.

[Illustration]


The old chronicler says, "Manners maketh man." "Manners are not the
character, but they are the dress of character," adds a modern writer.
Manners are not the pure gold of the mind, but they set the mint stamp
upon the crude ore and fit it for circulation, and few there be who
may dare to set aside their valuation. To genius only is this
privilege granted, and genius is exceeding rare.

It should be remembered that more people can give the list of Dr.
Samuel Johnson's sins against good manners than can quote from his
"Rasselas" and "Rambler," while there will always be more who can
descant upon the selfish, tyrannical ill-breeding of Thomas Carlyle
than can estimate the value and immensity of his literary labors.

The essence of all etiquette will be found in that Golden Rule from
Holy Writ that enjoins upon us to "do unto others as we would that
they should do unto us," and whereon Lord Chesterfield based his maxim
for the cultivation of manners:

"Observe carefully what pleases or displeases you in others, and be
persuaded that, in general, the same things will please or displease
them in you."

The social code, even in its smallest particulars, is the outgrowth of
a kindly regard for the feelings of others, even in the little things
of life, and a kindly sympathy for all that interests your
companions.

"Be hospitable toward the ideas of others," says Dr. George Ripley.
"Some people," he asserts, "only half listen to you, because they are
considering, even while you speak, with what wealth of wit they will
reply." Such people may be brilliant, but they can never be agreeable.
You feel that they are impatient to have their own turn come, and have
none of the gentle receptiveness so pleasing to our own _ego_ that
rebels against their egotism.

It is the kind and sympathetic soul that wins friends, and

    "He who has a thousand friends
      Has not a friend to spare,
    But he who has an enemy
      Will find him everywhere."

Our first impressions of a man are impressions of his manners. We
designate him from the first glimpse of his face, first sound of his
voice, as an affable, agreeable and sincere individual; or as crabbed,
cross-grained and suspicious in his temperament, and are attracted by,
or repelled from him, according to the characteristics with which his
manners have clothed him.


The Influence of Good Manners.

So potent is this power exercised over the world by the gentle sway of
manners that their possession is worthy the cultivation and care we
put forth for the attainment of all gracious, pleasant things, and to
their possessor is given the key to which all doors open.

Emerson was one of the most acute observers of manners that culture
has ever produced, and he wrote: "The longer I live the more I am
impressed with the importance of manners. When we reflect upon their
persuasive and cheering force, how they recommend, prepare and draw
people together; when we think what keys they are, and to what
secrets; what high and inspiring character they convey and what
divination is required of us for the reading of this fine telegraphy,
we see what range the subject has."

Manners, with some, are the gracious legacy of inheritance, education,
and environment; with others they are the growth of the careful
cultivation of years, and carry with them the calm self-poise of the
man who has conquered circumstances and established his own position.
In such as these there inheres a certain power that impresses itself
upon all who come in contact with its influence.

The self-possession and certainty stamped upon the face of a man who
inherited, or won for himself, the sure and perfect armor of
good-breeding, is but the outer stamp of the man himself.

Manners are profitable as well as pleasant. They carry with them a
measureless weight of influence. A gentleman once brought into his
library a costly subscription book. "My dear," said his wife, "you
already had a copy of that work." "I knew I did," he replied, "but the
manners of the lad who sold it were so elegant that it was a pleasure
to purchase it."

The charm of good manners is not a qualification belonging to any
particular station in life, for, to the poor and unlettered oftimes
may be traced deeds and actions that mark them as nature's noblemen.
Education, wealth and social station do not always confer them, but
the outer grace may be acquired by all.

In this way it has come to be known that a refinement of laws in any
country indicates that a gradual refinement of manners has led up
towards, and finally crystallized into a refinement of the hearts and
the laws of the people.


The Marks of True Politeness.

True politeness is always known by its lack of assumption. President
Tyler, in advising his daughter-in-law previous to her taking her
position as lady of the White House, used these noteworthy words: "It
is, I trust, scarcely necessary to say that, as upon you will devolve
the duty of presiding at the White House, you should be equal and
untiring in your affabilities to all. You should remember that nothing
shows a little soul so much as the exhibition of airs or assumptions
under any circumstances."

The minor observances have much to do with the polishing and
perfecting of the manners of men. These little things that mark one
as being "to the manor born" are not the growth of moments but the
slow accretions of years; neither can their use be dropped in the
privacy of home to be assumed at pleasure for the outside world to
admire, else they will fit but illy, as borrowed plumes are wont to
do.

The best-intentioned and best-hearted people that the world has ever
known are too often careless in the slight observances that mean so
much to the cultivated. Thoreau says, "I could better eat with one who
did not respect the truth or the laws than with a sloven and
unpresentable person. Moral qualities rule the world, but at short
range the senses are despotic."

"The code of society is just a little stronger with some individuals
than the code of Sinai, and many a man who would not scruple to put
his fingers in your pocket, would forego peas rather than use his
knife as a shovel."


The Great Value of Courtesy.

"Be courteous," is an apostolic command that too many earthly
followers of the Twelve would do well to consider. They are just, they
are truthful, sometimes aggressively so; they are conscientious, they
weary not in well-doing, but--they are not courteous. They are not
good mannered, and by so much as they sin in this regard do they lose
their power to win.

"Good manners," says one, "are more serviceable than a passport, than
a bank account, than a lineage. They make friends for us; they are
more potent than eloquence or genius without them." They add to
beauty, they detract from personal ugliness, they cast a glamour over
defects, in short, they work the miracle of mind over matter
exemplified in the case of the extremely plain Madame de Staël, who
was reputed to "talk herself beautiful in five minutes."

They teach us the beauty of self-sacrifice, they constrain us to
listen, with an appearance of interest to a twice-told tale, they
teach the wife to smile over the somewhat worn jest of the husband, as
she smiled in like fashion in the days of auld lang syne, or, harder
still, they enjoin upon us to follow the Duc de Morny's definition of
a polite man, as "one who listens with interest to things he knows
all about, when they are told by a person who knows nothing about
them."

They impress upon us to guard the feelings of others, they warn us to
avoid the familiarity that breeds contempt, and, above all, they are
contagious!

There is much to be said as to the true definition of those beautiful
but abused terms, lady and gentleman, each with its strong, sweet
meaning.

"A lady is one who, to inbred modesty and refinement, adds a
scrupulous attention to the rights and feelings of others, and applies
the Golden Rule of doing as she would be done by, to all who are
connected with her, both at home and in society."

While a gentleman has been described as: "Whoever is true, loyal and
candid; whoever possesses a pleasing, affable, demeanor; whoever is
honorable in himself and in his judgment of others and requires no law
but his word to make him fulfil all engagements."

Such men and such women are "ladies" and "gentlemen" whether they are
found in the peasant's hut or the prince's palace.


Rules of Etiquette.

The following rules, published some time ago as a receipt for that
beauty of expression so much more lasting and attractive than mere
beauty of feature, were written originally for the guidance of woman,
but they are equally applicable to the needs of man.

"1. Learn to govern yourself and to be gentle and patient.

"2. Guard your temper, especially in seasons of ill-health,
irritation, and trouble, and soften it by a sense of your own
shortcomings and errors.

"3. Never speak or act in anger.

"4. Remember that, valuable as is the gift of speech, silence is often
more valuable.

"5. Do not expect too much from others, but forbear and forgive, as
you desire forbearance and forgiveness yourself.

"6. Never retort a sharp or angry word. It is the second word that
makes the quarrel.

"7. Beware of the first disagreement.

"8. Learn to speak in a gentle tone of voice.

"9. Learn to say kind and pleasant things when opportunity offers.

"10. Study the characters of those with whom you come in contact, and
sympathize with them in all their troubles, however small.

"11. Do not neglect little things if they can affect the comfort of
others in the smallest degree.

"12. Avoid moods, and pets, and fits of sulkiness.

"13. Learn to deny yourself and prefer others.

"14. Beware of meddlers and tale-bearers.

"15. Never charge a bad motive, if a good one is conceivable."

Courtesy, charity and love are one, and, when all good deeds are done
the warning comes: "If ye have not charity" all is naught. Therefore:

    "A sweet, attractive kind of grace,
      A full assurance given by looks,
    Continual comfort in a face,
      The lineaments of gospel-books."

Do ye all things courteously, founding precept and practice upon that
old rule, the Golden Rule, which is the Alpha and the Omega of all
good manners and the very Essence of all Etiquette.

[Illustration]




INTRODUCTIONS AND SALUTATIONS

[Illustration]


Indiscriminate introductions are always in bad taste, yet, since the
sweetest of our friendships are wont to reach us through the medium of
a formal presentation, it is well that we understand how, when and
where these introductions should properly take place.

As a rule, introductions, to be agreeable, should be desired before
being given; and since we are, or should be, in a measure, the
endorsers of those whom we present to our friends, a due degree of
care should be exercised in so doing, lest inadvertently we force upon
another what may prove an undesirable acquaintance.

Introductions are given in cases of necessity, such as business
transactions, or emergencies that may arise in traveling, as when we
wish to consign some friend to the care of another. They are given at
balls, that partners may be found for all the dancers. Here, however,
care must be taken beforehand to ascertain if the parties will dance,
for such is the selfishness and, shall it be said, ill-breeding of our
society young men that not unfrequently they will walk away without
even offering the lady the courtesy of the next dance. In this way her
hostess unwittingly exposes her to a marked slight, since the
ball-room introduction is supposed to mean an intention on the part of
the gentleman to show some attention to the lady, with whom he should
either dance, promenade, or talk through one set.

Neither are young ladies quite guiltless in this respect, since it
often happens that they refuse partners from simple caprice, and no
gentleman likes to be refused, even for a quadrille. It may be added
that these introductions necessitate no after acknowledgments on
either side unless mutually agreeable.

Introductions are given at card parties when necessary to fill out
tables for a game and they occur also where one person especially
wishes another to become acquainted with a friend.


An English Custom.

Strangers are always introduced to visitors, and at dinners, if
previously unacquainted, the gentleman is introduced, a few minutes
beforehand, to the lady he is to take out to the table. In England,
however, where they exercise great care in giving introductions, even
this formality is not always complied with. Richard Grant White speaks
of being informed at the last moment, in some house whose owner
boasted many titles, that he was to take down "the lady in pink over
there in the bay window," to whom, therefore, he duly went, and,
bending an inviting elbow, said in his most persuasive tones: "May I
have the pleasure?" The proffered honor was accepted, and he and the
lady, each equally ignorant as to the other's identity, went out to
spend a long two hours in entertaining one another.

The one redeeming feature of this English custom is that everyone, at
private entertainments, talks to everyone else without an
introduction, considering that the fact of them being guests under the
same roof is a species of endorsement for all, and, better still, this
sociability carries with it no after obligations, because, since they
are not introduced, they are not acquainted. In this country, owing
probably to the unfortunate frequency of introductions among us, a
certain chill pervades the atmosphere when a portion of the guests are
unacquainted with one another, for, as a rule, no one here attempts to
converse without having been properly presented.

In metropolitan circles, however, this is not so much the case, and
as our country glows older it is to be hoped that "a change will come
o'er the spirit of our dream" in this respect, thus lessening the
present responsibility of our hostesses, who, torn between two
opposing factions, feel that "If I introduce Mrs. So-and-so to Mrs.
Blank she will never forgive me, and if I do not introduce Mrs. Blank
to Mrs. So-and-so I shall have made a mortal enemy."

At a party given in behalf of a _débutante_ she is to be introduced to
every lady present, and every gentleman is to be presented to her. In
case there should be a distinguished guest present at any
entertainment, all other guests must be made acquainted with the
favored one.


You May Introduce Yourself.

There are also times when it is eminently proper to introduce one's
self, such as when you find upon entering a drawing room that the
hostess has forgotten your name; or if it should have been wrongly
announced; or if you are an entire stranger to the hostess, it is not
only proper, but imperative, to introduce yourself at once. Then, too,
it occasionally happens that a gentleman, wishing to render some
assistance to a lady who is traveling alone, prefers to introduce
himself beforehand. This, of course, leaves the lady perfectly free to
recognize him or not at any future time. Occasions such as these are
constantly arising, and tact and judgment must be used to decide the
question for one's self.

Watering-place introductions are frequently given for the convenience
and pleasure of the time being. They are usually made by the eldest
lady of either party and further recognition in the future is
optional.

Do not introduce people in public places. Do not, even if a friend
should overtake you and walk by your side for some distance, or should
meet and talk with you, introduce him to another friend with whom you
are also walking. You may do it, however, in exceptional cases. Do
not, as a rule, introduce two people who are inhabitants of the same
town; it is to be supposed that they could have known one another had
they cared so to do. Still, it is well to exercise judgment in this
one particular, since what could be done unquestioned in a city parlor
cannot always be accomplished without exciting comment and ill-feeling
in a country town.

Do not introduce gentlemen to ladies without first being sure that the
acquaintance will be agreeable to the lady, since it is much more
difficult for a lady to shake off an undesirable acquaintance than it
is for a gentleman. In the case of foreigners it is always well to be
careful before introducing them to young ladies at their own request,
since it often happens that foreign titles, found upon this side the
water, are extremely dubious. Hence one is clearly justified in
referring them to her parents or guardians for the required favor.


A Custom Out of Date.

Introductions at evening parties are, fortunately, very much out of
date, except it is for partners in dancing, or unless there should be
so many strangers present as to threaten overwhelming the entire party
in speechless gloom. Occasionally in the country some old-fashioned
hosts persist in handing each newcomer around the room like
refreshments for an introduction to each one present. This custom puts
the later arrivals in the position, as some one says, "of making a
semi-circular bow like a concert singer before an audience," and this,
to non-professionals, is not a little embarrassing.

Timid people, and people unaccustomed to the rules of social
etiquette, always feel a certain dread in going through the slight
formality of an introduction. Nothing, however, if one remembers a few
timely hints, can be simpler than this little ceremony so necessary
for each of us to perform many times in our intercourse with others.
Recollect always to introduce the gentleman to the lady, never the
lady to the gentleman, except in the case of very exalted rank,
extreme age or the possession of great eminence in intellectual or
artistic life; otherwise, the rule is inflexible save in introducing a
youthful "rosebud" formally to an elderly gentleman, in which case you
would present her to him. The chivalry of etiquette assumes that a man
is always honored by presentation to a lady.

In introducing ladies, present the younger to the elder, unless in
case of some marked exception such as those given above.

The simplest form in presenting one person to another is always the
best. A wife presents her husband as "Mr. North," "Colonel North," or
"Doctor North," always giving him his rightful titles. The wife of the
President should introduce him as "The President," while we should
address him as "Mr. President."

In introducing a gentleman to a lady one should say, "Mrs. A., allow
(or permit) me to introduce (or present) Mr. B.; Mr. B., Mrs. A.,"
being sure that the names are distinctly pronounced. If this should
not be the case, let the parties themselves ask it at once, a simple
"I beg pardon, I did not understand the name," saving much future
annoyance.


Forms of Introduction.

In introducing two ladies the same formula may be used, as: "Mrs. Y.,
allow me to introduce Mrs. Z.; Mrs. Z., Mrs. Y." Or one may say: "Mrs.
Y., this is my friend Mrs. Z.; Mrs. Z., Mrs. Y." A still further
variation is to say "Mrs. Y., I believe you have never met Mrs. Z.;
Mrs. Z., Mrs. Y." In introducing two gentlemen any of the above forms
may be used. If the introduction is given simply for business purposes
it should be short and concise, as: Mr. A., Mr. B.; Mr. B., Mr. A.

In introducing a stranger it will always be well to make some little
explanatory remark that may be used as a stepping-stone toward
beginning a conversation, thus "Miss S., allow me to present Mr. T.,
who is just back from Africa," or, "Miss E., this is my friend Mr. F.,
the composer of that little song you sang just now." Any remark like
this always serves to make the opening of the conversation easier.

An introduction received, or solicited, simply for your own
convenience, as a business recommendation, or otherwise, entitles you
to no after benefits, or social recognition.

Where there are several waiting for an introduction to the same
individual, name the latter first, then in succession name the
others, bowing slightly, as each name is pronounced, in the direction
of the one named. Thus: "Colonel Parker, allow me to present to you
Mrs. Roe, Miss Doe, and Doctor Brown," being sure always to give every
one their full honorary title in making the introduction.

In introducing relatives be very sure to give their full name. A
sister, for instance, should be introduced as, "My sister, Miss Roe;"
or, "Miss Mary Roe," or, "My sister, Mrs. Doe," as the case may be,
making sure always never to say "My sister Mary," or, "My brother
Joe," thereby leaving the stranger ignorant as to name or estate.

A mother is always at liberty to introduce her son or daughter; a
husband is supposed always to introduce his wife, and a wife her
husband.


What Should Follow the Introduction.

Nowadays, the usual recognition of an introduction is by a formal bow.
Handshaking rarely occurs and a gentleman introduced to a lady never
offers his hand unless she should first extend her own. The
inclination on the part of the lady is slight, that of the gentleman
deeper. The custom of a courtesy by the lady has scarcely taken root
in this country.

A hostess receiving in her own parlors is at liberty, if she should
wish, to extend her hand to all comers.

A gentleman upon being introduced to a lady usually suggests that he
is "Happy to make her acquaintance," or, "Delighted to make the
acquaintance of Miss B----," though, if he choose, he may simply bow,
repeating her name. A lady, upon introduction to a gentleman, simply
bows, possibly repeating his name, but never is "happy" or "delighted"
to make his acquaintance. The pleasure is supposed to be upon his
part, the condescension upon her side. She should, however, upon his
expression of pleasure, bow, with a slight smile, or a murmured "Thank
you," in return, though, a married lady, especially if she be a little
the elder, may cordially say she is "glad to meet him."

It is the place of a gentleman, after an introduction to a lady, to
make some remark calculated to set the conversational ball rolling,
and she should endeavor to supplement his efforts sufficiently to keep
up the conversation. If, however, the gentleman be younger than the
lady and somewhat embarrassed, she should show sufficient tact to open
the conversation herself. If the introduction is between two ladies,
the one who is introduced should make the first remark.

Letters of Introduction are fully commented upon and explained in this
volume in the Department on Correspondence, where the proper forms for
such letters are given.

All introductions, however annoying, should be received pleasantly and
acknowledged fully while under the roof where they are given, though,
an hour after, the two might pass one another in speechless silence.
This is for the hostess' sake, and so great is this solicitude on the
part of the well-bred that mortal enemies have met and smiled across
the mahogany of a mutual friend, thus preventing the utter chagrin of
a hostess who discovers, by frowning faces and averted gaze, that her
carefully arranged dinner is a partial failure.


A Lady's Wishes Should be Respected.

Gentlemen rarely ask for introductions to one another, but, should a
lady, for any cause, express a desire to present two men of her
acquaintance to one another, they must, even if not anxious for the
honor, acquiesce instantly in her request.

An introduction given between two visitors calling at the same house
need not carry with it any weight unless both parties so desire. At
the time, a bow is the most that is demanded; afterward, it is the
individual having the most social prestige, or, if there is no
difference in standing, the one having most confidence, to whom this
privilege is given of acknowledging or ignoring the introduction. A
bowing acquaintance with a person thus introduced cannot in the least
injure the social position of an individual.

An introduction given on the street needs no after recognition. At the
time, a gentleman simply lifts his hat, a lady bows, and that is all.

After any introduction (except the one just mentioned) never give the
cut direct save for very good cause. It is too often an uncalled-for
insult.


SALUTATIONS.

The style of salutation differs among nations, but there have been
none yet discovered so low in the social scale as to be entirely
destitute of some sign for expressions of respect or fear between man
and man. Fear is, perhaps, the origin of respect, for every form of
salutation among us to-day may be traced back to a source that plainly
affirms it to be the survival of some attitude of deference from the
conquered to the conqueror, or some habit of adoration of an unseen
Power.

In our own customs of salutation we bare the head in token of respect,
never thinking that in the olden time it was an act of adoration
practiced before gods and rulers. Our formal bow is simply the
modification of a servile prostration, and the graceful bow of a lady
of society is but the last remaining trace of a genuflection. When we
rise and stand as our friends enter, or leave, our reception-room, it
is an act of respect, it was once an act of homage. The throwing of a
kiss is an imitation of an act of worship that devout Romans practiced
before their gods, and the wave of the hand to a friend across the
street is a modification of the same custom.

The removal of a gentleman's glove in shaking hands with a lady is the
relic of a habit based on necessity, and dating back to a day when the
knight of old removed his iron gauntlet, lest he crush the maiden's
hand within its grasp. The removal of the glove was practiced between
men also at a later date, when, too often, beneath the heavily
embroidered gauntlet, lurked the assassin's dagger, so that to unglove
before a hand-clasp grew to be considered an act of good faith.

The bow, the hand-clasp, and the kiss are the principal methods of
salutation employed by the most highly civilized nations of this era
of the world.

The bow is the most proper salutation among friends and acquaintances
meeting in public. It is also frequently resorted to on private
occasions.

The bow should never degenerate into a nod; this is both ungracious
and ungentlemanly. The hat should be lifted sufficiently to clear the
head, and the bow, in the reception room, should slightly incline the
body also. Ladies should incline their heads gracefully and smile upon
their friends pleasantly, but not broadly.


Removing the Hat.

A gentleman should remove his hat from his head with the hand farthest
from the person saluted. This turns the hat from instead of towards
them. If you see that the person saluted is going to stop to shake
hands, use the left in order to leave the right free.

A gentleman, in giving assistance to a lady in any difficulty (which
should be offered immediately), should do so courteously, lifting his
hat and requesting the pleasure of assisting her. This rule,
unfortunately, is much more frequently observed on the Continent of
Europe than in England or America.

Gentlemen meeting and passing ladies on hotel stairs, or in the
corridors, should lift their hats, whether acquainted or not. The same
courtesy should be observed on entering an elevator where there are
one or more ladies, or in opening a door for a lady and giving her
precedence in entering.

All these observances, slight as they are, mark the thorough gentleman
who respects all women, whether or not there has been a formal
presentation between them.

In giving up a seat to a lady in a street car, or a crowded room, a
gentleman will do so with a slight bow. Such a kindness should always
be acknowledged by the lady with a bow and a polite "Thank you."
American women are too prone to take this altogether optional courtesy
on the part of men as a matter of course, deserving no thanks at their
hands, or to look upon its omission as an infringement of their
rights. No true lady will ever fail to acknowledge such courtesies.
Any aid given, or information furnished, should also call forth her
thanks.

A gentleman walking with a lady will salute with a bow any person they
may meet to whom she extends the same courtesy, even should the party
be quite unknown to him.

Where two gentlemen are walking together and they chance to meet a
lady with whom one is acquainted and the other not, both should bow,
the one because of his acquaintance and the other out of respect.


The Privilege of Recognition.

A gentleman should usually wait for a lady to recognize him first on
the street. This privilege of recognition is her prerogative.
Especially is this the case if he is simply the acquaintance of a
single evening's entertainment. Acquaintances of long standing,
however, do not wait for such formalities, usually speaking at about
the same moment.

When a gentleman and lady are walking together and another gentleman,
also a friend of the lady, should meet or overtake the couple, a bow
and smile and a word of greeting are all that can be permitted the
newcomer, when he should at once pass on. By doing otherwise he
affronts the lady's escort, and should she, by word or look, endeavor
to retain him at her side, she also sins against that conventional
code which argues that by her own consent she has granted her company,
for the time being, to her first escort.

As before said, introductions are not to be given in public places,
but should it happen that a lady walking with a gentleman meet another
lady, and either pause for a few words, or else walk on beside her for
a few steps, the gentleman, at her departure, should lift his hat
politely in farewell.

If a gentleman should stop a lady on the street for conversation, and
she should be desirous of discontinuing it, she should bow slightly,
whereupon the gentleman must instantly take his leave. If she should
walk on without breaking up the conversation, he is bound to accompany
her.

Absolute good form, however, demands that a gentleman, wishing to
converse with a lady on the street, should, instead of stopping her,
turn and walk with her for a short distance in the direction in which
she may be going. When the conversation is finished, he should lift
his hat, bow, wish her "Good morning" or "Good afternoon," as the case
may be, and retrace his footsteps in the direction in which he was
previously going.

Young ladies show the same deference in awaiting a bow from a woman
much their senior that a gentleman does towards a lady.

A gentleman, in bowing to a lady, if he should be smoking, removes his
cigar from his lips, and if, alas! his hand or hands should be in his
pockets, withdraws them immediately.


Returning Salutations.

A lady's bow should always be returned by a gentleman; if he should be
determined not to recognize her he should take the pains of crossing
the street or in some other manner avoiding the meeting. Bows from
persons not recognized at the moment should be returned, as it may be
some one, not recalled at the moment, yet who has a claim upon your
politeness.

If the same friend is met several times in the course of a walk or
drive, the first bow is all that is required, a smile, or a glance
answering all purposes of recognition at after meetings.

A gentleman lifts his hat on passing a funeral procession or a group
of mourners; he removes it entirely on entering a church, and he
should remove it on entering a private office; he should remain
uncovered while talking to a lady at a door, unless, after the kindly
custom of French ladies, she should request him to replace his hat, on
account of wind or weather; in short, he should be with uncovered head
much more than American men are apt to be.

Gentlemen, who are acquainted, should lift their hats slightly upon
meeting one another, but should never fail to do so should either one
be walking with a lady. Under such circumstances a simple nod would be
a slight towards her.

A recognition, by bow or smile, is not required from opposite sides of
the street, or across hotel dining rooms. Gentlemen riding or driving,
and having both hands occupied, are not compelled to lift the hat on
bowing.

If saluted by an inferior, do not fail to return the courtesy in kind,
remembering Henry Clay, who, when asked why he lifted his hat to an
old colored man who had paid him the same deference, replied, "I never
allow a negro to outdo me in politeness, sir."


Shaking Hands.

Gentlemen, as a rule, shake hands upon being introduced to one
another. The lady of a house usually shakes hands with all guests whom
she receives in her house for the first time. Gentlemen do not,
however, offer to shake hands with the hostess, leaving it to her to
put the stamp of cordiality upon the ceremony of introduction, or to
simply pass it with courtesy.

If a lady extends her hand to a gentleman, he does not, as of old,
remove his glove, nor does he make use of the out-of-date formula,
"Excuse my glove." At his departure the lady bows her adieu, but does
not again extend her hand.

The hand-clasp is a cordial expression of good will, but there are
degrees of cordiality to be observed in the performance of this
ceremony. Every one knows, and shudders at, the woman who gives two,
or at most, three fingers of a cold and lifeless hand for a moment
into your keeping, and every one recognizes and fears the man who
swallows up and crushes the entire hand within his powerful grasp.
Each extreme is to be avoided.

A lady should give her whole hand, not her fingers; a gentleman should
receive it cordially, holding it neither too tightly nor too loosely,
shaking it very slightly and not presuming to retain it. Should a
gentleman sin against any of these particulars, a lady is justified in
refusing to offer her hand next time.

A young lady simply gives her hand to a gentleman, neither pressing
nor shaking his, unless it be in the case of especial friends. Two
ladies shake hands quietly. Both ladies and gentlemen always rise to
shake hands. Elderly people, or invalids, are permitted to excuse
themselves and keep their seats.

Ball-room introductions for dancing do not necessitate hand-shaking, a
bow being all that is required. A very particular introduction,
wherever given, such as one prefaced by some remark like, "I want you
to know my friend So-and-So," merits a hand-shake on your part,
together with some cordial remark.

Inferiors in social position should always wait until their superiors
offer the hand, never taking the initiative in this respect. This
precaution will sometimes save them the pain of a marked slight.


Words of Salutation.

Verbal greetings ought always to be quiet and respectful; they should
never be shouted across streets, nor called when the parties are at
any distance from each other. Nicknames should not be used publicly
and promiscuously, in short, all possible respect should be paid to
the feelings of other persons on public occasions.

The phrases, "Good morning," "Good evening," "Good afternoon," "How do
you do?" "How are you?" are the usual forms employed. Sometimes the
name of the person addressed is added, thus: "Good morning, Mrs.
Smith."

Replies to these salutations are sometimes simply a bow from a lady to
a gentleman, or perhaps a bow and a repetition of his greeting, as:
"Good morning, Mr. Jones." "How do you do," should be replied to by
the same phrase, never, as is often the case with the novice in social
arts, by: "I am very well, thank you." A special inquiry after one's
health, however, as: "How do you do, Mrs. Jones?" followed, after her
acknowledgment, by: "How are you?" or, "How is your health?" should
receive the response, "I am very well, thank you." After an
acquaintance has been ill, the first inquiry by a friend should be one
concerning health. This is a rule that should never be neglected; to
do so would be an oversight.

Kissing is a custom which the code of English and American etiquette
relegates as much as possible to the privacy of home. A kiss, the
outward expression of our closest affection and our warmest love,
should never be made a public show whereat the outside world may
smile. Hence, the effusive kissing between girls and women at their
meeting and their parting, is to be regretted as a specimen, to say
the least, of very bad taste on their part. Indiscriminate kissing of
children and infants is also objectionable on the score of health.
Happily, kisses and embraces among men are never seen in this country,
though, in some parts of Europe they are constantly to be observed,
both in public and private.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: A SOCIETY BALL--SHOWING FASHIONABLE COSTUMES.]




ART of CONVERSATION

[Illustration]


"Talk often," says Lord Chesterfield, "but never long; in that case if
you do not please, at least you are sure not to tire your hearers. Pay
your own reckoning, but do not treat the entire company: this being
one of the very few cases in which people do not care to be treated,
every one being fully convinced that he has the wherewithal to pay."

All other arts pale before the art of conversation as a source of
popularity, and no other accomplishment tends so much toward social
success. The contact of many minds is a constant stimulus to mental
activity and its outward expression in animated conversation. It lends
new power to brilliancy of talent, and quickens, to a certain extent,
even the lowest and dullest of intellects.

Everyone has been surprised and delighted at times by some
unexpectedly brilliant remark that has flashed from his lips during
the course of some animated exchange of badinage and repartee, and
there is no one but realizes how the mind acquires breadth and the
opinions grow tolerant as one converses with persons of intelligence
and culture.

Since, however, according to Cicero, "Silence is one of the greatest
arts of conversation," there may be added, with equal wisdom, to the
above counsel, "Listen often and well." Be not an impatient listener,
nor yet an impassive one, but pay the compliment of attention and
interest to the subject in hand, and your company will be sought as an
acquisition.

Any lady, by profound attention to, and a pleased interest in the
subject under consideration, may promote the conversation most
skillfully and delightfully. Knowledge of the subject is not always
necessary. An English savant, deeply interested in Egyptology, once
escorted a young lady out to dinner. His conversation, as a matter of
course, turned entirely upon excavations, hieroglyphics, and kindred
topics. Upon all these the young lady was profoundly ignorant, but, if
unversed in Egyptian lore, she was most thoroughly versed in
conversational arts, and, by her speaking glances of intelligence and
her pleased smile, so fascinated the man of science that he
enthusiastically declared afterward that "Miss L---- was one of the
best conversationalists and the most intelligent young lady he had
ever met, and that her knowledge of Egyptology was something
wonderful." This, to one who had sat opposite them at table, and could
have vouched that the lady in question had not spoken a single word
through the entire dinner, was slightly amusing. So strong however,
was the impression left upon the mind of the savant by her interested
attention, that it would have been difficult to convince him of the
fact.


The Good Listener.

This, even if an exception, shows what attentive listening may
accomplish toward social success. Let it be mentioned here, however,
that no one individual should be so carried away by a pet hobby as to
force conversation into a monologue. A very well bred man, no matter
how great his interest in or eloquence upon any topic may be, always
catches at the slightest hint to close the conversation.

A man will always bear in mind that the greatest compliment he can pay
a woman is a respectful, deferential attention to her words. There are
men whose very manner of listening conveys, in itself, the most
delicate flattery.

A woman, in her turn, should always remember that, however interesting
her conversation may be, there is always danger that a man may
possibly weary of its protracted continuance, and so she should
forebear leaving him no loophole for escape. Louise Chandler Moulton
enjoins one thing on women which they would do well to recollect, and
that is, "if they want a man to stay with them to make it evidently
and entirely easy for him to get away. There is something lawless and
rebellious in even the best of men; they hate doing things because
they are obliged."


Suitable Topics.

To render conversation agreeable, suitable topics for the company
present, if possible, must be chosen. Neither soar above the level of
their conversation, nor sink so far beneath it, as to lead them to
infer that you possess a very slight opinion of their merits.

In conversing, too many educated men fall into the error of talking
commonplaces to all women alike, as if "small talk," to the exclusion
of all weightier matters, were the only species of conversation suited
to a woman's ear. On the contrary, she is more often either hurt or
angered at your evident condescension, or, on the other hand, she
credits you with just the amount of knowledge that you have evinced in
your conversation with her.

In the search after suitable topics it is well to remember that all
are pleased by a display of interest in their especial affairs. Thus,
by leading the artist to talk of his pictures, the lady amateur of her
music, the _prima donna_ of her successes, the mother of her children,
the author of his book, you may rest assured that they will always
speak of you as a person of great discrimination and a very
interesting conversationalist. They in their turn, unless extremely
devoid of tact and eminently selfish, will display sufficient regard
for your feelings to give an opportunity for waxing eloquent on your
part over your own pet topics. Be very careful then not to fall into
that besetting fault of good talkers, a monologue, which is fatal to
all conversation.

Richard Steele gave a most desirable maxim for conversation when he
said: "I would establish one great rule in conversation, which is
this, that men should not talk to please themselves, but those that
hear them--adapting their words to the place where, the time when, and
the person to whom they are spoken."


Misuse of Quotations.

Do not use classical quotations before a woman unless you know that,
by virtue of a classical education on her own part, she is capable of
appreciating the point. Remember, too, that there are a great many men
who, not having enjoyed your educational advantages, are annoyed,
rather than edified by your display of learning.

Do not make a point of exhibiting your learning aggressively anywhere.
"Classical quotation is the literary man's parole the world over,"
says Dr. Samuel Johnson, but he savored somewhat of the pedant, and
his imitators, by too frequent an indulgence in this habit, may run
the risk of aping his pedantry without possessing his genius. Neither
is it well to interlard conversation with too frequent quotations from
English authors, no matter how well they may fit the occasion. This is
a habit that easily becomes tiresome.


"Small Talk."

The current change of society is the light coin of "small talk" that
breaks with chink and shimmer the heavy bills of large denomination,
that else would overwhelm social conversation with their size.

Wiseacres may meet and learnedly discourse on all manner of sage
subjects, but that is discussion, debate, argument, what you will, not
conversation. Conversation is light, brilliant, and tossed back and
forth from one to another with the grace and ease of the feathered
shuttlecock.

A lady of high literary attainments was seen in a gay gathering
sitting quietly by herself in a corner, and, being questioned by a
friend as to her silence, replied, half bitterly, "I have no 'small
change,' and my bank bills are all of too large denomination for the
occasion." This is a difficulty that one should strive to overcome,
for, after all, it is small change, rather than bank bills, that
society in general requires.

Given the foundation of even a moderate education, the aspirant for
social success will gain more ideas from modern fiction than from any
other source whatever. No historian presents the social manners and
customs of his time with half the accuracy displayed by our best
fiction writers. A well known society woman, familiar with its usages
both at home and abroad, declares that "a course of Anthony Trollope
is as good as a London season," and we all know that Howells and James
and other authors of that ilk have lifted the _portières_ of our own
drawing rooms and shown us what is transpiring therein. Gail Hamilton
says that to be "well-smattered" is next best to being deeply learned,
and nowhere can a smattering of almost everything be better gained
than from the modern works of fiction.


A Valuable Source of Knowledge.

A friend of the writer, a talented elocutionist, and socially
brilliant, once said with reference to her quiet country home and her
sudden emergence therefrom to mingle in Washington society, that she
found herself perfectly at ease in those circles so widely different
from her previous experience of life, and that "she attributed it
wholly to her knowledge of social customs and the social atmosphere,
as gained from the best society stories." It was in this manner that
she served her social novitiate and the result bore testimony to its
efficacy.

Where one is not quite sure of rising to the occasion it is well to be
provided, before attending a social gathering, with several topics
that will be suitable to bring forward in conversation. Many are in
the habit of doing this constantly. Some new book, one that created a
little sensation, some course of lectures, some late theatrical or
operatic entertainment, anything, in short, that is generally popular.
Be careful, however, in broaching such subjects not to egotistically
give your own opinion at the outset by saying decidedly, "I think that
book is a perfect failure, quite absurd in fact. What is your
opinion?" This course of action, if your companion is younger or more
timid than yourself, will probably reduce him to the point of having
no opinion whatever, or at least to being afraid to express it, and
the conversation, as such, will fail completely. Whereas, if you had
quietly asked him if he had read the book, how he enjoyed it, etc.,
you would have gradually entered upon a conversation wherein you
would have drawn out his ideas and at the same time have been enabled
to display your own.


Cultivate Your Mind.

One of the first requisites of social success is a cultivated mind.
You cannot hope to hold your own in society without at least a general
knowledge of the events of the last few years in historical,
scientific, artistic and social fields. Such knowledge is easily
gained by a little study and a great deal of observation, the pains
taken being more than recompensed by the ease and assurance with which
one enters society.

If a musician or an artist, you should be sure to know something of
your chosen art aside from the mere technicalities. Be well versed in
the various schools of painting, the varied merits of the musical
masters of the past and present. Be filled with the spirit as well as
the technique of your profession and you cannot fail to converse
pleasantly upon these subjects. Always remember, however, not to
advance your opinions to the utter exclusion of every one else, or
your companionship will become tiresome to the best of listeners.


"Drawing Out Others."

The very essence of the art of conversation is to draw others out and
cause them to shine; to be more anxious, apparently, to discover other
people's opinions than to advance your own.

Who does not remember gratefully and admiringly the sympathetic people
who seem to draw out the very best there is in us--in whose company we
appear almost brilliant, and actually surprise ourselves by the
fluency and point of our remarks? Such people are a boon to society.
No one sits dull and silent in their presence, or says unpleasant,
sarcastic things before them, and, while never seeming to advance any
views of their own, and certainly never forcing them upon our
attention, we involuntarily learn of them and love them, scarcely
knowing why.

Malebranche showed his knowledge of human nature when he wrote: "He
who has imparted to others his knowledge without any one perceiving it
and without drawing from it any advantage, necessarily gains all
hearts by his virtuous liberality. Those who would be loved, and who
have much wit, should thus impart it to others."


The Passion for Argument.

Never permit yourself to be drawn into an argument in general society.
Nothing can be more provocative of anger on one side or another, or
more destructive to conversation, than a lengthy and, too often,
bitter argument. Good breeding would suggest that the subject be
changed at once before the controversy becomes heated. Especially
should any debate upon politics or religion be avoided as subjects
upon which two seldom agree, but which are so close to the hearts of
the majority as to cause serious annoyance if their pet beliefs are
touched upon or questioned. Be careful, also, not to take the opposite
side of _every_ question that is brought up in conversation.


Wit and Humor.

Sidney Smith once said: "Man could direct his ways by plain reason and
support his life on tasteless food, but God has given us wit and
flavor, and laughter and perfumes, to enliven the days of man's
pilgrimage, and to charm his pained footsteps over the burning marl."
And Sidney Smith was so much the life and soul of every social
gathering that, while the English language is spoken, his witty
remarks will be quoted with delight.

Wit, however, is too often but another name for sarcasm and ridicule,
that, like a barbed arrow, rankles long in the soul of its victim.
True humor, it should be remembered, is neither scathing nor insolent;
it is simply that bright repartee that someone aptly calls the "spice
of conversation." Hence it would be well to smother the temptation to
be witty at the expense of another, and crush back the brilliant but
cutting retort meant only to wound, not to amuse.


Evil Speaking.

Beware of evil speaking. In the eyes of all right-minded persons much
that you have said recoils upon your own head, for no one has quite
the same opinion of an individual after having listened to a series of
scandalous stories from his lips. Hence, for your own sake, as well as
for that of others, eschew the vice of evil speaking as a very
pestilence.

Let young ladies have a care how they speak lightly or contemptuously
of one another at any time, but more especially when conversing with
men. Nothing, as a rule, is more prejudicial to a woman, in the
estimation of a man, than this all-too-prevalent habit. No matter what
the faults of your sister-woman may be, condone them gently, or, if
this be impossible, let a silence that is golden fall about the
subject.

Unhesitatingly acknowledge a woman's beauty or talent, and, instead of
detracting from your own merits, it will enhance them in the eyes of
all. A young man was once heard by the writer counselling his sister
from the depths of his own experience as a social favorite. "Never,"
said he, "say one word against a girl to any young man. It only puts
you down in their estimation. Say something pretty and complimentary
about them if you can; if not, keep still." And his advice was words
fitly spoken, that are, indeed, "like apples of gold in pictures of
silver."


"Telling Stories."

Stories should never be introduced into general conversation unless
they meet several requirements. In the first place, they should be
short and well told. Secondly, they should be new to the company where
they are told. Nothing is more tiresome than listening to a twice-told
tale, though the height of good breeding is to smile over its
tediousness.

One way to avoid inflicting this martyrdom is to ask beforehand if any
one present has heard such and such a story. Then, in the third
place, it must be straight to the point, and directly called for as an
illustration of the case in hand.

[Illustration:

    "SOCIETY IS QUICK TO TRACE
    THE MAGIC OF A PLEASING FACE."]

Do not tell more than two or three stories or anecdotes in the same
evening. Never be guilty of relating in company a narrative that is in
the least questionable in its import. This is utterly inexcusable,
and, to so sin, is to render one's self unfit for social
companionship. Avoid repetition. If some portion of an anecdote has
met with applause, do not repeat it. Its unexpectedness was its only
charm.


Absent-Mindedness.

This is a sin against good manners which cannot be too greatly
condemned, being, as it is, in some measure an insult to the company
in which you find yourself. No one cares to be of so little importance
as to find the person addressed totally oblivious of his presence or
remarks, and no one can blame him if, as Chesterfield suggests,
"finding you absent in mind, you should speedily find them absent in
body."


Profuse Compliments.

To be endurable, compliments should be made use of in a very cautious
and artful manner. If permitted to degenerate into gross flattery they
are far from complimentary to the understanding of the individual
addressed. The day, happily, is long since past when conversation
between men and women was confined to unmixed flattery on the one side
and blushing acceptance on the other. That "the best flattery is that
which comes at second hand," no one can deny, yet, judicious praise is
not only acceptable but useful many times in giving the needed
incentive, without which the flagging footsteps might have faltered on
their way.


Contradictions and Interjections.

Never be guilty of abrupt contradictions. If you differ decidedly from
some given opinion, soften the expression of your difference by such
modifications as, "I hardly think so," or, "My idea is rather
different," or, "I beg to differ." This is much more polite and less
likely to arouse antagonistic feelings.

In conversation never allow yourself to fall into the habit of using
constantly such phrases as "You don't say!" "Do tell!" "Did you ever?"
"Is that so?" and many others that will come to mind as you recall
your own faults in this respect, and the faults of your friends. An
equal avoidance should be cultivated of such interjections as "Say,"
"Well," etc., with which we often begin our sentences. These habits
are all to be condemned and should be corrected as speedily as
possible.


Voice and Manner.

Let your voice be low and pleasantly modulated and your enunciation
clear, distinct and musical. All these things are marks of good
breeding, and, if not yours by birthright, may be acquired by patience
and perseverance. Avoid high tones and nasal tones. Do not talk
rapidly, or in a hesitating, stumbling fashion. A partial course in
elocution and voice training will work wonders in this direction, and
any one determined to succeed will never regret the time or money so
spent.

Cultivate also, if shy and timid by nature, self esteem sufficient to
imagine that you are quite the equal of those with whom you are about
to meet. This resolution will enable you to say what you wish without
fear of mistake, and without showing too much respect of persons. The
above-mentioned elocutionary lessons will also be an aid toward
acquiring self-possession.

Repose of manner should be assiduously cultivated. Do not fidget or
loll about in your chair, or twist your fingers constantly, or play
with something while you talk, or restlessly beat a tattoo with
fingers or feet. All such faults render your companionship a burden to
those about you.

Indulge in no facial contortions, as they rapidly become habits
difficult to break and usually leave their traces on the face in lines
impossible to efface. Lifting the eyebrows, rolling the eyes, opening
them very widely, twisting the mouth and opening it so as to show the
tongue in talking, are all disagreeable habits, that, once acquired,
can only be broken by ceaseless vigilance. Practice talking without
moving the facial muscles but slightly. Do this before your mirror
daily, if necessary, and before the same faithful mentor learn to open
the eyes less widely, parting the lids only just so far as to show the
colored iris without a glimpse of the white portion, or cornea, of the
eye above or below it. The time thus spent will result in a change
most gratifying to yourself and friends.


Conversational Sins.

Never interrupt a person who is talking. Never take the words out of
anyone's mouth and finish the sentence for them. To do this is
ill-bred and does not bespeak your superior discernment, but your
ignorance of polite society.

Puns, unless exceptionally witty, are to be carefully avoided. Young
ladies, especially, should beware of establishing any reputation for
punning. At all events, puns should never be far-fetched.

Do not whisper in company; nothing can be more vulgar. Neither should
two in a gathering converse together in a foreign language, not
understood by the others present, or talk blindly in a manner
unintelligible only to themselves. Should, however, a distinguished
foreigner to whom the language is almost unknown be among the guests,
it is a mark of courtesy for as many as possible to converse in his
native tongue.

Do not immediately break off the conversation upon persons entering
the room. It is too apt to leave the impression upon their minds that
the discourse was of them. In carrying on a conversation after
newcomers enter the room, briefly recapitulate what has gone before,
that the thread of the story may be complete for them. Look at those
with whom you are talking, but never stare.

Profanity is the last and most inexcusable sin committed against good
manners and propriety. The man who will deliberately use profane
language in the drawing-room, or before women and children, or aged
men, should be considered without the pale of good society.

Language coarse in its tendency is open to the same criticism, and
remarks and stories that carry a double meaning cannot be too severely
condemned. If it is at any time possible for a woman to receive such a
story in its innocent sense, let her do it, showing by some remark the
light in which it is taken; otherwise, she should be apparently blind
and ignorant as to its meaning.

Avoid affectations. In conversation make use of long words as little
as possible, and wherever a short and easily understood one is
suitable to express your meaning, choose it in preference to one of
polysyllabic proportions.


Use of the Lips and Facial Expressions.

Do not cover the lips with the hand, or a fan, while speaking. To do
so shows nervousness and a lack of social training. Besides this, much
of the expression of the face lies in the mouth. This is shown by all
actors, readers and public speakers, who, as a rule, appear before
their audiences with closely-shaven faces, that no portion of the
varying changes of the lips may be lost.

Never, if you are a man, speak lightly of women. Nothing so surely
lowers your own standard in the eyes of all sensible people. Never
hurt the feelings of others. Never allude publicly to times when you
have known them in less affluent circumstances than the present.

Be very careful to guard against over much laughing. Nothing gives a
sillier appearance than spasms of laughter upon the slightest
provocation. It soon grows into a very disagreeable habit. Smile
frequently, if need be, but be moderate in laughter. A very little
reasoning will serve to do this; and the reflection that few grown
people laugh well will aid still farther in curbing the propensity.

Let your greeting of acquaintances be free from boisterousness and
familiarity. Do not bring your hand down heavily upon their shoulder,
nor emphasize your sentences with pushes and punches of an active
elbow, nor fling your arms about their necks or shoulders. To some
fastidious persons these boorish acts are a positive insult. An
affectation of boisterous familiarity more often betrays a feeling of
social inferiority than absolute shyness or timidity does.

Never permit yourself to correct other people in matter or manner,
unless it should be absolutely necessary to protect some one else.
Under all ordinary circumstances do not betray a confidential
communication made you by a friend. Set the seal of the confessional
upon it. If it should be sorrowful in its nature, do not mention it
even to the friend who has confided it to your keeping unless he or
she should first refer to it. It may have been confessed in a moment
of confidence and regretted almost as soon as spoken, hence, do not
revive the memory yourself.


Control Your Temper.

Keep your temper under all circumstance while in company. Even if some
remark has been made with plain intent to injure your feelings, an
absolute ignoring of the intended sting will prevent others, and, most
of all, the guilty party, from perceiving the depth of the wound. A
true gentleman, or lady, is never quick to take offense.

Never ask impertinent or personal questions, unless these latter are
called for by the nature of the conversation. Be careful not to give
advice unless it is sought, and remember then that it is a commodity
of which a very little goes a long way.

And last, but not least, utterly eschew all slang. There are some
young ladies who apparently think that a little slang, to spice their
remarks, is piquant and saucy, but, in the majority of cases they so
soon overstep the mark and fall into the deplorable habit of
constantly and copiously interlarding their speech with all manner of
slang phrases, that one is forced to advocate total abstinence as the
only safeguard.

The too common habit of exaggeration, on the part of so many
schoolgirls and young ladies is also to be deplored, a quiet
unobtrusiveness of speech always marking the true lady.

Do not, in speaking, too frequently mention your hearer by name. To do
so implies either great familiarity on your part, or social
inferiority on theirs. In this latter case it savors strongly of
patronage.

In speaking to people always give them their proper titles, as:
"Colonel," "Doctor Jones," "Professor Gray." Never make a practice of
saying: "That is so, Colonel," but, "That is so, Colonel Sharp."

In mentioning a married daughter, unless to a very intimate friend,
give her married title, as: "Mrs. Miller," or, "My daughter, Mrs.
Miller." In speaking of unmarried daughters, or of sons (unless to
servants), give them their Christian name, as Hattie or George, or
else mention them, and this is better before strangers, as: "My
daughter," or, "My son."


Misuse of Initials.

Never address persons by their initials, as: "Mrs. W.," "Miss C.,"
"Mr. D.;" give them instead their full name. Neither should you call
young ladies, "Miss Mollie," or "Miss Jennie;" "Miss Smith," or, "Miss
Brown," being in much better taste. Their Christian names should only
be used to distinguish them from other sisters. Never address people
by their Christian names unless very familiarly acquainted. This
practice savors of ill-breeding and is often very annoying to the
person so addressed.

In speaking of persons who are absent, mention them by their last
name, as: "Mrs. Roe," "Mr. Doe," unless the intimacy is very great;
even then care should be taken not to use their Christian names too
freely among persons to whom they may be strangers.

A wife in speaking of her husband should rather say "Mr. Smith," than
"My husband;" but, above all, let her refrain from referring to her
liege lord as "he," as if the whole wide world possessed no other
mortal to whom that pronoun was applicable. Husbands should follow the
same rules in referring to their wives.

Be careful not to interlard conversation with "sir," or "ma'am." In
Europe these terms are relegated to the use of the lower classes.




VISITING CARDS.

[Illustration]


Cards are the sign manual of society. Their use and development
belongs only to a high order of civilization. They accompany us, as
one writer has justly remarked, all the way from the cradle to the
grave. They begin with engraved announcements of the birth of a child,
then cards for its christening, and, later on, dainty little cards of
invitation for children's parties, until, in due time, the girl
crosses that line

    "Where the brook and river meet
    Womanhood and childhood sweet,"

sets up a card of her own, and blossoms forth into a young lady.

They announce the gaieties, the pleasures, the anniversaries of life:
they inquire for us during our illness and sorrow, they return thanks
for our gifts and attentions, and, finally, they commemorate to our
friends the last, sad earthly scene and ring the curtain down.

The stress laid by society upon the correct usage of these magic bits
of pasteboard will not seem unnecessary when it is remembered that the
visiting card, socially defined, means, and is frequently made to take
the place of, one's self. It will be seen, therefore, that one of the
first requisites for social success is to understand the language, so
to speak, of the visiting card. With this end in view the following
suggestions on the subject have been carefully arranged with due
regard to brevity, accuracy and ease of reference.


Style of the Card.

The card should be perfectly plain, fine in texture, thin, white,
unglazed and engraved in simple script without flourishes. Gilt
edges, rounded or clipped corners, tinted surfaces or any oddity of
lettering, such as German or Old English text, are to be avoided. A
photograph or any ornamentation whatever upon a card savors of
ill-breeding or rusticity. Have the script engraved always, never
printed. The engraved autograph is no longer considered in good taste,
neither are written cards as elegant as those that are engraved.


Size of the Card.

The regulation size, both in this country and England, for a lady's
visiting card is three and one-half inches in length and two and
one-half inches in width. This oblong form is most generally used, but
there is an almost square shape, two and a half inches by three, also
in favor, and especially used by unmarried ladies where the shortness
of their name would be too much emphasized in the longer card. For
instance: "Miss Ray" would be quite justified in choosing the square
style, while "Miss Ethelinda Crane" or "Mrs. Algernon Spencer" would
find the length of their names displayed to better advantage on the
oblong card.

[Illustration: _Mrs. J. Howard Ellis_]

Cards for gentlemen are much smaller than those for ladies. This
holds good in both England and America, where the required size is
three inches one way by one inch and a half the other.

[Illustration: _William L. Smith_]

The largest card in use is the one sometimes adopted by the
newly-married and engraved with their joint names. Thus:

     MR. AND MRS. GRANT TROWBRIDGE

may make use of a card four inches long by three and one-half in
width, but a lady and her daughter, where their names appear together,
should use the first-mentioned oblong size for ladies.


Engraving the Name.

Married ladies make a point of using their husband's name or initials
upon their cards instead of their own, as:

     MRS. GEORGE B. CLEVELAND,

Or:

     MRS. G.B. CLEVELAND,

Instead of:

     MRS. GRACE E. CLEVELAND.

It occasionally, however, happens that some lady, unwilling to so lose
the identity of her own name, prefers this latter form. Or, if her
family name be an old and honored one, she frequently retains it,
thus:

     MRS. GRACE ETHRIDGE CLEVELAND.

But, though the married woman make use of her husband's name, she has
no claim to his titles; so that while others may address her as "Mrs.
Judge So and So," "Mrs. Dr. So and So," she must carefully avoid all
such display. Let her be comforted, however, as her just pride in her
husband's honors is easily gratified, since she is expected, on all
formal occasions, to leave one of his cards, wherein his titles are
set forth, with her own.

Occasionally a lady contents herself with having engraved upon her
cards a simple:

     MRS. COURTHOPE.

This, however, is unwise unless the name is a very uncommon one, and
even then, should there be more than one branch of the family in the
vicinity, the wife of the oldest member of the family only would have
a right to make use of it.

Newly married couples frequently send out for their first cards the
largest size mentioned engraved thus:

     MR. AND MRS. HOLMAN B. HUNT.

Occasionally they preserve this custom throughout the entire first
season. But this is all; from thenceforth husband and wife have their
own separate cards. They may, however, be used at times throughout the
married life to convey messages of sympathy, congratulation, or to
accompany gifts.

Widows have always hesitated about exchanging the beloved and
accustomed name upon their cards for their own signature. This,
however, in many cases, is a necessity, especially where there is a
son bearing the father's name. This is sometimes thought to be avoided
by the use of the distinctive "Senior" or "Junior," a custom obviously
wrong, since after the death of Francis Brown, Senior, Francis Brown,
Junior, becomes at once Francis Brown, and his wife, Mrs. Francis
Brown. Hence, while we have no such convenient title as "Dowager," the
widowed Mrs. Francis Brown will be obliged to drop her husband's name
in favor of her son's wife and thenceforth appear before the world as
Mrs. Mary E. Brown. Where there are no children, or immediate
relatives, change of title on the part of the widow is a mere matter
of sentiment.

The black border upon a widow's cards should never be over a quarter
of an inch in depth: more than this savors of ostentation rather than
affliction.

Young ladies, especially if it is their first season in society, will
find it the best form to have their names engraved upon the visiting
card of their mother. Thus, if it is the eldest daughter:

     MRS. WILFRID FERGUSON.

     MISS FERGUSON.

If a younger daughter:

     MRS. WILFRID FURGUSON.

     MISS ETHEL FURGUSON.

And if it should chance that two daughters "come out" in consecutive
seasons both of their names are frequently engraved upon their
mother's card, thus:

     MRS. WILFRID FURGUSON.

     MISS FURGUSON.

     MISS ETHEL FURGUSON.

Though it often happens that, for convenience sake, by the time the
second rosebud is "out," the first has established a cardcase of her
own. Yet as neither custom nor etiquette sanctions young girls in
having cards of their own, a mother often continues to have the name
of her young daughters engraved upon her own card.

Young ladies should always prefix "Miss" to their names, as:

     MISS ALICE CREIGHTON WRIGHT,

there being a certain forwardness about announcing one's self as:

     ALICE CREIGHTON WRIGHT.

Especially is this so among strangers, the prefix "Miss" carrying with
it a certain quiet reserve and dignity.

The eldest daughter of a family announces herself upon her cards as
"Miss Wright," unless there are several of the same name in town,
while the others are respectively "Miss Alice Creighton Wright" and
"Miss Ethel May Wright." Occasionally a card is used for sisters
engraved as follows:

     MISSES WRIGHT.

All pet names are to be avoided upon visiting cards and "Nettie
Cranston" very properly becomes "Miss Annette Cranston" upon her
cards.

Neither are initials good form for young ladies, though after an
unmarried lady has reached a certain, or rather an "uncertain," age,
she may, if she choose, be permitted to place upon her visiting cards:

     MISS A.C. WRIGHT.

If the young lady be motherless she often has her name engraved
beneath that of her father, using not the smaller card of a gentleman
but the first given oblong card for ladies. In England unmarried
ladies, unless they have reached a very "uncertain" age indeed, follow
the above fashion, and quite young ladies leave their chaperon's card
as well. This fashion is often followed here, and when so done
signifies that they will be inseparable for the season.


Address on Cards.

There is much question as to whether the address should be engraved on
a lady's card, some very exclusive circles prohibiting it entirely on
a young lady's card and questioning its use for a married lady,
suggesting that in case a young lady desires to give her address to
any particular individual it may be easily pencilled on one of her
cards for the occasion, and that married ladies have the privilege of
leaving one of their husband's, with engraved address, in connection
with their own. This custom, while it may seem an over-nicety to those
outside the great centers of metropolitan life, will be appreciated by
all those to whom the "ins and outs" of city life are familiar. It
should be said that while engraving the address is still a mooted
question, except for young ladies, each individual is at liberty to
use her own judgment on the question.


Cards for Gentlemen.

The size and style of a gentleman's card has been already given, but a
few words as to name and titles will be necessary here. Custom, with
reference to the cards that a man must carry, is considerably less
arbitrary than towards women in the same respect. He may use his
initials or his full name, as it pleases him. He may inscribe himself
"Mr. John Smith," or simply "John Smith," and be quite correct in so
doing, though just now there is a little inclination in favor of the
more formal "Mr.," an English custom we do well in copying.

Military, not militia, naval and judicial titles, may always be used.
Physicians and clergymen have the same privilege; honorary titles,
however, should be avoided.

A private gentleman would have his card as: MR. HOWARD MASON, 24 Union
Square. If he were a club man, the club name, providing it were a very
fashionable one, would take the place of the address, as: MR. HOWARD
MASON, Union League Club. For a military card: CAPTAIN ARTHUR COLEMAN,
U.S.A. For a naval card: ADMIRAL PORTER, U.S.N. A medical man might
use the following: GEORGE H. HARRISON, M.D.

Some eminent men go to extreme simplicity, as, for instance, "Mr.
Webster" being all that graced the cards of that celebrity.

It is hardly necessary to say that a business card should never be
used as a visiting card. A gentleman carries his cards either in his
pocket or in a small leather case sold for that purpose.


Cards for Receptions.

Cards used for receptions, lawn-tennis parties, afternoon teas, etc.,
in place of more formal invitations, have been fully described under
"Invitations." One example will suffice here: MRS. LAWRENCE BARRETT,
July 1st, at 4. P.M. The object of the entertainment being written in
the corner of the engraved card.

Cards for receptions are a necessary convenience in this era of
lengthy visiting lists. Without them there would be no possibility of
leisure or of seeing one's friends at their own homes. The following
is an example: MRS. EMMONS B. CHURCHILL, Thursdays. Or: Thursdays,
Three o'clock to five, may be substituted; the latter form, however,
usually meaning that a simple afternoon tea will be served on the day
mentioned.

A young lady never sends out a reception card in her own name alone,
but her name is engraved upon her mother's card or that of her
chaperon, thus: MRS. HAROLD GRAY; MISS GRAY, Wednesdays, Four o'clock
to seven. Or, in case of a chaperon: MRS. GEORGE M. JANSEN; MISS ALICE
LEVICTOIRE, Wednesdays, Three o'clock to five.


Foreign Phrases.

There are a certain number of French phrases that custom has declared
shall take the place of that "pure English undefiled" whereof Spenser
wrote. In a few cases these chance to be shorter, more euphonious, and
more directly to the point than the corresponding English phrase. For
instance, the word "chaperon," so important in its signification at
the present, has no adequate English translation. Below is given an
alphabetical list of those phrases in most frequent use, together with
the abbreviations that ofttimes serve in place of the full phrase:

FRENCH PHRASES.       ABBREVIATIONS.  TRANSLATIONS.

_Bal masque_                          A masquerade ball.

_Chaperon_                            An older woman attending a girl
                                      in society.

_Costume de rigueur_                  Costume to be full dress.

_Début_                               First appearance.

_Débutante_                           A young girl making her first
                                      social appearance.

_En ville_                  E.V.      In town or city.

_Fête Champêtre_                      A rural or outdoor entertainment.

_Matinée_                             A morning or daylight
                                      entertainment.

_Matinée musicale_                    A daylight musical entertainment.

_Musicale_                            Musical entertainment.

_Pour dire adieu_           P.D.A.    To say farewell.

_Pour prendre congé_        P.P.C.    To take leave.

_Protégé_                             One under protection.

_Repondez s'il vous plait_  R.S.V.P.  Reply if you please.

_Soirée_                              An evening party.

_Soirée dansante_                     A dancing party.

_Soirée musicale_                     A musical entertainment.

The term _en ville_, when used in the place of "city," in addressing a
note that is to pass through the postman's hands, is a needless and
annoying affectation, since it is hardly to be expected that a
knowledge of the French language forms one of the qualifications for a
letter-carrier's position, and if delay ensues in delivery, the
writer, not the carrier, is to blame.


P.P.C. Cards.

In the event of leaving town for a long absence, P.P.C. cards are
frequently sent out. This is especially convenient where the length of
one's visiting list renders the personal making of farewell calls an
impossibility. The cards are sent out upon the eve of departure, and
all persons receiving them are expected, upon the arrival of the
absentee, to return the courtesy by cards (which may also be sent by
mail) and by invitations. The ordinary engraved visiting card is used,
and the initials P.P.C. (an abbreviation of the French phrase "to take
leave") are written in capitals in the lower left hand corner of the
card. P.D.A. (to say farewell) is occasionally used, but is not in
general favor. If the address should happen to be engraved in the
lower left hand corner, P.P.C. may be written in the lower right hand
corner, either way being permissible at any time. The large card
inscribed jointly with the name of husband and wife is frequently used
in this connection. P.P.C. cards are especially appropriate where
there are no calls due. If possible, unpaid personal calls should be
answered in person on the eve of departure.


Turning Down the Corners.

This custom is almost out of date, and in consequence of the various
interpretations liable to be given to the act, its disuse is a
satisfaction to all parties concerned. To briefly explain the custom,
a card turned down at the corner, or across one end, signifies that
the call was made in person, and is sometimes very convenient when one
wishes it distinctly understood that the card was brought in person,
not sent; while one folded through the center denotes that the call
includes all members of the family. A man should not turn down the
corners of his cards.

Minor interpretations, such as which end or which corner is to be
turned down on different occasions, even the surviving adherents of
the custom do not pretend to agree upon.


How to Leave Cards.

In leaving cards follow the fashion of those who have paid you the
same courtesy. If a call has been made upon you, return it by a call,
as to return a personal visit by the sending of a bit of pasteboard
would partake of the nature of a slight. If cards only have been sent
you by a servant, return cards in the same manner by messenger or
servant; if they were sent by mail, return by mail. If the cards of
any of the gentlemen of a house are left, always leave the cards of
any gentleman of your family in return.

Of course first calls should be made and returned in person, the
card-leaving formalities coming later on. This rule is departed from
only by a few ladies whom age, health, social or literary duties will
excuse from making personal calls. These frequently permit themselves
to send out cards in place of a first call, either accompanying them
with, or immediately following them by an invitation to some
entertainment. This attention should receive the same notice as a
first call; cards should be sent in return, together with an answer to
the invitation, if it is of a nature to require it, and a personal
call must be made thereafter, unless it was simply an afternoon tea,
and an invitation sent in return speedily as possible.

A lady leaves a card for a lady only, a gentleman leaves cards for the
host and hostess of a house. Some authorities assert that a man making
the first call of ceremony should, in addition to the first-mentioned
cards, if none of the family are at home, leave another folded down
through the center for the other members of the family. The folding,
however, is questionable taste and the requisite number of cards would
be better left in their original state. Cards should be left for the
daughters of a house; if there are sons, a lady may leave one of her
husband's for them also.


Number of Cards to be Left.

After this first visit of ceremony it is only necessary to leave one
card at any following call throughout the season. As a rule in country
towns but one card is left at any call, unless it is at the first
calls of a bride, when, if her husband's name is not engraved upon her
card, she leaves one of his with her own.

A gentleman and lady calling together and finding the mistress of the
house, only, at home, would leave but one card, that of the gentleman
for the master of the house. Finding no one at home, they would leave
three cards, one of hers and two of his. A lady calling under the same
circumstances would leave one of her own cards and two of her
husband's.

When one lady calls upon another, if the hostess be at home she does
not send in her card (unless she is an entire stranger), nor does
etiquette strictly enjoin her to leave it in the hall, unless it is
upon her hostess' reception day, when, on account of the large number
of visitors, it would be difficult to remember all. It then becomes a
very desirable custom for a lady to leave a card, together with two of
her husband's. Also when the servant is somewhat dull of comprehension
as to the name it will be well to send in a card to prevent mistakes.
On reception days in very fashionable houses it is the custom to
announce the guests by name as they enter the room, so that cards need
not be sent in.

Never hand your own card to your hostess. If it be necessary,
introduce yourself verbally, doing so quickly and clearly, and being
sure to mention yourself, if a young lady, as "Miss."

Busy, elderly, and even young men are very prone to leaving their
cards in the hands of mother, sister, wife, or any other lady of the
house for distribution, though after an elaborate entertainment it is
much more indicative of good breeding that a young man should pay his
respects in person to his hostess.


Calls upon Young Ladies.

Young men in this country leave cards for the young ladies of a house,
but they should always leave one at the same time for her mother or
chaperon. In Europe they are never permitted to leave a card for a
young lady at all. They call upon the mother or chaperon, and while
they may offer to send for the young lady, she is never asked after.

If a gentleman, in calling where there are several young ladies,
especially wishes to see one of the number, he may ask for her, but,
before the call is over, should say he would be pleased to see the
other ladies; more especially is there no excuse for ignoring the
existence of the mother or chaperon of the young girl.

If a gentleman knows the ladies of the house well, it is not necessary
for him to send in a card if they are at home, unless it be the first
call of the season, when it is well to leave one in the hall. In a
household consisting of two or more ladies not closely related a card
should be left for each one.

When ladies are visiting in a house where the caller, whether man or
woman, is unacquainted, he or she always leaves a card for the lady of
the house and requests to see her: a request which she may not grant,
but one which it would be a marked slight to omit.

In leaving a card for a friend visiting at a private house, never
write her name upon it; depend upon the servant, or whoever opens the
door, to remember for whom it is intended. This is only permissible
when your friend is at a hotel. In doing this write the name above
yours.

When a newly-married man sends cards immediately after his marriage to
his bachelor friends it may be expected that he wishes to retain them
as such in his new life. Upon the reception of these cards they are
expected to call upon the bride at once.


How to Send Cards.

Cards sent by messenger are enclosed in a single unsealed envelope;
sent by mail this envelope is enclosed within another and larger one
which is sealed. Cards handed in at the door are received by the
servant on a salver to prevent being soiled by handling.


When to Leave Cards.

First Calls of the season necessitate the leaving of cards. Let them
be left quietly in the hall. This custom assists the lady of the house
in revising her visiting list.

Letters of Introduction necessitate that those who have received
courtesies in response to such, should, upon their departure, send
P.P.C. cards to those that have thus remembered them.

A Change of Residence renders it desirable to send cards by mail to
one's friends with the new address engraved thereon. However, should
there be unpaid calls, the cards to these should be left in person.

The Return from an Absence, including any length of time, should be
announced by sending out cards having the address and reception day
engraved upon them. Where P.P.C. cards have been issued previous to
departure these should always follow the return.

Preceding a Début. Previous to the date decided upon for the
presentation of a _débutante_ to the social world, the young girl's
mother calls upon those of her friends whom she desires to be present
upon the occasion and leaves them her own and her husband's cards,
and, if she have grown sons, their cards also.

Reception Invitations to a full dress reception are preceded by a call
by card upon all the acquaintances to whom the hostess may be
indebted.

After Cards is the name applied to those that are sent to friends
after a marriage and are engraved thus:

     MR. AND MRS. CHARLES E. SMITH.

Later on, however, when the bride returns visits, she usually leaves
her own card with her married name engraved upon it, thus:

     MRS. CHARLES E. SMITH.

at the same time leaving her husband's separate card with her own.

Before Marriage, the bride expectant in paying her farewell calls,
leaves her own separate card, together with that of her mother or
chaperon, with all acquaintances she may wish to retain in her new
life.


Entertainments and Calls.

After Entertainments, a card, in large cities, is sufficient, unless
it be after a dinner or a wedding reception, when a personal call is
made. If the wedding invitations have been to the church only, not
including the gathering at the house, some most exclusive people send
cards to the bride's parents, afterwards inviting the young people to
their entertainments. But a dinner absolutely requires a personal
call.

Even gentlemen, usually so remiss in such matters, are rather expected
to leave a card in person after a dinner. Any invitation, however,
coming from a new acquaintance, necessitates a personal call, unless
the intercourse is not to be kept up. In towns and smaller cities, a
personal call is made after entertainments of any size.

After a Tea a visit is paid and thus the visiting etiquette for a year
is established. Before the season is over, however, the lady, if she
expects to retain her position in society for the next season, must
give a tea, or a series of teas, inviting all who have similarly
honored her. This must be done before the season closes. Where the tea
is not attended, cards should be sent to the house the same day.

Special Receptions, such as those dress affairs given once or twice in
a season, require a personal card.

General Receptions, or "at homes," given in a series, the dates of
which are all mentioned on one card, need neither cards nor calls in
return. Your presence there is a call in itself. A card may be left in
the hall upon the day of reception to assist the memory of the
hostess.


Other Hints.

Ladies in a strange city, staying either with friends or at a hotel,
are privileged to send cards, giving their address, to any
acquaintances, either lady or gentleman, from whom they may wish to
receive a call. If desirable, they may send a note in preference,
giving date or hour when they will be at home.

Special Pursuits. Ladies having special pursuits, literary, or
professional, often permit this fact to cover remission in social
demands, in fact do not "visit" at all.

For a Son, upon his introduction to society here in America, there is
very little display made. His _entrée_ is usually very gradual, but if
he has been closely kept at school his freedom from this is often
announced by his mother leaving his card with her own when she makes
her visits at the beginning of the season. This is taken as a
suggestion that, in future, his name is to be included among the
invited members of the family.

Cards for an unmarried gentleman should never be left by a lady,
except in the case of his having given an entertainment at which
ladies were present. In this case the lady of the house should drive
to his door with her own cards and those of her family. Names of the
young ladies should be engraved for the occasion upon the card of
their mother or chaperon. The cards should be sent in by a servant. If
a call is made upon a lady's regular reception day, it is rude to
leave a card only, without entering and inquiring for the hostess. The
time spent inside the house may be very brief, but even a few moments
will satisfy the demands of etiquette, which without these would be
rudely violated.

Cards may be made to accomplish so much of the multifarious duties of
society that one can scarcely imagine the social world revolving
safely upon its axis without their intervention. Far be it from any to
look upon the custom as a hollow mockery, for, without the system of
formal visiting, or calling, society as it now stands could not exist.
Such, too, are the complexities of modern existence that life would be
all too short for the fulfillment of its demands were it not for these
useful bits of pasteboard that do so much of our work by proxy and
dispose of our undesirable acquaintances so speedily by the simple
cessation, on our part, of leaving cards at their door.


Various Cards.

Among the cards as yet not referred to in this department may be
mentioned the following:

Cards of Congratulation, such as those sent the parents of a
newly-betrothed couple upon the announcement of the betrothal; those
sent the happy parents of a lately arrived son or daughter, etc. Cards
of this description should be left in person, though it is not
expected that you should enter and make a formal visit. The leaving in
person, however, is a compliment.

Cards of Betrothal are distributed by the parents of the newly-engaged
pair, leaving their cards with their own on all friends of the family.
Individuals receiving these cards should call as soon as possible.

Cards of Courtesy are sent on many occasions. For instance, to a house
where the children or youth of their family have been invited without
including the elders. This is done in acknowledgment of the courtesy
extended to their children. Again, a gift however simple, even
flowers, should always be accompanied by a card of courtesy. The
simple visiting card is usually sufficient, though a "Merry
Christmas," "Happy New Year," or "Many happy returns of the day," may
be penciled beneath the name. If there are many words to be written,
however, a little note of courtesy is far better. (See Notes.) The
recipient of the gift should answer by a note of thanks, never by a
card simply. Cards should also accompany, or be attached to, flowers
sent to a funeral, that the family may know friends remembered them in
their sorrow.

Cards of Inquiry are frequently sent, or better still, left in person,
at the homes of friends prostrated by severe illness, or by recent
bereavement. These usually have the words, "To inquire," or "With kind
inquiries," pencilled above the name. These are many times a source of
relief during the weary days of convalescence, or the heavy hours of
seclusion after affliction, when the voices of friends would be too
hard to bear, but the thought of their loving remembrance yields a
healing balm. In cases of bereavement the cards should be sent about
one week after the sad occasion that called them forth.


Acknowledgment of Inquiry Cards.

Cards of Thanks are usually sent out in reply to these cards of
inquiry, since the answering in any other fashion would prove too
great a task. The regular visiting card may be used in this case,
pencilling the words "With thanks for kind inquiries," or, "With
thanks for the kind inquiries of Mrs. ----," beneath the engraved
name; or cards especially engraved for the occasion may be
substituted, thus: "Mrs. ---- presents her sincerest thanks for recent
kind inquiries." These may be sent by mail, but really should be
carried by special messenger. Enclose in two envelopes. There is
another method of acknowledging attentions during a period of
bereavement, viz., the notice in the daily papers. This, however, does
not usually meet with favor in large cities, but the example set by
Mr. and Mrs. Secretary Blaine upon the death of their son, is, from
its heartfelt pathos, worthy of imitation. The card appeared in all
the Washington papers as follows:

     "The sympathy of friends has been so generously extended to
     Mr. and Mrs. Blaine in the great grief which has befallen
     their household that they are unable to make personal
     response to each. They beg, therefore, that this public
     recognition be accepted as the grateful acknowledgment of a
     kindness that has been most helpful through the days of an
     irreparable loss."

Birth cards are frequently sent to all friends, at home and abroad, as
soon as the child is named. One very pretty style now in mind read as
follows: ETHEL MAY TOUCEY, Half-past twelve o'clock, January 12, 1895.
This was enclosed in two small envelopes and sent by mail. These are
more especially useful for sending to friends at a distance.

Christening and Funeral Cards are considered in their respective
departments. Families in deep mourning are not expected to send out
return cards under the first year. Some prefer, however, to send cards
of thanks very soon to those who have inquired, leaving ordinary
visiting cards unanswered the usual length of time.

[Illustration]




VISITING CUSTOMS

[Illustration]


The customs of society in regard to visiting or "calling," and the
rules that govern these customs, are well worthy of our attention and
care, since they in a great measure underlie and uphold the structure
of our social life. No one, therefore, need consider these details
trivial or of little account, since, according to Lord Chesterfield,
"Great talents are above the appreciation of the generality of the
world, but all people are judges of civility, grace of manner, and an
agreeable address, because they feel the good effects of them as
making society easy and pleasing."


Length of Visits.

Ceremonious visits should always be short, fifteen to twenty minutes
being the outside limit, and a shorter time often sufficing. Even
should the conversation become very animated, do not prolong your stay
beyond this period. It is far better that your friends should regret
your withdrawal than long for your absence. A lull in the
conversation, a rising from her seat, or some pretext on the part of
the hostess, or the arrival of a guest, all give an opportunity for
leave-taking which should be made use of at once.


The Art of Leaving.

Cultivate the art of leaving; nothing will contribute more to your
social success. It is said of so brilliant a woman as Madame de Staël
that she failed lamentably in this particular, and, on the occasion of
her visit to Weimar, made with the avowed intention of intellectually
captivating the literary lions of the age, Goethe and Schiller, she
made one fatal mistake, she stayed too long! Goethe wrote to Schiller:
"Madame de Staël is a bright, entertaining person, but she ought to
know when it is time to go!" It is also evident from her own statement
that she did not know _how_ to go. She lingered after she had started,
and if this were an unpardonable sin on the part of so marvelous a
woman, it is surely a capital crime on the part of ordinary mortals.

The art of leaving is more thoroughly understood by men than by women.
The necessities of business life teach the value of time, and the
press and hurry of city circles teach them the art of leaving quickly,
so that a social call on the part of a business man is a model of good
manners. When he has "had his say" and politely listened to yours, he
takes his hat, says "good day," and is gone from your presence without
giving opportunity for those tedious commonplaces of mutual
invitations and promises to come again which seem a social formula
with so many women.


When Ready to Leave, Go at Once.

Never say, "I must go," but, when you have finished your visit and
rise to depart, go! Never permit yourself to be drawn into touching
upon any subject at this critical moment that will necessitate lengthy
discourse for yourself and hostess, or force upon you the awkward
alternative of reseating yourself to finish the conversation. There is
always a certain awkwardness in thus repeating the ceremony of
leave-taking which may be avoided by a quick and graceful departure
that leaves both host and guest with feelings of the utmost amiability
toward one another.

On the other side it is necessary that the host and hostess supplement
this laudable endeavor on the part of their guests in order that the
departure may be gracefully accomplished. Never detain the visitor,
who is attempting to leave, by protests, by inquiries, or by the
introduction of new subjects. One writer very pertinently says: "The
art of leaving on the part of the guest needs to be supplemented by
the art of letting go on the part of the host."


First Calls.

There is, possibly, more difference of opinion on the subject of _who_
shall make the first visit or call and _when_ it shall be made, than
almost any other point of etiquette. At the same time more importance
is attached to it than to almost any other social question, and it
touches more uniformly every phase of city or country life than any
other canon of courtesy.

Neither neighborliness, nor good-Samaritan feeling, can exist without
the civility of a call, and, when there is too great a hesitancy on
the part of a resident to call upon the newcomer, one is reminded
either of the priest or the Levite as they "passed by upon the other
side," or is forced to recall the parvenue's dread of losing a footing
in social circles.

Common sense and kindliness of heart are always to be relied upon in
matters of this nature, and the initiative may safely be taken by
those who have social position, age, or length of residence on their
side. Of course in large cities the immense demands of social life
give a certain immunity from anything like promiscuous calling to
those whose circle of acquaintance has already grown beyond the limits
of their time. In towns and villages, however, no such immunity
exists, and a call may be easily made, or a card left, while, on the
other hand, should the new acquaintance prove "pushing," or in any way
obnoxious, one simply ceases to leave one's cards and the evil is done
away with.

Many elderly ladies, and others whose time is very much occupied by
social or other duties, excuse themselves from calling customs. Under
such circumstances, they frequently send their cards, accompanied by
an invitation, to newcomers younger in years, thus entirely omitting
the personal visit. Such invitations, whether accepted or not, should
be honored in the same manner as if preceded by a call.

If two people meet pleasantly at a friend's house and wish to continue
the acquaintance so begun, let them not hesitate, should none of the
before-mentioned distinctions exist, as to which should make the first
visit. Still, it is ofttimes wise not to call too hastily upon the
newcomer, especially in cities, where it is well first to be properly
introduced, and further still to have some assurance that your
acquaintance is desired by them as well. As before stated, priority of
residence, age, or pre-eminence in social position, should properly be
upon the side of the one making the first advances. If none of these
exist, let the braver of the two break the social ice.

The etiquette of summer resorts demands that the owners of cottages
call first upon renters, and afterward that both unite in calling upon
later comers and arrivals at hotels or boarding houses. Of course,
such intercourse is simply for the pleasure of the time being, and
carries with it no responsibility of recognition in the future, unless
such recognition should be satisfactory to both parties. It would be
well for the "summer girl" and the "summer young man" to remember this
canon whereby "society" guards the doors of its exclusiveness, enjoy
the "good that the gods give" and expect no more.


Substitute for First Call.

In continental countries, and in cosmopolitan Washington, newcomers
make the first advances themselves, leaving cards with those whom they
wish to number among their acquaintances. Every one returns these
cards, and invitations flow in upon the aspirant for social honors.
This custom, unfortunately, does not hold good anywhere else in this
country, though a polite expedient is sometimes adopted by persons
entering upon life in a new city. This consists in the newcomer
sending out her cards for several reception days in a month. These may
be accompanied, or not, by the card of some friend well known in
social circles, if such she have, to serve as voucher. If not, she
relies upon her own merits and sends out her cards unaccompanied.
According to the varied authorities recommending this course of
action, those rudely ignoring this suggestion are few in number, and
the lady is permitted at once to feel that she has commenced her
social career.


Morning and Evening Visits.

Any visit made between the hours of twelve and six is to be looked
upon as a morning visit, though there is a little difference in
various cities with regard to the exact time. Where one expects to
touch upon reception hours, from three to five is usually a safe
limit. In country towns or the small cities, from two to five are the
usual hours for paying visits. Evening visits should be made between
the hours of eight and nine, and ordinarily should never extend in
length beyond the hour of ten.


Sunday Visits.

Gentlemen are permitted to call upon lady friends, Sundays after
church and Sunday evenings, business cares being their excuse for not
availing themselves of the other days of the week. Of course, if there
exists any known objection in the family to Sunday visiting all their
friends are bound to respect it.


Reception Days.

If a lady have a known reception day, callers are bound, in common
politeness, to make their visits, as far as possible, upon that day.
If this is not done, either a card only should be left, or, if a
personal visit is intended, particular instructions should be given to
the servant to the effect that if "Mrs. Brown is otherwise engaged she
is not to trouble herself to come down." For which thoughtfulness,
"Mrs. Brown," if she be a busy woman, and troubled with many social
cares, will cordially thank you.

Unfortunately, it often happens that many of our friends have the same
reception day, and one's own "day" may conflict with that of one's
nearest friend, so that, where the circle of acquaintance is large,
much good nature, a few apologies and a great many cards are needed to
safely balance the social accounts.

It is considered a rudeness to simply leave a card, when one happens
to arrive upon a lady's reception day, without entering the room for a
few moments' visit.


"Not at Home," "Engaged."

The simple and necessary formulæ of, "Not at home," or "Engaged," are
more frequently questioned than any other social custom. Nevertheless
their use is often a necessity, while, on the contrary, their abuse is
to be regretted. No suspicion of an untruth need apply to either, for
the phrase, "Not at home," is used with the accepted signification of,
"Not at home, for the time being, to any visitors." If, however,
conscience rebels against this so transparent fraud, there is always
the alternative of "Engaged," which carries not the least suspicion of
deception with it, but is somewhat less gracious to the ear.

Indeed, were it not for these safeguards, the woman of society must
bid good-by to all opportunities for solitude, self-improvement, or
the fulfillment of her own social duties.

The servant should be very carefully instructed each morning as to the
formulæ to be employed through the day, or such portion of the day as
the lady of the house shall require to herself. No lady, after a
servant has informed her that the mistress of the house is "not at
home," will question as to her whereabouts, or the probable length of
her absence. If she should so far forget her dignity, the well-trained
servant will answer all inquiries with a respectful, "I do not know,
Madame," adding, if such be the case, "Mrs. Brown receives on
Thursdays."

Should a servant show evident hesitation upon receiving your card, and
say, "I will see if Mrs. Brown is in," enter the parlor, at the same
time saying, "If Mrs. Brown is otherwise engaged, or going out, beg
her not to trouble herself."

Never, except upon urgent necessity, insist upon pencilling a word or
two upon a visiting card and sending it up, where a lady is "engaged,"
as a demand upon her attention. If a servant has said the lady is
"not at home," she has a perfect right to refuse the message.

In suburban towns and small cities, where reception days are not
common, the lady of the house must be very careful how and when she
denies herself to visitors. Indeed, in all cases much discrimination
must be shown in this respect, as great inconvenience may result, and
some injustice be done, by an indiscriminate denial. But, as before
said, in towns, it is better, if possible, to receive guests. Even if
no servant is kept, the mistress can usually, by the exercise of a
little care, keep herself neat and presentable. If at any time some
slight alterations are necessary to the toilet, let the interval thus
employed be very short.

Some one has said that it would be well for a lady having a reception
day to devote a part of the morning of the same day to business calls,
and to instruct her servants to inform all comers of this custom.


Visiting List.

It is well for all ladies having a large list of acquaintances to keep
a carefully revised visiting list to assist their memories as to
addresses, names of persons to invite, reception days of
acquaintances, and, if possible, a list of their own ceremonious
visits for the season, noting those that have been returned. The time
thus expended is amply repaid by the convenience of reference and the
avoidance of the possibility of making a second visit when the first
is unreturned. Also this list serves as a basis for the visiting list
of the next season; those having failed to return calls or cards being
dropped from the new list.


Visits Between Ladies and Gentlemen.

A gentleman, as a rule, should not ask a lady for permission to call
upon her. It is very easy for her, if she desires his company, to say:
"I receive Thursdays," or, "I shall be at home Monday." It is a great
discourtesy for a gentleman not to call at the time mentioned, or in a
very few days, after being thus invited by a lady. Some gentlemen, if
simply asked to "call sometime," will ask, "when may I have the
pleasure of seeing you?" To this question a definite answer should be
returned, if possible. Very young ladies do not thus invite gentlemen;
the invitation coming from either father, mother, or chaperon.

A gentleman does not call upon a lady without some intimation of her
wishes in the matter, unless he is the bearer of a letter of
introduction, or is taken to her home by some friend sufficiently well
acquainted to warrant the liberty. He may, however, seek an
introduction through some mutual acquaintance.

Ladies may express regret at being out when a gentleman called; he
also should regret the absence. If it should happen that a gentleman
should call several times in succession and be so unfortunate as to
miss the lady each time, it would be quite proper for her to write him
a note, regretting her absence and appointing an evening when she
would be at home for his next call. This would remove any feeling of
annoyance on his part that perhaps her absence had been premeditated.

Gentlemen frequently call upon their married lady friends, doing so
without the slightest appearance of secrecy and with full knowledge of
all parties concerned. Indeed, the right of entrance to some of these
pleasant home parlors is a great boon to the unmarried men of our
cities. Ladies do not call upon gentlemen except professionally or
officially, or, it may be, in some cases of protracted invalidism.


"Out of Society."

It sometimes happens that a newly-married lady, or a newcomer in some
city, through severe illness, a season of mourning, or devotion to
home duties, finds herself, in a year or so, completely "out" of a
society with which she had scarcely become acquainted. If she be timid
and non-assertive, she will sink back dismayed at the prospect, but if
energetic and aspiring, she will at once win her way back by giving a
series of receptions, either formal or informal, to all her old-time
friends; or, by entering into charities, or joining literary or
musical clubs, she will quickly reinstate herself in the memory of
society.


Conduct of the Hostess.

A hostess does not necessarily advance to receive her guests, simply
rising and moving forward a step in order to shake hands (if she
should so wish), remaining standing till they are seated, and, if
possible, keeping the latest comer near her side. Gentlemen should
always permit the lady to make the first advance in the matter of
hand-shaking. It is her prerogative.

As the guests depart, the hostess does not accompany each one to the
door, but rising, remains standing until the guests have quite left
the room, when it is to be supposed they will be met by a servant. In
country towns the hostess usually accompanies the guest to the door,
if there are others present, excusing herself to them and remaining
out of the room but a moment.


Entertaining Callers.

Where there are several guests in the room at once the hostess should
try to make the conversation general and pay equal attention to all,
save that for a few moments, the latest arrival engages her more
intimately, or some guest of great intellectual or artistic genius may
be honored among the rest, as a lion of the hour.

If you should chance to find, at once, in your reception room, two
friends with whom you are upon equal terms of intimacy, treat them
with the most absolute impartiality, being demonstrative toward
neither, for there is too much truth in the saying that "there is
always a feeling of jealousy on the part of each, that another should
share your thoughts and feelings to the same extent as themselves."
There are other occasions where the same care against wounding their
feelings should be observed.

If there should be any preference with regard to seats, one suggestion
is that a lady should be seated on a couch or sofa, unless advanced in
years, when she should be asked to accept an easy chair; an elderly
gentleman should be treated in the same manner. If a young lady should
be occupying a particularly comfortable seat, she must at once arise
and offer it to an older lady entering the room.

Should the hostess, upon the arrival of occasional visitors, be
engaged upon work requiring any attention, she must at once relinquish
it; but should it be light, ornamental, and not at all confining, she
may continue it, if so requested. It would be well, however, to drop
it at intervals, lest it appear as if there were more interest in the
work than the visitor.

Refreshments are not offered to visitors unless it is a regular
reception day with afternoon tea.


Conduct of the Guests.

If a visitor on entering the room finds that name or face has not been
remembered by the hostess, let the difficulty be rectified by the
guest pronouncing the name instantly and distinctly, the hostess, on
her part, to remember names and faces. A bad memory is inconsistent
with good manners. In very fashionable houses a servant announces the
name of each guest as they enter, thus saving any confusion.

Should you find yourself ushered into a room where there are several
inmates, all strangers, ask for the individual you wish to see and
introduce yourself distinctly.

If your friend is at a hotel, wait in the parlor until the servant who
carries up your card has returned to tell you whether you can be
admitted. Never follow him as he goes to make the announcement. A
little formality is the best preservative of friendship.

If, while you are paying a visit, other guests arrive, you should,
providing your stay has been sufficiently long, arise so soon as they
are quietly seated, make your adieus to your hostess, bow politely to
the other inmates of the room and take your departure. If you should
be calling upon a lady and meet a lady visitor in her drawing room,
you should rise when that lady takes her leave.

The style of conversation should always be in keeping with the
circumstances under which the visit is made. Common sense alone should
teach us that where a short morning call is in question, light, witty
and quickly-changed subjects only should be entered upon, the nature
of the case plainly prohibiting discussions on many topics.

Gentlemen are expected not to use classical quotations before ladies
without a slight apology and a translation, unless they are aware that
the lady's educational training has made it possible for her to
appreciate them. It would be well if they would use the same courtesy
toward other men not gifted like themselves. For a general maxim, it
may be here recommended not to air one's classical learning
unnecessarily, lest it savor of pedantry.

Guests should greet their hostess cordially, but a bow is usually
sufficient to include the others present.

Young ladies visiting a strange city should not receive calls from a
gentleman without requesting the privilege from their hostess, and
hostess and daughters should be introduced to him. Always avoid the
slightest appearance of seeming to use your friend's house for a
rendezvous.


Deference to Ladies.

A gentleman rises when ladies leave the room. Ladies bow if it is a
gentleman, rising if it is a lady acquaintance, or a lady much older
than themselves. A gentleman rises when ladies enter a room, but never
offers them his chair unless there should be no other in the room.

A gentleman carries his hat and cane into the drawing room with him in
making a visit. His hostess should no more offer to relieve him of
them that she would take fan and handkerchief from the hands of her
lady guests. If he wears an outer coat he leaves that in the hall; if
there should be no hall the hostess may ask him to put it on a chair
or in another room. His hat and cane he either holds if he chooses, or
places beside him on the floor, never on a chair or other article of
furniture. If he intends spending the evening, he can, if he choose,
leave hat and cane in the hall. Gentlemen should never bring friends
with them to call upon ladies unless they have first received
permission from them so to do.

After escorting a lady on the previous evening the gentleman should
make a call upon her the following day, if possible. Gentlemen should
not consult their watches during a ceremonious visit. If some
pressing engagement should render this necessary, they should offer
both an apology and an explanation.

A gentleman, unless invited, should never seat himself beside his
hostess, but should take the chair pointed out to him.

Gentlemen, in receiving other gentlemen, go to the door to meet them
and furnish them with seats.

The man of the house should escort ladies to their carriage, should
they call while he is at home. If it be raining or otherwise
disagreeable, and they have their own coachman, they should, however,
beg him not to trouble himself.

Gentlemen should decline an invitation to spend the evening when
making a first visit; indeed, such an invitation should never be
given.

A man is usually asked to repeat his visit by the mistress of the
house, not by the daughters, or else it is given by their chaperon.


What Not to Do.

Do not, according to the author of "Don't," be in haste to seat
yourself; one appears fully as well and talks better, standing for a
few moments. A man should always remain standing as long as there are
any women standing in the room. A man should never take any article
from a woman's hands--book, cup, flower, etc.--and remain seated, she
standing. This rule is an imperative one; he must always rise to
receive it.

Do not take young children when making formal calls; the hostess will
be in terror as to the fate of her bric-à-brac, and the mother in
dread as to what her young hopefuls may say or do.

Do not take pet dogs with you into the drawing room. Their feet may be
dusty, they may be boisterous in expressing their feelings, and
besides, some people have a perfect aversion to dogs, so that your
visit, thus accompanied, is likely to be far from pleasant.

Do not meddle with, nor stare at the articles in the room. Do not toss
over the cards in the card receiver, if there be one, and, while your
name is being announced, do not wander impatiently around the room
handling everything within reach.

Do not loll about in your chair, if a gentleman (a lady scarcely needs
this caution), keep your feet squarely in front of you, not crossing
them; ladies would do well to heed this also. Do not torment pet dogs
or cats, or tease the children. Do not call the length of the room if
you wish to address any one, but cross the room and speak to him
quietly. Neither should you whisper to some one of the company, twist
or curl your thumbs or hands, or play with the tassels on the
furniture or window curtains, or commit any of the thousand and one
blunders that mark the underbred and nervous visitor and render his
presence an unwelcome trial.

There are a few other rules that would seem unnecessary to mention
here were it not that they are so constantly sinned against. Among
others it may be suggested not to do anything disagreeable in company.
Do not scratch the head or use a toothpick, earspoon or comb; these
are for the privacy of your own apartment. Use a handkerchief whenever
necessary, but without glancing at it afterwards, and be quiet and
unobtrusive in the action as possible. Do not slam the door, do not
tilt your chair back to the loosening of its joints, do not lean your
head against the wall, as it will soil the papering; in short, do unto
others as you would be done by.

Do not tell long stories, more especially if they are about yourself;
do not argue; do not talk scandal, and be sure not to attack the
religious beliefs of any one present. Do study the chapter on the "Art
of Conversation," and cultivate, as much as possible, that self-repose
of manner that is, above all things, a sign of the lady or gentleman.


The Reception-Room.

The arrangement of the reception-room itself has much to do with the
pleasure of the visitor. Who does not remember those delightful
parlors where the guests dropped into pleasant conversational groups
as by magic, and contrast them mentally with those other chilly
apartments where a sort of mental frost seems to settle over one's
faculties and incapacitate them for use. Much of this may be avoided
by a judicious arrangement of chairs and couches, just where people
drop naturally into easy groups, or, for the time being, surround
their hostess.

Propinquity is a great incentive to pleasant conversation, for there
are few people that can talk the pretty nothings and sparkling
witticisms, whereof parlor conversation properly consists, across
space to people stranded against the opposite wall. Therefore let the
hostess, who would have her symposiums remembered with delight, see to
it that she has an abundance of chairs, both easy and light, easy ones
for the refreshment of the weary in body and light ones that may be
quickly moved when the spirit moves toward some other group.

A clever woman, to whom all social arts were long-solved problems,
once said that she always observed how the chairs were left in a
drawing room where several people had been sitting and put them in the
same position next time. A group near the door where the casual caller
will naturally drop into one and the hostess into another, without the
least effort, will be placed in the best possible position for a
little chat. Fulfill these conditions and your drawing room will be
often filled and the fame of it will go abroad.

Formal calls, as a rule, are at best but a duty performed that brings
a satisfaction in itself, but it sometimes happens that, as a reward
for our well-doing, some word may be said, some friend may be met by a
happy chance that is like a gleam of sunshine on a cloudy day.

[Illustration]




INVITATIONS FORMAL AND INFORMAL

[Illustration]


There are certain rules to be observed in the writing of invitations
that cannot be transgressed without incurring a just suspicion as to
the degree of one's acquaintance with the laws and canons that govern
our best society. For instance, Mrs. John Doe issues invitations for a
ball or evening party; these, if issued in her own name or in the name
of herself and daughter, or lady friend, would, very properly, find
them "at home" on a certain evening. Should, however, the invitations
be sent out in the name of herself and husband, then it is that "Mr.
and Mrs. John Doe request the pleasure of Mr. and Mrs. Richard Roe's
company" at a certain date. We will also find that Mr. Dick Roe is
never "at home," but "requests the pleasure of your company."

To widely depart from any of these received canons of etiquette is to
commit a decided solecism and to discover an utter unfitness for the
desired social rank. Fortunately, there is no need, even for those not
to the manor born, of displaying any ignorance in this matter when the
simple consultation of a standard work on social etiquette will give
the needed information and save the credit of the individual.

At first sight, it would seem a very easy thing to invite a friend to
come to you at a given day and hour, and to accept or decline said
invitation would appear a matter scarcely worth considering. This rash
conclusion, however, disappears from view when it is recollected that
the proper phrasing, the suitable signature, and the appropriate
paper, are all matters of the nicest choice, and indicate with the
most unerring accuracy the good or ill breeding of the parties
interested.

From two to three persons only are invited from one family to the same
entertainment, and, in the event of a small dinner party, two would be
the limit. The invitations would be addressed, not to Mr. Coates and
family, but one to "Mr. and Mrs. Coates," another to "The Misses
Coates," or to "Miss Coates." If there are brothers, and they are to
be invited, a separate invitation is required for each one of them; a
single one addressed to the "Messrs. Coates" being considered in bad
taste. To one son and one daughter a joint invitation may be extended
in the name of "Miss Coates and Brother." On rather informal occasions
where the family, and perhaps their guests also, are desired to be
present, the invitation may be sent in the name of "Mr. and Mrs. James
B. Coates and Party."


Note Paper for Invitations.

Note paper for invitations should be plain, unruled, heavy in texture,
creamy-white in tint, and of a size to fold once to fit the large,
square envelope of the same size and tint. Monogram, if used, or
crests, if they may be rightfully claimed, should be stamped or
embossed in white directly in the center of the upper portion of the
sheet and on the upper flap of the inner envelope only. This envelope
should bear the name simply of the invited guest, and is to be
enclosed in a perfectly plain, somewhat larger envelope, which bears
the entire address and protects the enclosure from the soil of
frequent handling by postman or messenger.


Invitation Cards.

Invitation cards, if they are used, should be heavy, creamy-white, and
of a size to fit the large, square envelope. Such a card is
sufficiently large to contain any ordinary invitation, and should be
enclosed, as above, in two envelopes.

Writing the invitation should receive the greatest care, especial
attention being given to securing each phrase a line to itself. For
instance, the names of host and hostess should never be separated,
but given an entire line, the same rule applying to the names of the
invited guests.

Invitations written in the third person should always be replied to in
the third person, care being taken to permit no change of person from
beginning to end of the note. This rule holds good in whatever person
the invitation may have been written; regrets or acceptances must be
sent in the same manner.

No one, nowadays, "presents his (or her) compliments" in giving or
accepting an invitation; neither is "your polite invitation" any
longer the best form. "Your kind," or "your very kind invitation,"
being the most graceful manner of acknowledging the courtesy extended.


Written Regrets.

Always, if possible, accept a first invitation if the new acquaintance
is to be kept up. In case inexorable circumstances prevent this
acceptance, the regret sent should explain these circumstances fully
and be very cordially written; while the earliest opportunity must be
taken of extending some courtesy in return.

Even should you not desire the acquaintance, your regrets should be
courteous and cards should be left at the house in response to their
civility. It is then at your own option whether or not to acknowledge
the acquaintance farther.

Invitations can be written or engraved on the large cards, or small
sheets of note paper, that are used for this purpose, though, on all
formal occasions, engraved forms in clear, fine script are preferable,
and for weddings absolutely necessary. If written, black ink should be
invariably used.

A young lady never sends out invitations in her own name; instead,
"Mrs. and Miss Hoyt" are "at home," or the name of the young lady's
chaperon appears with her own, as: "Mrs. Haviland and Miss Hoyt, at
home, etc."


Uninvited Guests.

Should it so happen that an uninvited guest finds, accidentally, his
way into the festivities, let the strictest politeness mark his
reception, neither word nor glance betraying the slightest surprise
at the unexpected arrival.


Inviting Married People.

A married man should never be invited to an entertainment without his
wife, nor a married woman without including her husband also in the
invitation. An invitation erring in this particular should be looked
upon as an insult, and should never be honored by an acceptance. This
category, however, does not include gatherings, such as ladies'
luncheons or gentlemen's game suppers, that are wholly confined to the
members of one sex.


Dinners.

Ladies who give many dinner parties usually keep on hand the engraved
invitation cards, with blanks left for the insertion of name and date.
The invitation for a dinner party is always sent out in the name of
both host and hostess, and the usual form is as follows:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. Grant White_

_Request the pleasure of your company at dinner,_

_On ---- evening, ----,_

_At eight o'clock._

_81 Graceland Court._

_R.S.V.P._]

The letters _R.S.V.P._ are simply the initials of the French words,
_Repondez s'il vous plait_, meaning, "Reply, if you please."

Some very stylish people now use, in place of these letters, the
English phrase: "The favor of answer is requested."

Written invitations, or those engraved for a single occasion, would
read as follows:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. Philip Vance_

_Request the pleasure of_

_Mr. and Mrs. Otis Sullivan's_

_Company at dinner,_

_On Tuesday, March 6th, at 8 o'clock._

_34 Ashland Boulevard._

_The favor of an answer is requested._]

_R.S.V.P._ can be substituted for the last phrase, if desired. If the
host be a widower with a young lady daughter, the invitation can be
issued in the name of father and daughter, as: "Mr. and Miss Van
Vleit, etc.," or, a lady and her daughter, under similar
circumstances, would issue invitations in the name of "Mrs. Holt and
Miss Holt."

Persons who make a point of strictly observing the usages of polite
society are extremely careful, having received any invitation, to take
immediate notice of it, according to proper form. This is only a
courtesy due to the one who has sent the invitation, which should be
accepted or declined promptly, in order that the hostess may know what
to depend upon.

If the dinner party is given to introduce either a friend or some
person of distinction, an extra card, inscribed as follows, is
enclosed in the same envelope: To meet MR. ----. Another form would
be:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. Jackson_

_Request the pleasure of_

_Mr. and Mrs. Brown's_

_Company at dinner,_

_To meet Robert Browning,_

_Thursday, October 8th at seven o'clock._

_692 Arch Street._

_R.S.V.P._]

It is well, if the party is given in honor of some celebrated person,
to give them the choice of several dates before issuing the general
invitation, thus assuring yourself that no conflicting engagement will
rob the entertainment of its bright, particular star. An invitation to
a dinner is the highest social compliment that can be offered. It
should be sent out about ten days in advance, and requires an
immediate and positive answer, for it is to be supposed that the
hostess wishes to make up her table at once. Both invitation and
answer should be sent by messenger; all other invitations, and replies
to the same, may be sent by mail. In London, however, where distances
are so great, all invitations, without exception, are sent by post.

In case of an informal dinner, a verbal invitation is sometimes sent,
one or two days beforehand, by a servant, and a verbal answer is given
at the time. The principal objection against this method is that the
date, having no written reminder, may be confounded with some other
engagement. Where the affair is not too stately, an informal
invitation, written in the first person, may be pleasantly exchanged
between friend and friend. For instance:

     MY DEAR MRS. ROE:

     My aunt, Mrs. LeFevre, of New York City, is here with me for
     a short stay, and Mr. Doe and I hope that you and Mr. Roe
     can give us the pleasure of your company at dinner, on
     Tuesday, October ninth, at seven o'clock, when, with a few
     other friends, we hope to pass a pleasant hour in your
     society.

     Cordially yours,

     MARIAN DOE

     _Mrs. Marian Doe, St. Caroline's Court._


Asking for Invitations.

Asking for invitations for one's visiting friends, while permissible
on some occasions, such as requesting the favor of bringing a
gentleman to a ball where dancing men are always at a premium, or an
unexpected guest of your family to a reception or evening party,
should never be resorted to when a dinner party is in question, for,
to gratify the request would, in all probability, throw the whole of a
carefully arranged table into disorder. This rule is only to be broken
when the guest to be included is some really celebrated character
whose addition to the company would compensate for the extra covers to
be laid and the re-arrangements to be made before the unexpected guest
can be accommodated. No one, however, should feel offense when a
request of this nature is refused. The hostess, in all probability,
had good and sufficient reasons for her course of action. Invitations
for a married couple should never be requested.


Evening Parties, Balls and "At Homes."

Invitations to these entertainments are issued in the name of the
hostess only, and are sent out from ten days to two weeks in advance.
Informal occasions, however, give very short notice, and it is well to
use the word "informal" in the invitation, that guests may not put
themselves to inconvenience as regards dress. It must be remembered
that this term is too often misleading in its nature, and many a
sensitive guest has been seriously annoyed by finding herself, after a
too literal interpretation of the "informal" character of the
entertainment, in a crowd of gay butterflies, a misuse of the word
that should be seriously protested against.

Invitations to evening parties and private balls are less elaborate
than formerly; the word "party" or "ball" is never used unless on the
occasion of some public affair, such as a charity ball, but any
especial feature of the evening may be mentioned in the invitation.

To an evening party where dancing may, or may not, be a feature of the
entertainment, the following, either engraved or written on a small
sheet of note paper, is a very good form:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. Stuyvesant Wentworth_

_Requests the pleasure of the company of_

_Mr. and Mrs. Mark Cowden,_

_On Wednesday evening, July 4th,_

_At nine o' clock._

_Informal._]

All invitations are to be considered as "formal" unless the word
"informal" appears on the card. If the card states that the
entertainment is to be "informal," the invited guest is fully
justified in considering it so, and dressing accordingly. Neither
host, hostess, nor other guests can take any exception if the
invitation is treated just as it reads.

If dancing is the feature of the evening, the same form may be used
with the word "Dancing" added in the lower left hand corner. Or:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. John Burrows,_

_At Home,_

_Thursday evening, October first,_

_At nine o'clock._

_1080 LeFrance Avenue._

_Quadrilles at ten._]

If the ball is at a public place, as at Delmonico's, in New York, the
following form is appropriate, always making use, in case of so public
an entertainment, of the host's name in connection with that of the
hostess:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. George Douglas_

_Request the pleasure of your company,_

_Thursday evening, December twelfth,_

_At nine o'clock._

_Delmonico's._]

Another form that would be equally appropriate is as follows:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. Augustus Saltus,_

_Sanger Halle,_

_Wednesday evening, January twentieth._

_German at nine._

_R.S.V.P._]

If any of these occasions are intended to introduce a _débutante_, her
card may be enclosed. If they are given in honor of a friend, or some
celebrated individual, the following form is appropriate:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. Henry Alexander_

_Requests the favor of your company on_

_Tuesday evening, October tenth,_

_From eight to eleven o'clock,_

_To meet the_

_Rev. Prof. Dr. Kemp,_

_Of the Princeton Theological Seminary._

_684 West 49th Street._

_R.S.V.P._]

Or, if very formal, the name of the guest may be given first, as: To
meet the CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES and MRS. FULLER. MRS.
HAROLD COURTRIGHT, At Home, from eight to eleven o'clock, Thursday,
February seventh. _R.S.V.P._

This same precedence may be given to the name of an honored guest in a
dinner or other invitation. Still another form is where the name of
the guest is written on a separate card, thus: To meet MRS.
SUMMERVILLE. Enclose this in the same envelope.

For a club party the following may be used: THE LA SALLE CLUB requests
the pleasure of your attendance Wednesday evening, June eight, at nine
o'clock. 555 West 51st Street. _R.S.V.P._

A still more simple form for a party invitation is an "At Home" card
filled out thus: MRS. DON CARLOS PORTER, At Home, Tuesday evening,
March fourth. 1021 Broadway. Cotillion at ten. _R.S.V.P._


Masquerades.

The entire invitation for a masquerade may be engraved, or it may be
written, with the exception of the word "Masquerade," which should be
engraved on the card. For example:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. L.J. LeFevre_

_Requests the pleasure of your company,_

_Saturday evening, November twelfth,_

_At eight o'clock._

Masquerade.

_R.S.V.P._

_55 East Thirtieth Street._]


Musicales, Soirées and Matinées.

Invitations to a Musicale are simply written on "At Home" cards, thus:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. P.V. VanVechton,_

_At Home,_

_Tuesday, April second._

_Music at half-past three._]

Or: MRS. P.V. VANVECHTON, At Home, Tuesday afternoon, April second,
from half-past three to five o'clock. _Matinée Musicale._

If the Musicale is to be an evening affair, and dancing is to follow
the music, the following form of invitation may be used: MRS. HERBERT
HUGHES, At Home, Friday evening, January tenth, at eight o'clock. 200
Winchester Avenue. Music. Dancing at ten.

Precisely the same form is to be used in giving out invitations for a
_soirée_, save that the word "_soirée_" is substituted for that of
"_Musicale_" or "_matinée musicale_." It may be farther added that the
term "_matinée_" applies exclusively to entertainments given in the
morning, or at any time before dinner, a distinction to which our
custom of late dinners gives a wide latitude, so that any
entertainment up to eight o'clock in the evening may receive the name
of _matinée_, notwithstanding the fact that drawn curtains and
gas-lighted rooms may give all the semblance of night-time.
"_Soirée_," however, is used only where an evening party of a
semi-informal character is denoted.


Garden Parties.

Precisely the same form of "At Home" cards can be used for these
entertainments, substituting the words "Garden Party" in the left hand
corner and sending them out some two or three days in advance. Or, if
a more formal affair is intended, use the following: MRS. WAITE
TALCOTT requests the pleasure of the company of MR. and MRS. JOHN
CLAY, on Monday, August fifth, at four o'clock. Garden Party. "The
Oaks."

If it should be desirable to include the entire family in the
invitation, the wording would be as follows:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. John Clay and Party._

_Mrs. Waite Talcott,_

_At Home,_

_Tuesday, August fifth, at four o'clock._

_"The Oaks."_

_Garden Party._

_R.S.V.P._

_Carriages will meet the 3.40 train from Union Depot._]

This clause to be added only when the party is to be given at some
distance from the station. If preferred, these directions may be
written on a separate small card and enclosed in the same envelope.

In this country we are not so accustomed to giving garden parties as
people are in England, but a garden party may easily be made one of
the most inviting and enjoyable of any.


Breakfasts, Luncheons and Suppers.

Breakfast invitations may be engraved or written upon a lady's
visiting card, thus:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. George Norton._

_Breakfast, Wednesday, at ten o'clock._

_24 Euclid Avenue._]

A written invitation is usually in the first person, and should read
somewhat as follows:

     DEAR MRS. GRACIE:

     I should be pleased to have the company of you and your
     husband at breakfast with us, Wednesday morning at ten
     o'clock.

     Cordially yours,

     GERTRUDE HORTON.

     MRS. GEORGE HORTON.

The invitations should be sent out a week or five days in advance, and
should be answered at once.

Luncheons, in this country, are very apt to possess much of the
formality of a dinner, and are written or engraved, according to the
degree of stateliness that is to mark the occasion. Very formal
invitations are sent out ten days or two weeks in advance, and are
couched in precisely the same terms as a dinner invitation, save that
the word "Luncheon" is substituted for "Dinner." Written invitations,
also, follow the same plan as those written for dinners, and are not
usually issued more than a week or five days in advance. Some ladies
use their visiting card, thus: MRS. FRANK E. WENTWORTH. Luncheon,
Wednesday, at one o'clock.

A later hour, say two o'clock, is usually adopted for a more formal
affair. Replies should be sent at once that the hostess may be enabled
to make up her table.


Teas and "Kettledrums."

Teas and "Kettledrums," High Tea and Afternoon Receptions, have come
to bear a strong resemblance one to another, in fact to infringe so
much upon the same territory that it is very difficult at times to
distinguish between them sufficiently to apply the appropriate name. A
simple affair is announced thus by those ladies who have a regular
reception day: MRS. JOHN ST. JOHN. Thursdays. Tea at five o'clock. 40
West 49th Street.

Or: MRS. JOHN ST. JOHN. Five o'clock tea. Thursday, February fifth. 40
West 49th Street.

The words "kettledrum" or "afternoon tea" are not to be used, and
these cards may be sent by mail, enclosed in a single envelope. They
require no answer. Where the lady has not a regular reception day and
wishes to give an afternoon tea, an engraved card, like the following,
is usually sent out: MRS. ARTHUR MERRILL. MISS MERRILL. Monday,
February third, from four to seven o'clock. 274 Chestnut Street.

In case of the hostess having no one to receive with her, her name
would appear alone upon the card. The name of any friend may take the
place of a daughter's. Such an entertainment partakes more of the
nature of an afternoon reception, or high tea. It may be adapted also
to other occasions, such as the introduction to one's friends of a
guest who is to make a prolonged stay, as for instance: MRS. ARTHUR
MERRILL, At Home, Monday, December seventh, from one until seven
o'clock. To meet MRS. FRANCES ELMER. 55 Vine Street.

Invitations like this and the one just above are to be enclosed in
two envelopes, same as for dinners and sent out ten days or two weeks
in advance.


Kaffee Klatsch.

This furnishes very much the same class of entertainment that is to be
found at an afternoon tea, save that coffee is the predominating
beverage. The invitation is precisely the same as for teas, simply
substituting the words "Kaffee Klatsch."


Suppers.

For the evening supper, invitations are issued in some one of the
forms presented for dinner parties, substituting the word "Supper."
Answers should be returned at once.


Coming-out Parties.

These special festivities may take almost any form, so that the
presentation of the blushing _débutante_ may be at a dinner, ball,
reception, evening party or afternoon tea; which latter custom has
become very frequent of late. So much is this the case that it is
somewhat to be reprehended as rendering afternoon teas too ceremonious
in character. There is this in its favor, however; it relieves young
girls from the strain incident upon a large party or ball. In some
cases, the invitations preserve their usual form (whatever that may
be) and the card of the _débutante_ is enclosed in the same envelope.
Even this distinction is sometimes wanting. Again, in the case of "At
Homes" and "Teas," the name of the young lady is engraved beneath that
of her mother; if it is the eldest daughter, the form would be: MRS.
ARTHUR HOLT. MISS HOLT.

A younger daughter, under the same circumstances, would pose as: MISS
EDITH MAY HOLT.

Such cards do not need a reply, but the guest will remember to leave
cards in the hall for the _débutante_ as well as her mother or
_chaperon_. It may be said here that, should it for any reason occur
that the young lady is "brought out" under the wing of some friend
instead of under her mother's care, the relative position their names
will occupy on the cards is precisely the same, as: MRS. D.G.
HAVILAND. MISS HOLT.

A more formal presentation would be in the style of an engraved note
sheet:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. Arthur Holt_

_Requests the pleasure of introducing her daughter,_

_Edith May,_

_To_

_Mr. and Mrs. Ross Clark,_

_On Thursday evening, December fifth,_

_At nine o'clock._

_28 St. Caroline's Court._

_R.S.V.P._]

This invitation, of course, implies a large evening party, reception
or ball, and should be sent out ten days or two weeks in advance of
the event.


Receptions.

Informal receptions and full-dress occasions of the same kind are
announced somewhat differently. In the first case the affair partakes
so closely of the nature of an afternoon tea that the same form of
invitation is used: MRS. HOWARD POST, At Home, Tuesday, October
second, from four to seven.

If a series of receptions are planned the form would be: MRS. HOWARD
POST, At Home, Tuesdays in November, from four to six o'clock.

Full-dress receptions are frequently given both afternoon and evening,
sometimes in the evening only. Invitations to these should be engraved
on square cards or note sheets, and sent out two weeks previous to the
reception day. A very good form is:

[Illustration:

_Mrs. Jerome Hastings_

_Requests the pleasure of your company,_

_On Thursday, November twelfth,_

_From five until ten o'clock._

_711 DuPage Street._

_R.S.V.P._]

If a daughter or a friend is to assist in receiving, the invitation
should include her name also: MRS. JEROME HASTINGS, MISS HASTINGS, At
Home, Thursday, November twelfth, from five until ten o'clock. 711
DuPage Street.

When the reception is given by a gentleman, and its object is to
enable his friends to meet some distinguished guest, the following
form is used: MR. HOWARD POST requests the pleasure of the company of
MR. ALONZO METCALF to meet GENERAL E.L. BATES. Union League Club. 100
Cedar Street. _R.S.V.P._

Though some prefer placing the name of the honored guest first,
according to the form given under dinner invitations. The answer
should be:

     Mr. Alonzo Metcalf accepts with pleasure Mr. Howard Post's
     kind invitation to meet General E.L. Bates.


Weddings.

Wedding invitations are issued two weeks in advance, sometimes earlier
to friends at a distance, in order that they may lay their plans
accordingly. They are engraved in fine script on small sheets of cream
note, and the form most used for church weddings is as follows:

[Illustration:

_Mr. and Mrs. Richard Earle_

_Request the pleasure of your company_

_At the marriage of their daughter,_

_Guendolen_

_To_

_Mr. Egbert Ray Cranston_

_On Tuesday, June Eighteenth, 1895,_

_At half-past twelve o'clock,_

_Christ Church,_

_Binghamton._]

Still another form would give the daughter's name as "Miss Guendolen
Earle."

There may or may not be a monogram on the sheet of paper, but, if used
there, one to correspond must be placed on the inner envelope also.
The envelope, however, may be stamped with a monogram and the paper
left plain, this latter style being much in favor. Where the wedding
is in church, it is usually followed by an after-reception, cards for
which are engraved in some similar form to the following: Reception
from one until three o'clock, 107 Washington Street. Or: At Home after
the ceremony. 107 Washington Street.

A still more ceremonious invitation to the reception may be issued in
the parents' name, and in the usual form of similar invitations, as:
MR. and MRS. RICHARD EARLE request the pleasure of your company at the
wedding reception of their daughter, GUENDOLEN, and MR. EGBERT RAY
CRANSTON, Tuesday evening, June eighteenth, 1895, from nine to eleven
o'clock. 107 Washington Street.

If there is reason to believe that the church will be crowded with
uninvited guests, admission cards are engraved as follows: Christ
Church. Please present this card to the usher. Tuesday, June
eighteenth.


How Invitations are Sent.

Several of these cards are usually enclosed for distribution to
friends of the invited and for the use of servants that have
accompanied guests to the church. This custom is hardly necessary in
country towns. All of the cards and the invitation are enclosed in one
envelope superscribed with the name only of the person invited, and
re-inclosed in another envelope bearing the full address. All formal
invitations are to be enclosed in the two envelopes as above; less
stately affairs requiring but one envelope; send by mail.

In England, wedding invitations are issued in the name of the mother
of the bride only; here custom sanctions the use of the father's name
as well. If the invitation is issued in the name of some other
relative, then the word "granddaughter," "niece," etc., should be
substituted for that of "daughter." If the future home of the young
couple is decided upon, "At Home" cards also should be enclosed for
all the invited guests that the bride desires to retain upon her
visiting list. The following form is appropriate: MR. and MRS. EGBERT
RAY CRANSTON, At Home, Thursdays in September, from four until six
o'clock. 48 Washington Street.

Or, in place of designating especial days, it may read: MR. and MRS.
EGBERT RAY CRANSTON, At Home, after September first. 48 Washington
Street.

Where the list of acquaintances is very large it sometimes happens
that a portion of the guests are invited to the church only. When this
is the case the reception card is omitted from the envelope; but if a
visiting acquaintance is to be maintained, "At Home" cards must be
enclosed.


Wedding Invitations.

The home wedding is, perhaps, less stately in appearance, but,
involving as it does, less care on the part of friends and less
nervous strain on that of the bride, is frequently adopted. The
invitations are precisely the same as for a church wedding, merely
inserting street and number in place of designating the church,
omitting, of course, the card of admittance and that for reception.
The "At Home" card of the newly-married couple should always be
enclosed lest doubt as to their new address prove perplexing to their
friends.

Sometimes, where life is to be commenced in their own home, the wedded
pair, soon after their establishment therein, send out "At Home" cards
for a few evenings after this style: MR. and MRS. EGBERT RAY CRANSTON,
At Home, Tuesday evenings in September, from eight to eleven o'clock.
48 Washington Street.

Gatherings such as these partake of the nature of semi-formal
receptions and present a delightful opportunity for welcoming friends
to the new home, and at same time arranging a visiting list for the
season, no one receiving a card to these entertainments that is not to
be honored with a place thereon. These invitations are to be sent out
after the return from the bridal tour, and, when thus used, the
first-given "At Home" card is omitted in sending out the wedding
invitation.

If the wedding is to be a morning affair from the church, followed by
a breakfast, the first given invitation is issued and the following
engraved card enclosed in the same envelope: MR. and MRS. RICHARD
EARLE request the pleasure of your company at breakfast, Tuesday, June
twentieth, at half past twelve o'clock. 107 Washington Street.

"At Home" cards and cards to the church should be enclosed as before.
The time should be carefully arranged so that not more than half an
hour is allowed to elapse between the ceremony at the church and the
reception or breakfast at the house.

A home wedding with a breakfast simply sends out the ordinary wedding
invitation, indicating the hour and giving the street and number.

Sometimes, at a home wedding, it is desired that no one but relatives
or very particular friends should be present at the ceremony. Under
these circumstances the usual invitations are issued. Then, for the
favored few, ceremony cards are enclosed, on which the words are
engraved: Ceremony at half past eight.

"At Home" cards may be enclosed as before.

Where the wedding has been entirely private, the mother, or some other
relative of the bride, frequently gives a reception upon the return
home of the young couple, invitations to which are issued as follows:
MRS. RICHARD EARLE, MRS. EGBERT RAY CRANSTON. At Home, Wednesday,
September first, from four to ten o'clock. 107 Washington Street.

For an evening reception the form is a little different: MR. and MRS.
RICHARD EARLE request the pleasure of your company, Thursday,
September second, from nine to eleven o'clock. 107 Washington Street.
Enclosing the card of Mr. and Mrs. Egbert Ray Cranston.


Announcement Cards.

Announcement cards, where the wedding has been strictly private, are
sent out after the following style: MR. and MRS. RICHARD EARLE
announce the marriage of their daughter, GUENDOLEN, to MR. EGBERT RAY
CRANSTON, Tuesday, November nineteenth, 1895. 107 Washington Street.

The before-given "At Home" cards may be enclosed, or the necessary
information conveyed by having engraved in the lower left hand corner
of the sheet of note paper: At Home, after December first, at 48
Washington Street.

Another form of announcement is also used: EGBERT RAY CRANSTON.
GUENDOLEN EARLE. Married, Tuesday, November nineteenth, 1895.
Binghamton. With this form use "At Home" cards, or engrave the street
and number in the lower left hand corner of the announcement card.
This form is permissible in any case, but is more frequently employed
where there are neither parents nor relatives to send out the
announcement.

If the wedding should have taken place during a season of family
mourning or misfortune, the bridegroom himself issues the following
announcement: MR. and MRS. EGBERT RAY CRANSTON, 48 Washington Street.

These cards are large and square, and in the same envelope with them
is enclosed a smaller card engraved with the maiden name of the bride:
MISS GUENDOLEN EARLE.


Wedding Anniversaries.

[Illustration:

_1885._

_1890._

_Wooden Wedding._

_Mr. and Mrs. Theodore Grant,_

_At Home,_

_Thursday evening, December fifth, 1895,_

_At half-past eight o'clock._

_263 East Thirteenth Street._]

In sending out invitations for the various anniversaries that
pleasantly diversify the years of a long wedded life, the simplest
form will always be found in the best taste. There are varied devices
for rendering these invitations striking in effect, such as silvered
and gilded cards for silver and golden weddings, thin wooden cards for
the wooden wedding, etc., but good taste would indicate that none of
these, not even gold and silver lettering (though this last is least
objectionable of all), should be used. The large engraved "At Home"
card, or the small sheet of heavy note paper, also engraved, are the
most elegant.


"No Presents Received."

The words, "No presents received," are sometimes engraved in the lower
left hand corner of the note sheet, or card. A much-to-be-admired
custom, since the multiplicity of invitations requiring gifts, is, in
more cases than one, burdensome to the recipient.


Revise the Visiting List.

Now, that it has become the custom to engage the services of an
amanuensis to direct the invitations for a crush affair by the
hundred, it would be well for every hostess to frequently revise her
visiting list, in order that the relatives of lately deceased friends
may not be pained by seeing the dear lost name included among the
invitations of the family; also, this care is necessary to remove the
names of those who have recently departed from the city, and those
whose acquaintance is no longer desired.




ACCEPTANCES AND REGRETS

[Illustration]


The essence of all etiquette is to be found in the observance of the
spirit of the Golden Rule. Perhaps in no one point is the "do unto
others as ye would that they should do unto you," more applicable than
in the prompt acknowledgment of either a formal or a friendly
invitation. This acknowledgment may be either denial or assent, but
whatever the form, it is requisite that the proffered courtesy should
be answered by a prompt and decisive acceptance or refusal. This is a
duty owed by an invited guest to his prospective host or hostess and
one that should never be neglected.


Answering an Invitation.

In accepting or declining an invitation close attention should be paid
to the form in which it is written and the same style followed in the
answer. For instance: should the invitation be formal, the answer
should preserve the same degree of formality; while a friendly
invitation in note form should meet with an acceptance or regret
couched in the same terms. Another rule to be rigidly observed is,
that the acceptance or refusal must be written in the same person that
characterized the invitation. For instance: if "Mr. and Mrs. Algernon
Smith request the pleasure of the company of Mr. and Mrs. Joseph
Bronson at dinner, etc.," with equal stateliness "Mr. and Mrs. Joseph
Bronson accept with pleasure the kind invitation of Mr. and Mrs.
Algernon Smith." To do otherwise would imply ignorance of the very
rudiments of social or grammatical rules.

A friendly note of invitation, beginning somewhat after this fashion:
"Mr. Smith and I would be pleased to have you and Mr. Brown, etc.,"
would be accepted or declined in the same fashion and person, as: "Mr.
Brown and I accept with pleasure your kind invitation, etc." To answer
such an invitation with a formal acceptance, or regret, written in the
third person, as given above, would display profound ignorance of
social customs.

An acceptance or regret, written in the first person, receives the
signature of the writer, but one written in the third person remains
unsigned. To sign it would produce a confusion of persons and be
ungrammatical to the last degree. Another error to be avoided is that
of beginning in this fashion: "I accept with pleasure the kind
invitation of Mr. and Mrs. John Jones," this also producing a change
of person altogether inadmissible. Neither must one be betrayed into
the mistake of using the words, "will accept," thus throwing the
acceptance into the future tense, when, in reality, you _do_ accept,
in the present tense, at the moment of writing.


Accepting a Dinner Invitation.

Incumbent upon us as it is to answer the majority of our invitations
in either the affirmative or negative, there are degrees of necessity
even here, for, sin as we may in all other particulars, there is an
unwritten code like unto the laws of the Medes and Persians which
declareth that the invitations to a dinner are not to be lightly set
aside. First, an invitation to a dinner is the highest social
compliment that a host and hostess can pay to those invited, and,
second, the guests are limited in number and painstakingly arranged in
congenial couples by the careful hostess. Judge, then, of her
disappointment, when, at the last moment, some delinquent sends in a
hasty regret leaving little or no time to fill that terror of all
dinner-givers, that skeleton at the feast, an empty chair. One such
failure is sufficient to ruin the most carefully-arranged table and is
an injury to host and hostess that only the occurrence of some
unforeseen calamity can justify.

[Illustration: ANSWERING AN INVITATION.]

In answering an invitation it is well to repeat the date, as: "Your
kind invitation for Tuesday, May fifth." This will give an
opportunity, if any mistakes have been made in dates, to rectify them
at once. This caution it would be well to observe in answering any
invitation.

Answer decisively as well as promptly. Do not, if there is a doubt as
to your being able to attend, selfishly keep the lists open in your
favor by suggesting that "You hope to have the pleasure," etc., or, if
married, that "one of us will come." This is an injustice to those
inviting you, who, to make a success of their entertainment, must know
at once the number to be depended upon. Say "yes" or "no" promptly and
abide by your decision. To do this will, in case of refusal, give time
to fill your place at table.


Accepting a Dinner Invitation.

In accepting a dinner invitation the following form is very suitable.
This, of course, presupposes that the invitation has also been written
in the third person. (See Invitations.)

     Mr. and Mrs. Harvey Pratt accept with pleasure the kind
     invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Potter for dinner on
     Tuesday, December fifteenth, at eight o'clock. 24
     Abercrombie Street. Wednesday.

A gentleman might respond thus:

     Mr. Fremont Miller has much pleasure in accepting the very
     kind invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Potter for dinner on
     Tuesday, December fifteenth, at eight o'clock. Union League
     Club. Wednesday.

To answer a formal invitation carelessly and familiarly is to show a
degree of disrespect to the sender, but, if the invitation be in note
form, first person, answer in same fashion, it being usually safe to
follow the style of invitation in either accepting or refusing the
proffered pleasure.

Never "present one's compliments" in response to an invitation. It is
entirely out of date; neither should one say "the _polite_ invitation
of Mr. John Jones." All invitations are presupposed to be "polite."
"Your kind" or "very kind invitation" is a gracefully-turned and amply
sufficient phrase for all occasions.


Declining a Dinner Invitation.

An unexplained regret is often (as before mentioned) wounding to the
feelings of a sensitive person, leaving at times the impression that
one did not care to come. This can always be avoided by
particularizing the cause of refusal. A plea of expected absence, a
previous engagement to dine elsewhere, a recent bereavement, or sudden
illness in the family, are each of them good and sufficient reasons
for non-acceptance and should always be mentioned. Thus, in reply to a
formal dinner invitation, a "regret" might be sent in the following
terms:

     Mr. and Mrs. Harvey Patten sincerely regret that, owing to
     the sudden illness of their daughter Eleanor they will be
     deprived of the pleasure of accepting the very kind
     invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Potter for dinner on
     Tuesday, December fifteenth. 24 Abercrombie street.
     Wednesday.

This form of refusal will be found suitable for all formal occasions,
varying the name of the entertainment and the cause for non-acceptance
to suit the circumstances.


Persons in Mourning.

Invitations to those in mourning should be sent as a matter of course,
except during the first few weeks of deep bereavement, when their
sorrows are not to be intruded upon by the gayeties of the outer
world. After this first season of sorrow, invitations, which neither
custom nor their own feelings permit them to accept, should be sent,
that they may know that they are not forgotten in their solitude.

To these there is always given the privilege of declining all
invitations without any specified cause therefor, their black-bordered
stationery showing all too plainly the sad reason that prompted their
refusal. They should then send their cards (black-bordered) by mail
enclosed in two envelopes. These will take the place of a personal
call and should be the same in number. It may be mentioned here that
while people in deep mourning are not usually invited to dinners or
luncheons, it is customary for them to receive invitations to all
weddings and other social gatherings, and though they may not accept,
still it is gratifying for them to know that they are remembered in
their seclusion.

[Illustration: A LETTER OF CONDOLENCE.]


Addressing the Answer.

The answer to an invitation should always be addressed to the person
in whose name it is sent. If "Mr. and Mrs. Richard Roe request the
pleasure," etc., address the answer to "Mr. and Mrs. Richard Roe." If
"Mrs. Richard Roe is At Home" on a certain date, address the reply to
her alone. In case of wedding invitations, address all answers to the
parents of the bride, in whose name they are sent out, never to the
bride, although she may be your only personal acquaintance in the
family, the civility being due to the issuers of the invitation. This
is customary in the case of all invitations.


Wedding Invitations.

Wedding invitations are usually thought to require no answer unless it
be to a sit-down wedding breakfast. In this case the same exactness in
reply and the same form is demanded as for a dinner invitation. If the
invitation is extended to friends at a distance and presupposes an
intention to entertain the recipients for any length of time, the
obligation for speedy reply is equally necessary.

If the invitation is given by an informal note, as is the case with
some very quiet weddings, an answer must always be returned and in the
same note form. This attention is demanded by courtesy.

To a large crush wedding a regret, accompanied or not by a gift, may
be sent if desired; an acceptance is not necessary. Where the
invitations are to the church only, they are amply answered by sending
or leaving cards at the house. To receive a card stating that the
wedded pair will be "At Home" on certain dates, means that they desire
to continue their acquaintance with the parties thus invited, who
should either call in person or send cards promptly.


Wedding Anniversaries.

Anniversary invitations require an answer, thus giving a very pleasant
opportunity for congratulating the happy couple. The following forms
are suitable:

     Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Cummings accept with pleasure the kind
     invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Kennet Wade for Thursday evening,
     October tenth, and present their warmest congratulations on
     their Silver Wedding Anniversary. 45 Church Street.
     Thursday.

For a refusal:

     Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Cummings sincerely regret that, owing to
     an unexpected absence from town, they are unable to accept
     the very kind invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Kennet Wade for
     Thursday evening, October tenth, but beg to present to them
     their warmest congratulations on this occasion of their
     Silver Wedding Anniversary. 24 Church Street. Wednesday.

The same formulæ in answering will apply to any of the anniversary
festivities.


Theater and Opera Parties.

These parties are frequently made up on rather short notice and the
invitations are then sent to the house by special messenger who awaits
the reply, which must be written at once, that the lady or gentleman
giving the entertainment may be sure of a certain number to fill the
box or stalls, engaged for the evening. Occasionally, when the party
is given by a gentleman, he takes a carriage and gives out the
invitations in person when a verbal answer is returned.


Luncheons and Suppers.

Invitations for these are written in the same form as for a dinner,
merely substituting the word "luncheon" or "supper" for "dinner," and
should be accepted or refused in precisely the same style. Answers
also should be sent with the same promptness that the hostess may be
certain of arranging her table satisfactorily.


Other Invitations.

Other invitations, aside from those already specified in this
department, scarcely demand an answer, except they bear the words:
"The favor of an answer is requested," or the initials, "R.S.V.P."
Simple "at home" affairs never need an answer, though cards must
always be sent, or left in person, immediately afterward. Garden
parties, where they are held at any distance from the city and
carriages are to be sent to convey the guests thither, always require
an answer; this, however, is usually indicated upon the card.


Refusing After Acceptance.

Should it unfortunately occur, after accepting an invitation, that, by
one of the sorrowful happenings so often marring our best laid plans,
we are prevented from fulfilling our promise, let the regret sent be
prompt, that your hostess, especially if the entertainment be a dinner
or luncheon may possibly, even at the eleventh hour, be able to supply
the vacancy. Make it explanatory as well, that she may feel positive
that no mere whim has caused the disarrangement of her plans.


What Not to Do.

Never write the word "accepts," "regrets" or "declines" upon your
visiting card and send in lieu of a written note. To do so is not only
an insult to your hostess but a mark as well of your own ill-breeding.
An invitation, which is always an honor and implies the best that your
host is able to offer, should always receive the courtesy of a civil
reply.




Etiquette of Courtship and Marriage

[Illustration]


"Courtship," according to Sterne, "consists in a number of quiet
attentions, not so pointed as to alarm, nor so vague as not to be
understood."

In this little quotation lies the spirit and the letter of all
etiquette regarding courtship. The passion of love generally appearing
to everyone save the man who feels it, so entirely disproportionate to
the value of the object, so impossible to be entered into by any
outside individual, that any strong expressions of it appear
ridiculous to a third person. For this reason it is that all
extravagance of feeling should be carefully repressed as an offense
against good breeding.

Man was made for woman, and woman equally for man. How shall they
treat each other? How shall they come to understand their mutual
relations and duties? It is lofty work to write upon this subject what
ought to be written. Mistakes, fatal blunders, hearts and lives
wrecked, homes turned into bear-gardens, tears, miseries, blasted
hopes, awful tragedies--can you name the one most prolific cause of
all these?

If our young people were taught what they ought to know--if it were
told them from infancy up--if it were drilled into them and they were
made to understand what now is all a mystery to them--a dark, vague,
unriddled mystery--hearts would be happier, homes would be brighter,
lives would be worth living and the world would be better.

[Illustration:

    "GOOD NIGHT! GOOD NIGHT! PARTING IS SUCH SWEET SORROW,
    THAT I SHALL SAY GOOD NIGHT TILL IT BE MORROW."]

[Illustration: A POLITE ESCORT.]

This is now the matter--matter grave and serious enough--which we have
in hand. There are gems of wisdom founded on health, morality,
happiness, which should be put within reach of every household in our
whole broad land. It is a most important, yet neglected subject.
People are squeamish, cursed with mock modesty, ashamed to speak with
their lips what their Creator spoke through their own minds and bodies
when he formed them. It is time such nonsense--nonsense shall we
say?--rather say it is time such fatal folly were withered and cursed
by the sober common sense and moral duty of universal society.

Courtship! Its theme, how delightful! Its memories and associations,
how charming! Its luxuries the most luxurious proffered to mortals!
Its results how far reaching, and momentous! No mere lover's fleeting
bauble, but life's very greatest work! None are equally portentous,
for good and evil.


Errors of Love-Making.

God's provisions for man's happiness are boundless and endless. How
great are the pleasures of sight, motion, breathing! How much greater
those of mind! Yet a right love surpasses them all; and can render us
all happier than our utmost imaginations can depict; and a wrong more
miserable.

Right love-making is more important than right selection; because it
affects conjugal life for the most. Men and women need knowledge
concerning it more than touching anything else. Their fatal errors
show their almost universal ignorance concerning it. That most married
discords originate in wrong love-making instead of selection, is
proved by love usually declining; while adaptation remains the same.

Right courtship will harmonize natural discordants, much more
concordants, still more those already in love; which only some serious
causes can rupture. The whole power of this love element is enlisted
in its perpetuity, as are all the self-interests of both. As nature's
health provisions are so perfect that only its great and
long-continued outrage can break it; so her conjugal are so numerous
and perfect that but for outrageous violation of her love laws all who
once begin can and will grow more and more affectionate and happy
every day.

Any man who can begin to elicit any woman's love, can perfectly
infatuate her more and more, solely by courting her right; and all
women who once start a man's love--no very difficult achievement--can
get out of him, and do with him, anything possible she pleases. The
charming and fascinating power of serpents over birds is as nothing
compared with that a woman can wield over a man, and he over her.
Ladies, recall your love hey-day. You had your lover perfectly
spell-bound. He literally knew not what he did or would do. With what
alacrity he sprang to indulge your every wish, at whatever cost, and
do exactly as you desired! If you had only courted him just right, he
would have continued to grow still more so till now. This is equally
true of a man's power over every woman who once begins to love him.
What would you give to again wield that same bewitching wand?


How to Carry on Courtship.

Intuition, our own selfhood, is nature's highest teacher, and
infallible; and tells all, by her "still, small voice within," whether
and just wherein they are making love right or wrong. Every false step
forewarns all against itself; and great is their fall who stumble.
Courtship has its own inherent consciousness, which must be kept
inviolate.

Then throw yourself, O courting youth, upon your own interior sense of
propriety and right, as to both the beginning and conducting of
courtship, after learning all you can from these pages, and have no
fears as to results, but quietly bide them, in the most perfect
assurance of their happy eventuality!

"What can I do or omit to advance my suit? prevent dismissal? make my
very best impression? guarantee acceptance? touch my idol's heart?
court just right?" This is what all true courters say.

Cultivate and manifest whatever qualities you would awaken. You
inspire in the one you court the precise feeling and traits you
yourself experience. This law effects this result. Every faculty in
either awakens itself in the other. This is just as sure as gravity
itself. Hence your success must come from _within_, depends upon
yourself, not the one courted.

Study the specialties, likes and dislikes in particular, of the one
courted, and humor and adapt yourself to them.

Be extra careful not to prejudice him or her against you by awakening
any faculty in reverse. Thus whatever rouses the other's resistance
against you, antagonizes all the other faculties, and proportionally
turns love for you into hatred. Whatever wounds ambition reverses all
the other feelings, to your injury; what delights it, turns them in
your favor. All the faculties create, and their action constitutes
human nature; which lovers will do right well to study. To give an
illustration:


A Case to the Point.

An elderly man with points in his favor, having selected a woman
eighteen years younger, but most intelligent and feminine, had two
young rivals, each having more points in their favor, and came to his
final test. She thought much of having plenty of money. They saw they
could "cut him out" by showing her that he was poor; she till then
thinking his means ample. All four met around her table, and proved
his poverty. His rivals retired, sure that they had made "_his_ cake
dough," leaving him with her. It was his turning-point. He addressed
himself right to her _affections_, saying little about money matters,
but protesting an amount of devotion for her to which she knew they
were strangers; and left his suit right on this one point; adding:

"You know I can make money; know how intensely I esteem, admire,
idolize, and love you. Will not my admitted greater affection, with my
earnings, do more for you than they with more money, but less love?"

Her clear head saw the point. Her heart melted into his. She said
"yes." He triumphed by this affectional spirit alone over their much
greater availability.

Manifesting the domestic affections and virtues, a warm, gushing
friendly nature, fondness for children and home, inspires a man's love
most of all, while evincing talents by a man peculiarly enamors woman.

Relations, you shall not interfere, where even parents may not. Make
your own matches, and let others make theirs; especially if you have
bungled your own. One _such_ bungle is one too many.

The parties are betrothed. Their marriage is "fore-ordained" by
themselves, its only rightful umpires, which all right-minded
outsiders will try to promote, not prevent. How despicable to separate
husbands and wives! Yet is not parting those married by a
love-_spirit_, equally so? Its mere legal form can but increase its
validity, not create it. Marriage is a divine institution, and
consists in their own personal betrothal. Hence breaking up a true
love-union before its legal consummation, is just as bad as parting
loving husband and wife; which is monstrous. All lovers who allow it
are its wicked partakers.


Choice of Associates.

The first point to be considered on this subject is a careful choice
of associates, which will often, in the end, save future unhappiness
and discomfort, since, as Goldsmith so truthfully puts it, "Love is
often an involuntary passion placed upon our companions without our
consent, and frequently conferred without even our previous esteem."

This last most unhappy state of affairs may, to a great extent, be
avoided by this careful choosing of companions. Especially is this
true on the part of the lady, since, from the nature and constitution
of society, an unsuitable acquaintance, friendship, or alliance, is
more embarrassing and more painful for the woman than the man. As in
single life an undesirable acquaintance is more derogatory to a woman
than to a man, so in married life, the woman it is who ventures most,
"for," as Jeremy Taylor writes, "she hath no sanctuary in which to
retire from an evil husband; she may complain to God as do the
subjects of tyrants and princes, but otherwise she hath no appeal in
the causes of unkindness."


First Steps.

To a man who has become fascinated with some womanly ideal, we would
say, if the acquaintanceship be very recent, and he, as yet, a
stranger to her relatives, that he should first consider in detail his
position and prospects in life, and judge whether or not they are such
as would justify him in striving to win the lady's affections, and
later on her hand in marriage. Assured upon this point, and let no
young man think that a fortune is necessary for the wooing of any
woman worth the winning, let him then gain the needful introductions
through some mutual friend to her parents or guardians.

If, on the other hand, it is a long acquaintance that has ripened into
admiration, this latter formality will be unnecessary.

As to the lady, her position is negative to a great extent. Yet it is
to be presumed that her preferences, though unexpressed, are decided,
and, if the attentions of a gentleman are agreeable, her manners will
be apt to indicate, in some degree, the state of her mind.

Prudence, however, does, or should, warn her not to accept too marked
attentions from a man of whose past life she knows nothing, and of
whose present circumstances she is equally ignorant.


Character.

There is one paramount consideration too often overlooked and too late
bewailed in many a ruined home, and that is the character of the man
who seeks to win a woman's hand. Parents and guardians cannot be too
careful in this regard, and young women themselves should, by refusing
such associates, avoid all danger of contracting such ties. Wealth,
nor family rank, nor genius, availeth aught if the character of the
man be flawed.

Let parents teach their daughters and let girls understand for
themselves that happiness, or peace, in married life is impossible
where a man is, in any wise, dissipated, or liable to be overcome by
any of the fashionable vices of the day. Better go down to your grave
a "forlorn spinster" than marry such a man.


Disposition.

As to temper or disposition, the man or woman can easily gain some
insight into the respective peculiarities of another's temperament by
a little quiet observation. If the gentleman be courteous and careful
in his attentions to his mother and sisters, and behave with ease and
consideration toward all women, irrespective of age, rank, or present
condition, she may feel that her first estimate was a correct one. On
the other hand, should he show disrespect toward women as a class,
sneer at sacred things, evince an inclination for expensive pleasures
in advance of his means, or for low amusements or companionship; be
cruel to the horse he drives, or display an absence of all energy in
his business pursuits, then is it time to gently, but firmly, repel
all nearer advances on his part.

As to the gentleman, it will be well for him also to watch carefully
as to the disposition of the lady and her conduct in her own family.
If she be attentive and respectful to her parents, kind and
affectionate toward her brothers and sisters, not easily ruffled in
temper and with inclination to enjoy the pleasures of home; cheerful,
hopeful and charitable in disposition, then may he feel, indeed, that
he has a prize before him well worth the winning.

If, however, she should display a strong inclination towards
affectation and flirtation; be extremely showy or else careless in her
attire, frivolous in her tastes and eager for admiration, he may
rightly conclude that very little home happiness is to be expected
from her companionship.


Trifling.

A true gentleman will never confine his attentions exclusively to one
lady unless he has an intention of marriage. To do so exposes her to
all manner of conjecture, lays an embargo on the formation of other
acquaintances, may very seriously compromise her happiness, and by
after withdrawal frequently causes her the severest mortification.
Hence a gentleman with no thought of marriage is in honor bound to
make his attentions to ladies as general as possible.

Still more reprehensible is the conduct of the man who insinuates
himself into the affections of a young girl by every protestation and
avowal possible, save that which would be binding upon himself, and
then withdraws his attentions with the boastful consciousness that he
has not committed himself.

Again, the young lady who willfully, knowingly, deliberately, draws on
a man to place hand and heart at her disposal simply for the pleasure
of refusing him and thus adding one more name to her list of rejected
proposals, is utterly unworthy the name of woman.


Etiquette of Making and Receiving Gifts.

On the question of gifts there is a point of etiquette to be observed.
Gentlemen, as a rule, do not offer ladies presents, save of fruits,
flowers, or confections; which gifts, notwithstanding that a small
fortune may be lavished upon their purchase, are supposed, in all
probability from their perishable character, to leave no obligation
resting upon the lady.

Should the conversation, however, turn upon some new book or musical
composition, which the lady has not seen, the gentleman may, with
perfect propriety, say, "I wish that you could see such or such a work
and, if you will permit, I should be pleased to send you a copy." It
is then optional with the lady to accept or refuse.

Should a gentleman persist in offering other gifts there must be no
secrecy about it. She should take early opportunity of saying, in the
presence of her father and mother, "I am very much obliged to you for
that ring, pin (or other gift) which you were so kind as to offer me
the other day, and I shall be happy to accept it if Papa or Mamma does
not object." If the lady is positive in her objections to receiving
gifts, it is easy to say, "I thank you for the kindness but I never
take expensive presents;" or, "Mamma never permits me to accept
expensive presents." These refusals are always to be taken by the
gentleman in good part. Where a present has been unadvisedly accepted,
it is perfectly proper for the mother to return it with thanks,
saying, "I think my daughter rather young to accept such expensive
gifts."

After an engagement is formally made the etiquette of gifts is
somewhat altered, though even then expensive presents, unless it be
the engagement ring, are not in the best taste. These should be
reserved for the marriage gifts.


Proposals of Marriage.

The proposal itself is a subject so closely personal in its nature
that each man must be a law unto himself in the matter, and time and
opportunity will be his only guides to success, unless, mayhap, his
lady-love be the braver of the two and help him gently over the
hardest part, for there be men and men; some who brook not "no" for an
answer, and some that a moment's hesitation on the part of the one
sought would seal their lips forever.

A woman must always remember that a proposal of marriage is the
highest honor that a man can pay her, and, if she must refuse it, to
do so in such fashion as to spare his feelings as much as possible. If
she be a true and well-bred woman, both proposal and refusal will be
kept a profound secret from every one save her parents. It is the
least balm she can offer to the wounded pride of the man who has
chosen her from out all women to bear his name and to reign in his
home. A wise woman can almost always prevent matters from coming to
the point of a declaration, and, by her actions and her prompt
acceptance of the attentions of others, should strive to show the true
state of her feelings.

A gentleman should usually take "no" for an answer unless he be of so
persevering a disposition as to be determined to take the fort by
siege; or unless the "no" was so undecided in its tone as to give some
hope of finding true the poet's words:

    "He gave them but one tongue to say us, 'Nay,'
        And two fond eyes to grant."

On the gentleman's part, a decided refusal should be received as
calmly as possible, and his resolve should be in no way to annoy the
cause of all his pain. If mere indifference be or seem to be the
origin of the refusal, he may, after a suitable length of time, press
his suit once more; but if an avowed or evident preference for
another be the reason, it becomes imperative that he should at once
withdraw from the field. Any reason that the lady may, in her
compassion, see fit to give him as cause for her refusal, should ever
remain his inviolable secret.

[Illustration: SOCIAL PASTIME ON RETURN VOYAGE.]

[Illustration: DECLINED WITH REGRETS.]

As whatever grows has its natural period for maturing, so has love. At
engagement you have merely selected, so that your familiarity should
be only intellectual, not affectional. You are yet more acquaintances
than companions. As sun changes from midnight darkness into noonday
brilliancy, and heats, lights up, and warms _gradually_, and as summer
"lingers in the lap of spring;" so marriage should dally in the lap of
courtship. Nature's adolescence of love should never be crowded into a
premature marriage. The more personal, the more impatient it is; yet
to establish its Platonic aspect takes more time than is usually given
it; so that undue haste puts it upon the carnal plane, which soon
cloys, then disgusts.


Unbecoming Haste.

Coyness and modesty always accompany female love, which involuntarily
shrink from close masculine contact until its mental phase is
sufficiently developed to overrule the antagonistic intimacies of
marriage.

Besides, why curtail the luxuries of courtship? Should haste to enjoy
the lusciousness of summer engulf the delights of spring? The
pleasures of courtship are unsurpassed throughout life, and quite too
great to be curtailed by hurrying marriage. And enhancing or
diminishing them redoubles or curtails those of marriage a hundredfold
more. A happy courtship promotes conjugal felicity more than anything
else whatever. A lady, asked why she didn't marry, since she had so
many making love to her, replied: "Because being courted is too great
a luxury to be spoilt by marrying."

No man should wait to make his pile. Two must _acquire_ a competence
conjointly, in order fully to really _enjoy_ it together. This alone
can give full zest to whatever pleasures it produces.

A formal proffer of marriage naturally follows a man's selection and
decision as to whom he will marry. Consent to canvass their mutual
adaptations implies consent to marry, if all is found satisfactory;
yet a final test and consummation now become necessary, both to bring
this whole matter to a focus, and allow both to state, and obviate or
waive, those objections which must needs exist on both sides;
including any improvements possible in either.


How to Deal with Objections.

The best time to state and waive or remove all objections, seeming and
real, not already adjusted, is at his proposal, and her acceptance. A
verbal will do, but a written is much better, by facilitating future
reference. A long future awaits their marriage; hence committing this
its initial point to writing, so that both can look back to it, is
most desirable. And he can propose, and she accept, much better when
alone, and they have all their faculties under full control, than
verbally, perhaps, when excited. Those same primal reasons for
reducing all other contracts to writing obtain doubly in reference to
marriage.

You who fear awkwardness on paper, remember that true human nature
always appears well, even when poorly dressed. A diamond is no less
brilliant because set in clay. Mode is nothing, reality everything.
All needed to appear well is to _feel_ right, and express naturally
what is felt. Saying plainly what you have to say, is all required.

The acceptance or rejection should also be unequivocal, or any
contingencies stated, and waived if minor, but if they can neither be
obviated nor compromised, should terminate their relations, that both
may look elsewhere. If any bones of contention exist, now is the time
to inter them finally, and to take the initiatory steps for perfecting
both in each other's eyes. Bear in mind that as yet your relations are
still those of business merely, because neither has acquired or
conceded any right to love or be loved. Without pretending to give
model letters of proposal, acceptance, or rejection, because varying
circumstances will vary each _ad infinitum_, the following may serve
as samples from which to work:

     "MUCH ESTEEMED FRIEND: As we have agreed to canvass our
     mutual adaptations for marriage, and my own mind is fully
     made up, a final decision now becomes necessary.

     "What I have learned of and from you confirms that high
     opinion of you which prompted my selection of you, and
     inspires a desire to consummate it. Your pleasing manner and
     mode of saying and doing things; your intelligence, taste,
     prudence, kindness, and many other excellencies, inspire my
     highest admiration.

     "Will you let me love what I so much admire?

     "But my affections are sacred. I can bestow them only on one
     who _reciprocates_ them; will bestow them upon you, if you
     will bestow yours on me; not otherwise; for only _mutual_
     love can render either happy. I can and will love you alone,
     with all my heart, provided you can and will love only me,
     with all of yours. Do you accord me this privilege, on this
     condition, for life, forever? I crave to make you my wife;
     to live with and for you, and proffer you my whole being,
     with honest, assiduous toil, fidelity to business, what
     talents I possess, and all I can do to contribute to your
     creature comforts. Do you accord me this privilege, on this
     condition? May I enshrine you as queen of my life?

     "Say wherein you find me faulty, or capable of improvement
     in your eyes, and I will do my utmost, consistently with my
     conscience, to render myself worthy and acceptable to you.

     "I wish some things were different in you--that you had
     better health, arose earlier, were less impulsive, knew more
     about keeping house, etc.; yet these minor matters sink into
     insignificance in comparison with your many excellences, and
     especially that whole-souled affection obviously inherent in
     you.

     "Deliberate fully, for this is a life affair, and if, in
     order to decide judiciously, you require to know more of me,
     ask me, or ---- and ----. Please reply as soon as you can
     well decide.

     "Decline unless you accept cordially, and can love me truly
     and wholly; but if you can and will reciprocate my proffered
     affection, say yes, and indicate your own time and mode of
     our marriage. Meanwhile, with the highest regards, I am, and
     hope ever to remain,

     "Yours truly,

     "A.B."

A true woman could give a better answer than the following, which does
not claim to be a model. It is hardly time yet for a gushing
love-letter, or we would not profane this sacred subject by making the
attempt; yet should like to receive one in spirit somewhat as follows:

     "DEAR SIR: Your proffer of your hand and heart in marriage
     has been duly received, and its important contents fully
     considered.

     "I accept your offer: and on its only condition, that I
     _reciprocate your love_, which I do completely; and hereby
     both offer my own hand and heart in return, and consecrate
     my entire being, soul and body, all I am and can become, to
     you alone; both according you the 'privilege' you crave of
     loving me, and 'craving' a like one in return.

     "Thank Heaven that this matter is settled; that you are in
     very deed mine, while I am yours, to love and be loved by,
     live and be lived with and for; and that my gushing
     affections have a final resting-place on one every way so
     worthy of the fullest reciprocal sympathy and trust.

     "The preliminaries of our marriage we will arrange whenever
     we meet, which I hope may be soon. But whether sooner or
     later, or you are present or absent, I now consider myself
     as wholly yours, and you all mine; and both give and take
     the fullest privilege of cherishing and expressing for you
     that whole-souled love I find even now gushing up and
     calling for expression. Fondly hoping to hear from and see
     you soon and often, I remain wholly yours forever,

     "C.D."


Sealing the Vow.

The vow and its tangible witnesses come next. All agreements require
to be attested; and this as much more than others as it is the most
obligatory. Both need its unequivocal and mutual mementos, to be
cherished for all time to come as its perpetual witnesses. This vow of
each to the other can neither be made too strong, nor held too sacred.
If calling God to witness will strengthen your mutual adjuration,
swear by Him and His throne, or by whatever else will render it
inviolable, and commit it to writing, each transcribing a copy for the
other as your most sacred relics, to be enshrined in your "holy of
holies."

Two witnesses are required, one for each. A ring for her and locket
for him, containing the likeness of both, as always showing how they
now look, or any keepsake both may select, more or less valuable, to
be handed down to their posterity, will answer.

Your mode of conducting your future affairs should now be arranged.
Though implied in selection, yet it must be specified in detail. Both
should arrange your marriage relations; say what each desires to do,
and have done; and draw out a definite outline plan of the various
positions you desire to maintain towards each other. Your future home
must be discussed: whether you will board, or live in your own house,
rented, or owned, or built, and after what pattern; or with either or
which of your parents. And it is vastly important that wives determine
most as to their domiciles; their internal arrangements, rooms,
furniture, management; respecting which they are consulted quite too
little, yet cannot well be too much.

Family rules, as well as national, state, corporate, financial, must
be established. They are most needed, yet least practiced in marriage.
Without them, all must be chaotic. Ignoring them is a great but common
marital error. The Friends wisely make family method cardinal.


A Full Understanding.

Your general treatment of each other now especially requires to be
mutually agreed upon. Each should say, "I should like to treat and be
treated by you thus, but not so; and let you do this but not that;"
and both mutually agree on a thousand like minor points, better
definitely arranged at first than left for future contention; each
making requisitions, conceding privileges, and stipulating for any
fancies, idols, or "reserved rights."

Differences must needs arise, which cannot be adjusted too soon. Those
constitutionally inherent in each should be adjusted in love's _early_
stages; it matters less how, than whether to your mutual satisfaction.
Or if this is impossible, "agree to disagree;" but settle on
something.

A concessionary spirit is indispensable, and inheres in love. Neither
should insist, but both concede, in all things; each making, not
demanding sacrifices. The one who loves most will yield to oblige
most. What course will make both happiest should overrule all your
mutual relations.

Write down and file all. Your present decisions, subject to mutual
changes and amendments, will become more and more important for future
reference, as time rolls on, by enabling each to correct both; for our
own changes make us think others have changed. A mutual diary is
desirable; for incidents now seemingly trivial, may yet become
important.


Important Trifles.

See or correspond with each other often. Love will not bear neglect.
Nothing kills it equally. In this it is most exacting. It will not,
should not, be second in anything. "First or nothing," is its motto.
Meet as often as possible. After its fires have once been lit, they
must be perpetually resupplied with their natural fuel; else they die
down, go out, or go elsewhere; and are harder to rekindle than to
light at first.

A splendid young man, son of one of New England's most talented and
pious divines, endowed with one of the very best of organisms,
physical and phrenological, having selected his mate, and plighted
their mutual vows, being the business manager of a large manufactory,
and obliged to defend several consecutive lawsuits for patent-right
infringements, neglected for weeks to write to his betrothed,
presupposing, of course, that all was right. This offended her
ladyship, and allowed evil-minded meddlers to sow seeds of alienation
in her mind; persuade her to send him his dismissal, and accept a
marriage proposal from another.

As he told his mournful story, he seemed like a sturdy oak riven by
lightning and torn by whirlwinds; its foliage scorched, bark stripped,
limbs tattered, even its very rootlets scathed; yet standing, a stern,
proud, defiant, resolute wreck. A gushing tear he manfully tried but
failed to suppress. His lips quivered and voice faltered. Perceiving
his impending fate, he seemed to dread his future more than present;
and hesitated between self-abandonment, and a merely mechanical,
objectless, business life. In attempting his salvation, by proffering
advice to the "broken-hearted," he respectfully but firmly declined;
deliberately preferring old-bachelorship, with all its dearths, of
which he seemed fully conscious. He felt as if he had been deeply
wronged.

Yet was not he the _first_ practically to repudiate? He suffered
terribly, because he had sinned grievously, not by commission, but
omission. He felt the deepest, fullest, manliest love, and revelled in
anticipations of their future union, but did not _express_ it; which
was to her as if he had not felt it; whereas, had he saved but one
minute per week to write lovingly, "I long to be with you, and love
you still," or, "Business does not, cannot diminish my fondness," he
would have saved her broken vows, and his broken heart.

Mingling other enjoyments with love, by going together to picnics and
parties, sleigh-rides and Mayings, concerts, and lectures,
marvellously cements the affections.


Love Feeds on Love.

Meet in your most attractive habiliments of mind and person. French
ladies will see their affianced only when arrayed in their best
toilet. Yet mental charms vastly surpass millinery. Neither can render
yourselves too lovely.

Express affectionate fondness in your visits and letters; the more the
better, so that you keep it a sentiment, not debase it by animal
passion. It is still establishing its rootlets, like young corn,
instead of growing. Allow no amatory excitement, no frenzied,
delirious intoxication with it; for its violence, like every other,
must react only to exhaust and paralyze itself by its own excesses.

Affianced young man, life has its epochs, which revolutionize it for
good or bad. You are now in one. You have heretofore affiliated much
with men; formed habits of smoking or chewing tobacco; indulged in
late suppers; abused yourself in various ways; perhaps been on sprees.
Now is your time to take a new departure from whatever is evil to all
that is good and pure. Break up most of your masculine associations;
and affiliate chiefly with your affianced. Be out no more nights. Let
your new responsibilities and relations brace you up against their
temptations; and, if these are not sufficient, your prospective spouse
will help. No other aid in resisting temptation and inspiring to good
equals that of a loving, loved woman.

Break off from your cronyisms, clubs, societies, all engagements
except such as mean imperative, cold-blooded business. Your new ties
furnish an excellent excuse. All your spare time and small change are
wanted for _her_. To give to bad habits the time and money due to her
and setting up in life, is outrageous. Bend everything to your new
relations, them to nothing. Now's your time to turn over a new leaf,
and turn all the angles, corners and right-about faces needed.

Affianced maiden, you have some departures to take and corners to
turn. Your life has till now been frivolous, but has now become
serious. You have no more need of toilet fineries; for "your market is
made," and you have work on hand far more important, namely, fitting
yourself for your new duties. Find out what they demand of you, and
set right about making a premium wife and mother. Both begin life
anew. Forgetting the past, plant and sow now what you would gather and
become always.


The Best of all Possessions.

Woman is man's choicest treasure. That is the most precious which
confers the most happiness. She is adapted to render him incomparably
happier than any other terrestrial possession. He can enjoy luscious
peaches, melting pears, crack horses, dollars and other things
innumerable; but a well-sexed man can enjoy woman most of all. He is
poor indeed, and takes little pleasure in this life, be his
possessions and social position what they may, who takes no pleasure
with her. All description utterly fails to express the varied and
exultant enjoyments God has engrafted into a right sexual state. Only
few experiences can attest how many and great, from infancy to death,
and throughout eternity itself. All God could do He has done to render
each sex superlatively happy in the other. Of all his beautiful and
perfect work, this is the most beautiful and perfect. Of all his
benignant devices, this is his most benign. All the divine attributes,
all human happiness, converge in male and female adaptations to mutual
enjoyments.

Each is correspondingly precious to the other. Man should prize many
things, yet woman is his pearl of greatest price. He should preserve,
cherish, husband many life possessions, but woman the most. He has
many jewels in his crown of glory, but she is his gem-jewel, his
diadem. What masculine luxury equals making women in general, and the
loved one in particular, happy?


The Source of Miseries.

Beginning and conducting courtship as this chapter directs, avoiding
the errors and following the directions it specifies, will just as
surely render all superlatively happy as sun will rise to-morrow. Scan
their sense. Do they not expound nature's love-initiating and
consummating ordinances? Are they not worthy of being put into
practice? Discordants, can you not trace many of your antagonisms and
miseries to their ignorant violation? Parents, what are they worth to
put into your children's hands, to forewarn them against carelessly,
ignorantly, spoiling their marriage? Young ladies, what are they worth
to you, as showing you how to so treat your admirers as to gain and
redouble their heart's devotion? Young men, what are these warnings
and teachings worth to you? God in his natural laws will bless all who
practice, curse all who violate them.

The conduct during engagement on the part of the gentleman should be
marked by the utmost courtesy toward and confidence in the woman of
his choice; a state of feeling which she should fully reciprocate.

In public their behavior toward one another should not be markedly
different from that displayed by them toward other men and women of
their acquaintance; save that the bridegroom-elect should be on the
watch that not the slightest wish of the lady be unfulfilled.

As for the lady, while she is not expected to debar herself from
accepting the customary courtesies extended by the gentlemen of her
acquaintance, a slight reserve should mark her conduct in accepting
them. At all places of amusement or entertainment she should appear
either in the company of her _fiancé_, or that of some relative.

She should never captiously take offense at her _fiancé's_ showing the
same attention to other ladies that she, in her turn, is willing to
accept from other gentlemen, and she should take the same pains to
please his taste in trifles that he does to gratify her slightest
wish.

This does not mean, though, that in the selfishness and blindness of
love--and love is very blind and selfish sometimes--she is to shut
herself up to his companionship at all times, excluding him from the
family circle of which he is so soon to become a member, and "pairing
off" on all occasions, thus rendering both the mark for silly
jestings.


How to Cherish Love.

But, in sober matter-of-fact, that little ring of gold does not mean
utter blindness. It does not mean that she is to devote her evenings
exclusively to the chosen one, ignoring her family entirely. It does
not mean that she is to accept valuable presents of all kinds at his
hands, to expect him to give up all his friends for her sake, nor to
confide all the secrets of the household to his keeping, but, as one
wise woman says, to "guard herself in word and deed; hold his love in
the best way possible; tie it firmly with the blue ribbon of hope, and
never let it be eaten away by the little fox who destroys so many
loving ties, and who is called familiarity."

Neither is this counsel to be deemed over-cautious, since, alas! even
"engagements" are sometimes broken in this uncertain world, and surely
there is no womanly woman that would not in such an event reflect
gladly, as she took up her life once more at the old point, that she
had remembered these things.

A domineering, jealous disposition on either side before marriage is
not the best possible guarantee for after happiness, and if these
traits are clearly shown during an engagement, the individual who
escapes from such thraldom before it is too late has shown
conclusively that discretion which is, at times, the better part of
valor.


Conduct Toward Parents.

The gentleman should exercise some tact in regard to his conduct
toward the family of his betrothed. Marked attention should be shown
toward the lady's mother. He should accommodate himself as much as
possible to the wishes, habits and ways of the household, and not
being, as yet, a member of the family, he should not presume to show
an intrusive familiarity of conversation.

The lady, on her part, should strive to show consideration,
friendliness, and a desire to please the parents of her
husband-that-is-to-be. Thus both will unite in the endeavor to
overcome that loving jealousy so natural on the part of those who see
the claims of another grown paramount in the heart of one of their
number, and feel that these new links are fast becoming stronger than
ties of blood and relationship.

The respective families should meet these advances with all kindness,
and should also endeavor, in view of the new union pending between
them, to make, if this be necessary, one another's acquaintance as
soon as convenient.


Length of Engagements.

Engagements should not be entered upon prematurely, a certain degree
of acquaintanceship proving no mean preparation for an arrangement of
this nature. But when an engagement is once formed it should not, in
the majority of cases, be of an undue length. This is a matter to be
settled by the wishes or the circumstances of the contracting parties.

It is oftimes the measure of wisdom, where the obstacle is lack of
fortune, to risk some degree of deprivation, rather than submit to a
long-protracted engagement; the man, as head of the new home, finding
a fresh motive for ambitious striving, and both parties being
preserved from that coolness of feeling too attendant upon years of
waiting. No homes are happier than those constructed on the principle
of economy and patient effort.


Broken Engagements.

Not unfrequently does it occur that circumstances arise that render
the dissolution of an engagement inevitable, and, as such a course,
unless mutual, of necessity involves an injury to the feelings of one
party, great care and delicacy should be employed in approaching the
subject.

If the occasion should arise on the lady's side, it must be remembered
that she is not bound to declare any other reason than her own sweet
will. It is better, however, for reasons to be frankly given, that the
step may not be attributed to mere caprice on her part. On the side of
the man the reasons must be strong, indeed, that can justify him in
breaking a solemn engagement sought of his own free will, and urged by
him upon the object of his choice. By thus releasing himself he not
unfrequently leaves the lady in an embarrassing position before the
public, not to mention the possible injury that may be inflicted upon
the deepest feelings of her heart.

If the cause should arise from any fault on the part of the lady, a
man of honor will ever preserve the strictest silence on the subject.
If from sudden failure in his own fortunes he should feel himself in
duty bound to relinquish his hope of present happiness lest he
selfishly drag another down to penury, let the reason be carefully and
clearly explained.

At the conclusion of an engagement let every gift, including the
engagement ring, and all photographs and letters that have been
exchanged between the two, be promptly returned by each that as little
as possible may remain to remind of the days that are done. It is
especially a point of honor on the gentleman's part to retain nothing
that the lady may have given, or written, him.


Etiquette of Married Life.

Marriage, to the elect, may be fitly termed a state of grace, but
without a close observance of all the courtesies that tend to uplift
everyday life in some degree above the narrowness of mere existence
it may but too easily become what the old cynic declared it to be when
he wrote, "Marriage is a feast in which the grace is sometimes better
than the dinner."

Mutual confidence and mutual respect are the two principal factors in
the case. Without these there can be none of that harmony so necessary
to happiness in the state matrimonial. And not only this, but they
should strive to be mutually entertaining.

The pains they took during their engagement to be agreeable to one
another at a time when they were by no means entirely dependent upon
themselves for companionship, would surely not be amiss in rendering
pleasant the years, and it may be decades of years, during which they
must be to a great extent dependent upon each other for entertainment.
The young man who spent so much time at the home of a certain lady
that he was finally asked why, if he was in love with her, he did not
marry her, uttered a sad truth when he answered, "Ah, but where then
should I pass my evenings?" A reflection upon the agreeableness of
married life that might easily be avoided by the exercise of care and
tact on both sides.


The Art of Agreeableness.

Philip Gilbert Hammerton, in his _Intellectual Life_, wisely suggests:
"A married couple are clearly aware that, in the course of a few
years, their society is sure to become mutually uninteresting unless
something is done. What is that something? Every author who succeeds,
takes the trouble to renew his mind by fresh knowledge, new thoughts.
So, is it not at least worth while to do as much to preserve the
interest of marriage?"

The wife who dresses for her husband's sake, who reads that she may
qualify herself for conversation with him, who makes him the chief end
of her cares, and the husband who brings home from the outside world
some of its life and animation to share with her, who has a loving
interest in all that she has done for his pleasure, and, if wealth be
a stranger at their door, stands ready to lift the heaviest burdens
from her shoulders, have solved for themselves the problem of married
happiness, and found it to be a condition wherein every joy is doubled
and every sorrow halved.


Duty Toward One Another.

Let the wife have no confidant as to the little shortcomings of her
husband, over which love, as well as pride, should draw a sheltering
veil. Never listen to an unkind tale of his past or present mistakes,
and count all those who would seek thus to destroy your peace of mind
as your bitterest enemies. Let the husband in his turn remember that
an unkind or slighting word spoken of his wife, touches his own honor
to the quick, and be instant in resenting the words that should never
have been spoken in his presence.

Another point to be remembered in view of the duty of husband and wife
toward one another, is with reference to attending church or
entertainments. The wife has, in all probability, left a home where
the different members of the household were ready to accompany each
other whenever occasion served, and young friends were planning many a
pleasant outing, and now she is wholly dependent upon her husband for
all of these things. Let her beware, under these circumstances, of
allowing herself to attend church, lecture, or any other evening
entertainment, in the company of well-meaning friends. For the
husband, once seeing that his wife can attend these places without his
assistance, will soon, if such be his disposition, remain selfishly
home at all times, or, if otherwise inclined, still more selfishly
find his amusement in places widely foreign to his wife's happiness or
peace of mind. The carelessness of many well-meaning men in this
respect is the cause of very much unhappiness that might be wholly
avoided by a little consideration as to the utter dependence of the
wife upon her husband for all these recreations.


Home Attire.

This is a subject that it should be unnecessary to touch upon, but,
unfortunately, too many bright, pretty, carefully-dressed girls
degenerate into careless, fretful, untidy and illy-clad young wives,
whose presence is anything but a joy forever to the individuals who
must face them across the family board for three hundred and
sixty-five days in every year. And it is this careless young woman who
is first to complain that "John does not care for me in the least, now
we are married," while John is very apt to think, "If Carrie would
only take just a little of the pains to please me now that she did six
months ago, how much happier we would be." And John is quite right
about it. This very carelessness on the part of wives has marred the
happiness of more than one new home. The ribbon, the flower, the color
that "John likes" and the smile that crowns all are magical in their
effects.

Then let John always remember to bring to this home a pleasant face,
from which business cares are driven away, and a readiness to please
and be pleased, that meets the wife's attempts half way, and the
evening meal will be made delightful by pleasant chat, which should
never consist of a _résumé_ of the day's tribulations, but should turn
on subjects calculated to remove from the mind all trace of their
existence, and thus will they arise at its close better and happier
for the hour that has passed.


Household and Personal Expenses.

One of the chief sources of unhappiness in married life is the strife
arising from the vexed question of home and personal expenses. In the
first place, the husband frequently fails in regard to openness with
regard to his business concerns and profits; thus the wife, entirely
ignorant as to what amount she may safely spend, errs too often on the
side of extravagance, finding too late, when a storm of reproach
descends upon her innocent head, where and how she has sinned.

Then, too, it is often a sore trial to the wife's pride to ask for the
money necessary to keep her own wardrobe in repair. Especially is this
the case when, before marriage, she was in receipt of her own money,
earned by her own hands. It seems to her that her husband ought to see
that she has need of certain articles, and the very fact that he does
not, leads her to the false supposition that he has ceased to care
for her, while he, if there was any thought about it in his mind,
would say, "Why doesn't she ask for money if she wants it? She knows I
will give it to her if I have it."

All these troubles would be avoided if married couples early came to a
definite understanding on this subject, and a certain sum were set
aside which the wife was to receive weekly for household expenses, her
personal wants to be supplied from such surplus as she may be able to
save from out this sum, or in some other way provided for by a stated
amount, both of which sums should be under her exclusive, unquestioned
control.

Some simple system of accounts should then be kept and regularly gone
over together on every quarter. A mutual agreement thus established on
the money question, much annoyance and much extravagance may be
prevented. It is not too much to suggest that, perhaps, it might not
be amiss to present an account of the husband's expenses also, at
these quarterly reckonings.

Above all things, never let the wife, from a weak desire to gratify
her own personal vanity, enter upon some extravagant purchase, the
amount of which she must conceal from her husband, and (vainly often)
strive to pay in small amounts saved or borrowed. The result is
usually exposure, sometimes disgrace, pecuniary loss and loss of
esteem in the husband's eyes. Perfect confidence is the only basis
upon which happiness can be safely founded.


A Pleasant Disposition.

Cultivate, on both sides, a disposition to restrain all unseemly
exhibitions of temper. Hysterics and prolonged and repeated fits of
tears soon lose their effect, and, at the last, a half-pitying
contempt is their only result. Let all conversation be refined in its
tone. The force of example in this respect carries with it a silent,
impressive power that is not easily resisted and lapses therefrom
involve a loss of this influence that cannot be easily estimated.

Profanity, too, is a deadly foe in the household and any wife that
permits her husband to swear in her presence, either to herself, or
concerning others, lessens her own self-respect each time it occurs.
That profanity can be repressed, has been shown her by the fact that,
no matter how long the previous engagement may have lasted, no word of
such import escaped the man's lips in her presence, and surely the
woman chosen to be head of his home is no less worthy of his respect
than was the girl he wooed.

The habit of indulging in cutting or harsh remarks is one to be
guarded against. Mutual politeness should be exercised by both husband
and wife, and in all cases watch should be set over the mouth, and the
door of the lips well kept.


Boarding Versus Home Life.

The tendency in all large cities, at this present time, points toward
fashionable boarding-houses, or expensive lodging-houses, as the
nuclei round which the newly-married most do congregate.

It may be that the wife is utterly unused to the care of a house (in
which case the sooner she learn the art, the happier for both parties)
or, perhaps, the financial resources of the husband are unable to
support the drain consequent upon furnishing a home that shall gratify
the foolish pride of the wife. But, whatever the cause, the effects
are the same, and are to be found in the utter unfitness of women
adopting this manner of existence for any of the serious duties of
life that, sooner or later, come upon all who wear this mortal garb.

Then, too, in the idle, censorious, gossiping, novel-reading life that
flourishes in this hothouse existence, the seeds of lifelong misery
are not infrequently sown.

Let a home, then, however small, be one of the first considerations in
beginning the married life, and let the adding to, and the beautifying
of, this precious possession be the duty and the privilege of the
years to come.

To the wife, in her housewifely _rôle_, belongs the care of overseeing
or accomplishing with her own hands, the varied duties that go to
secure the daily well-being of the home. She must see that the rooms
are bright, neat, and cosily arranged; that the meals are
appetizingly and punctually served, and be herself neatly and
tastefully attired to preside at the table.

Due allowances are to be made for the amount of manual labor she has
been obliged to perform with her own hands, still, by care and tact a
woman can always maintain a certain degree of neatness.

Let the husband, on his part, bring into the home cheerfulness, with a
quick remembrance of all those little attentions that go so far toward
making up the sum of earthly happiness. Let him see that, to the best
of his ability, the home wants are provided for, and be not forgetful
to lend the help of his stronger hand wherever needed. (Read carefully
other hints in department of Home Etiquette.)

Never demand of your wife more than you are willing to give. If you
desire to be received with smiles, enter the house with a cheerful
mien, and you will find there are few women who are not willing to
give measure for measure, and even a little more than they receive of
kindly attention. For a wife will usually shine, like the moon, by
reflection, and her happiness will always reflect your own.

[Illustration]




WEDDINGS AND WEDDING ANNIVERSARIES.

[Illustration]


In discussing the important subject of etiquette as connected with
weddings and wedding anniversaries, it may be mentioned here that the
forms for invitations to all occasions of this sort, and acceptances
and regrets of the same, card-sending, etc., have been fully treated
in their respective departments. The observances immediately
preceding, during, and following the ceremony, are now to receive
consideration.


Paying for the Cards.

The form, size and use of these important bits of pasteboard having
been before stated, it only remains for us to say here that all the
expenses relative to their purchase and distribution are to be borne
solely by the parents or other guardians of the bride. To have it
otherwise implies a lack of delicacy on the part of the bride, and
lays upon her a certain amount of obligation which every right-minded
girl would desire, above all things, to avoid. Hence when the parents
are financially unable to incur the expense, good taste demands that
all display be abandoned and the couple be quietly married in the
presence of the family only.

The bride should always remember that until the fateful words are
spoken that make the twain one flesh, she has no claim whatever on the
purse of her future husband, and conduct herself accordingly.

Hence it is that a very plain _trousseau_ is more commendable to the
self-respect of the wearer, than the elaborate outfittings, toward
the purchase of which the groom-expectant has largely contributed, and
which, in case of the oft-recurring "slip twixt the cup and the lip,"
must weigh heavily upon the maiden's pride.

Even the "after cards" are usually ordered by the parents with the
others, and paid for at the same time. If, however, they are ordered
after marriage, they are paid for by the groom.

There is only one exception to the rule of the bride's parents paying
for the wedding cards, and this occurs when the wedding ceremony is
performed quietly in church and the reception, for some reason, is
held at the home of the groom's parents, in which case they, as the
entertainers, properly pay for, and issue, the cards of invitation.

The groom, in England, always pays for the carriage that conveys
himself and bride to the station after the ceremony and reception are
past, but in this country the fashionable father usually claims the
privilege of sending them on this first stage of their married life in
his own carriage. However, the groom buys the ring and a bouquet for
the bride, furnishes dainty presents for the bridemaids, remembers the
best man and the ushers, pays the clergyman's fee, the size of which
is to be regulated only by his inclination, or the length of his
purse-strings, and furnishes the marriage license.


Naming the Day.

This privilege belongs by right to the lady herself, but, in reality,
the business engagements of the groom, and the time when he can best
leave for the bridal tour have much to do in settling the exact date
for which the invitations shall be issued. In very fashionable circles
it is the mother that names the day of her daughter's marriage.

Time was when during the two weeks, or longer, elapsing between the
issuing of the invitations and the occurrence of the wedding, the
bride-expectant was not to be seen in public, nor by chance callers at
the house, a custom which still prevails to some extent, but is
superseded in the most fashionable circles by a series of especial
entertainments given during this interval.

It frequently happens that one, or each, of the bridemaids entertains
the bride and other bridemaids at a lunch or dinner, either informally
or on a large scale. Some married friend of the family may give a
large farewell dinner to Miss ---- and her bridemaids; and the bride
herself, or her mother, may give a rehearsal dinner. Ordinary
invitations, however, are not to be accepted.

If the presents are not to be exhibited at the wedding reception, the
bride frequently gives an informal tea the day before to her lady
friends for the purpose of displaying them. She should also, for her
health's sake, take a daily drive.


Announcing the Engagement.

An engagement is now frequently announced in rather a formal manner.
This, however, is not usually done until a short time previous to the
marriage itself. Sometimes it comes out in the society papers
immediately after it has been made known to the kinfolk and intimate
friends. Felicitations follow as a matter of course.

Sometimes a dinner-party is given by the parents of the bride-elect
and the announcement is made by the host just before leaving the
table. Congratulations follow. Sometimes notes are written by the
young lady or her mother in announcement.

If the families of the contracting parties have been strangers
heretofore it is expected that the gentleman's family will make the
first call. Any friends that choose may give entertainments in honor
of the couple.

The lady does not make any ceremonious calls after this announcement
has been made, it being supposed that before this occurs she shall
have left cards upon all her friends. If no formal announcement is
made the bride-to-be must, before invitations are issued, leave cards
with her friends and acquaintances. In the city she need not enter to
make a personal call, in the country she will probably find it
necessary so to do.


Wedding Gifts.

There is much to be said for and against the custom of wedding
presents. And while the fact remains that they too often become the
vehicle for an expenditure so uncalled-for as to encroach upon
vulgarity in its excess, another fact still exists, that the simple
remembrances of friends are very grateful to the bride, who, perhaps,
is bound for a distant home where every loving token will recall a
well-known face.

Then remember your friends on their wedding day, wisely, and according
to their tastes and your own resources, for:

    "Policy counselleth a gift,
    Given wisely and in season,
    And policy afterward approveth it,
    For great is the power of gifts."

By those so desiring, the words, "No presents," or "No presents
received," may be engraved in the left hand corner of the card. This
is often a relief to many of the guests, and, at the same time does
not prevent the very intimate friends, as well as members of the
family, from sending quietly such gifts as they may choose, which, of
course, are not exhibited.

Where presents are to be given they are frequently sent some time in
advance, and the bride often takes much pleasure in arranging them for
exhibition in some upstairs room. Each article is accompanied by the
card of the giver; these are removed or not, as may be desired before
exhibition.

The bride acknowledges the reception of each gift by a graceful little
note of thanks. Some of them doubtless will come from persons unknown
to her, friends of the groom, and to these she must be especially
prompt in returning her acknowledgments.


List of Invitations.

Making up the list of invitations should be attended to carefully. The
engaged couple should carefully prepare their respective lists and the
mother of the bride should attentively scan names, for from this is to
be made up the future visiting list of her daughter, and she cannot
but hesitate at burdening her at the outset of her new life with a
host of calling acquaintances, hence is forced to exclude every
ineligible name; a cutting painful but oftimes necessary.


Ushers.

The duties of the ushers in a church wedding are very important. At
large weddings as many as half a dozen, or more, ushers are sometimes
needed to manage the great number of guests. They usually appoint one
of their number as head usher, and to him falls the duty of deciding
on the space to be reserved for near relatives, which is to be divided
from the remainder of the church by white ribbons. He makes sure that
the organist is in place, indicates the approach of the bridal party
that the Wedding March may greet them, and instructs the other ushers
as to their respective duties.

Ushers must escort guests to their seats, and as relatives of the
groom are seated on the right of the main aisle, or center of the
church, and those of the bride on the left, it is proper for an usher
to ask any one with whom he may be unacquainted whether their
relationship is to the bride or groom.

In escorting guests to their seats an usher gives his right arm to a
lady. A gentleman who may be in her company should follow after.

The guests assembled, part of the ushers should leave the church at
once and drive to the bride's residence in order to be there to
receive the bridal party upon their return.


"The Best Man."

The "best man" is usually an intimate friend or relative of the groom.
He drives to the church with him, stands by his side at the
altar-rails while he awaits the approach of the bride, and, stepping
back, it is he that holds the groom's hat during the ceremony and
hands it to him at its close. To him is confided the payment of the
wedding fee, and if there is a marriage register he signs as a
witness. He then drives by himself to the bride's home, reaching there
in time to receive the bridal party and to assist the ushers in the
presentation of guests to the newly-married couple. He also makes the
necessary arrangements about their departure, secures the tickets,
and, if their destination is to be kept a secret, to him alone is it
confided.

It occasionally happens that there are as many groomsmen as there are
bridemaids, but this is the exception and the "best man" takes their
place.

The ushers frequently form, two and two, and precede the bridal party
up the aisle.


Bridemaids.

The number of these is optional, from one to twelve being allowable.
Four, six or eight are usually chosen. Unmarried sisters of the bride
and groom are frequently selected. Custom emphatically declares that
they must be younger than the bride. For an elder sister thus to
officiate would be extremely inappropriate.

Indeed, the favored fashion of the present time is for little tots,
all the way from three or four to eight, clad in bewitchingly quaint
and picturesque costumes and crowned by the largest of Gainsboro'
hats, to precede the bridal couple to the chancel. In addition to
these, the bride is followed by a chosen number of bridemaids as well,
but often the children are all. Frequently they carry baskets of
flowers, and, preceding the newly-made wife in her progress down the
church aisle, they scatter the blossoms in her pathway.

Sometimes this order is changed, and children rise in groups from
seats near the front, and, preceding the bridal _cortège_ to the door,
scatter flowers before them. Children selected for this purpose should
be under ten. Young boys, selected from among relatives, are sometimes
dressed as pages and accompany the bride as train-bearers.

Bridemaids usually consult the bride as to their toilets, and each
other as well, that there may be no unfortunate combinations of color
to mar the effect of the whole. They usually dress in colors, unless
the bride choose some faint tint for her costume; then it is customary
for them to wear pure white, and sometimes the whole group are clad in
spotless purity.

The bridemaids' gowns are walking length, as a rule, and they wear
large, picturesque hats, overshadowed with plumes or adorned with
flowers, and carry huge bunches, or baskets, of fragrant blossoms.
Wealthy brides, who have some special fancy to carry out, often
provide the gowns for their maids. Historic styles are frequently
chosen, making every gown after the exact mode of the epoch selected,
but adopting a different color for each.

Where there is but one bridemaid, if she be escorted at all, which is
not always done, it should be by some friend, not the "best man,"
whose duties in attendance on the groom are all-sufficient.

Bridemaids should not refuse the proffered honor, if possible for them
to accept. If, after acceptance, unforeseen circumstances should occur
to prevent participation in the festivities, no time should be lost in
sending a regret and full explanation, so that her place may be
supplied in time to prevent disarrangement of the entire plan.


A Church Wedding.

A church wedding is more picturesque and solemn than any other form of
celebrating the marriage rite and the etiquette of all full-dress
affairs of this nature is essentially the same.

The groom drives first to the church, accompanied by his "best man"
and enters either vestry or church parlor. The relatives, the mother
of the bride and the bridemaids now drive to the church in carriages,
closely followed by the carriage of the bride and her father.

By this time it is supposed that the carpet and awning, if it is a
city church, are in place, the invited guests assembled, and the
bridal procession immediately forms, entering the church and passing
up the aisle to the strains of the wedding march. In England a lovely
innovation is made on this threadbare custom by having a chorus of
boy-voices sing an epithalamium, or wedding ode, during their
progress. This custom has found its way here in some ritualistic
churches where the vested choir march, two and two, at the head of the
bridal procession, singing as they march. Sometimes as high as forty,
and even seventy, in number swell the _cortège_.

The order of progression is as follows: first the ushers, (unless
there are choristers to take the lead) who march up the aisle by
twos, keeping step with the music, then, if there are child-bridemaids,
they follow in the same order. Some brides have two, some four or six
of these dainty dots of maids. The children are followed by the grown
bridemaids, also two by two. Sometimes children alone fill the place,
there being no grown maids. The maids, both children and grown folk,
are arranged according to their height and the harmony of color in
their gowns.

[Illustration: THE MARRIAGE CEREMONY.]

After them comes the bride leaning on the right arm of her father. It
sometimes happens that she walks up the aisle alone, and again that
she is accompanied by some male relative who is to take a father's
place in giving her away. Occasionally young brothers, mere boys in
age, are permitted to assume this touching duty.

At the altar steps the ushers separate and pass to the right and left,
the bridemaids also separate in a similar manner, leaving space for
the bridal couple. The groom, having come from the vestry, accompanied
by the "best man," should be standing in readiness to advance, take
the bride by her right hand and turn to the clergyman, who proceeds
with the marriage formula sanctioned by his faith.

At that point in the service where the question is asked, "Who giveth
this woman to be married to this man?" the father, or whoever takes
his place, should bow, and then in a moment leave the group and seat
himself beside the bride's mother in the front pew at the left.

In a ritualistic church the bride and groom at once kneel before the
officiating clergyman, who will signify to them at what point of the
service to rise. Hassocks should be provided for the occasion.

The first bridemaid, or maid of honor, takes her stand close to, and
slightly back of, the bride, that she may be ready to take her
bouquet, if she has one, remove her glove, or, as is the better custom
in this day of many-buttoned gloves, to turn back the neatly-ripped
glove-finger that the ring may be adjusted, and to hold her bouquet or
prayer-book when necessary. In the meantime, it is the "best man" who
hands the ring to the clergymen in readiness for use.


After the Ceremony.

The service over, which may or may not have been accompanied by low,
slow music, the clergyman shakes hands with and congratulates the
newly-wedded couple (kissing being no longer permissible), the groom
draws the bride's right hand within his left arm and conducts her to
the carriage, taking the center aisle if the church have one; if not,
taking the opposite from that by which they entered, the bride, her
veil over her face, neither recognizing nor paying the slightest
apparent heed to any one in the church. The organ peals forth, the
procession re-forms and follows to the door, first the bridemaids,
next the ushers. If there have been choristers, they lead the line,
chanting as before, until their voices die out of hearing in the
vestibule. Often, too, the child-bridemaids precede the couple as they
leave the church, scattering flowers before them, the whole forming a
very pretty pageant to the eye. The church may have been richly
decorated with flowers and potted plants.

Where there is but one bridemaid or maid of honor, as she is then
called, she attends to all the duties necessary, but the bridal
procession is shorn somewhat of its fair proportions.

The vestibule reached, certificate or church register signed, the
bride is cloaked, and, entering a carriage with her husband, is
quickly driven home, the guests remaining in their seats until the
cessation of the wedding march, when they, too, enter their carriages.
Meanwhile the "best man" takes the shortest route possible to the same
destination in order to assist the head usher, who with, perhaps, some
of the other ushers, is supposed to be already there, in receiving the
bridal party and guests as they reach the house. The remaining ushers
busy themselves in assisting the bridemaids to their carriages and
speeding them onward that they, if possible, may reach the house in
time to receive the bride and groom.

If the church wedding be in the evening the same order will be
observed, save that the gentlemen wear evening dress.


The Reception.

At the house the ushers introduce the guests to the newly-married
couple who, together with the bridemaids, form a group to receive the
good wishes of the company. The parents of the bride stand a little
apart from this party and receive the felicitations of their guests in
behalf of their daughter's welfare. The parents of the groom, if
present, form part of this group.

If the company is very large it is well to divide the centers of
attractions by placing the young couple in one room and the parents in
another, thus compelling a freer circulation of the guests, who else
would crowd the bridal party to suffocation.

The house may be profusely decorated with flowers, and the rooms
though daylight reign without, may have been carefully darkened only
to be re-illuminated by the softer radiance of waxen candles or shaded
gas jets.


Refreshments.

The banquet may be as elaborate as desired, but is usually served in
the refreshment room from the _buffet_, guests repairing thither at
any time where they are served by attendants, ushers seeing that
ladies unattended by gentlemen are invited to partake and properly
served.

Tea or coffee is not considered a necessity, though, in compliance
with tastes that do not yield easily to fashion's decree, it is
usually to be had, but in winter bouillon, in cups, is usually
offered. Wine, of course, depends upon the scruples of the
entertainers. Salads, lobster, salmon, etc., birds and dainty rolled
sandwiches, do duty for meats. Fancy cakes, such as maccaroons,
kisses, etc., are always offered, together with ices. The variety of
other cakes is always at the option of the hostess, save the
regulation rich black fruit, or groom's cake, and the bride's snowy
loaf. These are necessities, and if the bride so far conform to the
old custom of "cutting the cake" as to make one incision therein with
a wonderful silver knife, "ye ancient superstition" is satisfied, and
the work of cutting it and packing in dainty boxes to be carried home,
if this be wished, is deputed to attendants. These boxes are deposited
in some convenient place within reach of the departing guests.

When there are a number of elderly guests it is generally thought best
to set two or more small tables in the refreshment-room, or an
ante-room, where they may be comfortably accommodated with seats, and
one of the ushers should see that they are so seated and promptly
served.


Rehearsals.

In view of the complicated arrangements made necessary for the proper
carrying out of a fashionable church wedding, and in consideration of
the large number of people involved in the ceremony and the necessity
of each one being in the right place at the right moment, in order to
prevent confusion, it will be seen that some preparation is necessary
before all can act in concert.

The needed drill is usually given by an exact rehearsal of the entire
affair, to give which, the whole party meet at the church and
rehearse, so to speak, their respective parts; the forming into
procession, the parting right and left at the chancel and the
re-forming to return to the vestibule, being all gone through with to
the sound of music, until every part of the long procession moves like
clockwork.

The grouping of the bridemaids, the appointed duties of maid of honor
and "best man," even to the smallest details, are all made perfect,
until even the principal actors in the scene can retire without fear
of any disaster to come.

This rehearsal is frequently made the occasion of a rehearsal dinner,
given by the mother of the bride, at which the intimate participants
of the wedding-to-come entertain and refresh themselves.


The Wedding Breakfast.

Wedding breakfasts are an exclusively English fashion, but are
gradually creeping into favor here. The breakfast does not differ from
the ordinary reception, save that it is usually at an earlier hour and
is more frequently a "sit-down affair."

The guests all go into the refreshment room at the same time, even
though it sometimes happens that the assembly is so large that no one
but the bridal party and immediate relatives are provided with seats
at small tables. In this case, the gentlemen help the ladies and
themselves from a long table in the center of the room, the whole
affair, under these circumstances, being simply a cold collation.
Gentlemen leave their hats in the hall; ladies retain bonnet and
gloves.

After the usual greetings to the bridal pair and a few minutes general
conversation, the repast is announced and the guests proceed to the
appointed room in the usual fashion--bride and groom, bride's father
and groom's mother, groom's father and bride's mother, "best man" and
maid of honor, other bridemaids and gentlemen appointed, usually
ushers, etc.

A "stand-up" breakfast has many things in its favor. It is more easily
served than one where all the guests are seated at a table that, in
everything but name, is a dinner table; it is less formal and
therefore pleasanter, and far more guests can be accommodated. The
refreshments are the same as for a reception.


Departure.

After mingling with the guests for a short time the bride quietly
withdraws to don her traveling garb, and soon descends the stairway.
She is met at the foot by her bridemaids, who part and form in line on
either hand, through which dainty pathway she passes to join the
groom.

Quick good-bys are said, the carriage is entered and whirls rapidly
away, followed by showers of rice and cast-off slippers, and the
pretty scene is ended.


Home Weddings.

Home weddings are attended with much less trouble, fatigue and expense
than fashionable church weddings. The clergyman enters the room and
stands facing the people; the bridal couple follow and stand facing
him. Hassocks are provided for kneeling, if desired. The father, or
some near male relative, stands ready, in sight of the clergyman, to
give away the bride. He should simply bow his affirmation when the
question is asked.

There are many additions that may be made to this simple ceremony,
such as a troop of pretty children holding white ribbons each side to
mark the path the bridal pair must walk to reach the minister, while
the sweet strains of a hidden band of musicians may accompany their
footsteps.

Floral decorations, within limits, are beautiful and appropriate, but
where they are so lavishly displayed as to remind more of the
florist's bill than the beauty of the blossoms, their effect is lost
in a certain vulgarity that attends all too-visible evidences of
outlay.

One pretty idea is to carry out the fancy of having one kind of
flower, massed according to the chosen design, serve for the
decorations, at flower weddings; for example, rose weddings, lily
weddings, daffodil weddings, etc. The design itself is according to
the taste of the florist or the family, and is a subject changing so
easily with the season or the fashion as to merit no mention here.

The supper may be as elegant an affair as one chooses to make it. If
served by caterers, all care is removed from the hostess as to
possible accidents, and she is left free to entertain her guests.

At evening weddings the company remains late or not, according to the
hour of the bride's departure. Sometimes dancing is arranged as one
of the evening's amusements. If so, the bride may, if she choose, open
the first quadrille with the "best man." Should she do this, the groom
is expected to dance with the first bridemaid.

The bride can slip away at any time, to reappear in traveling costume,
and bidding a quick farewell, disappear from the company, who, after
this, begin to disperse.

One most pleasant custom, English in its origin, should not be
forgotten; it is that of remembering all the servants with some little
gift as a souvenir of the occasion.


Invitations to Church Weddings.

There is a good deal of dispute in regard to the etiquette of
acknowledgment of a card for a church wedding. Some high authorities
assert that the invitation is so general and means so little
particular attention that no notice need be taken of it except in the
regular line of future visits to the bride and to the bride's mother.
But one of our American social oracles declares that a card is
obligatory at the hour of the wedding, if one cannot attend, and that
if the house address is unknown, this card should be sent to the
church. If this is necessary, most people err woefully, for few
non-attendants send the card.

For church weddings everything pertains to formality, and the
invitation as well as the ceremony is impressive in all details. The
names of the parents heading the invitation are now more often written
in full, thus insuring a good-looking line at the top of the note. The
line, "request the honor of your presence," almost invariably appears
on a church invitation with "honor" spelled with a "u."

The names of bride and groom are separated by the little word "to,"
although some consider "and" quite as proper.

The omission of the prefix "Miss" from the daughter's name is
customary on an invitation but should never occur when the bride is a
sister, cousin or niece of the people issuing the invitations. If a
widow is re-marrying, she uses the prefix "Mrs." with her Christian
names and the surname of her deceased husband. If the bride is an
orphan, with no one to issue the invitations for her, the heading
reads, "The honor of your presence is requested," etc. When the bride
has more names than one it is customary to use all.

The address of a well-known church is generally omitted, although it
is frequently a convenience for out-of-town friends to know it. Names
of churches ending with "s," as Saint Thomas, are written with an
apostrophe "s"--thus, Saint Thomas's.


Dress for the Occasion.

The Bride's Dress may be as elegant as desired, or as simple, but it
is to be hoped that the custom of using pure white in the composition
of the toilet will not be superseded by any passing freak of Dame
Fashion's for softly tinted bridal robes. This innovation should be
stoutly resisted by all brides-to-be. If the white robe is simple in
material, a simple style should be chosen for the making; richer goods
allow of more elaboration. The bride wears no jewels, and the typical
orange-blossoms and myrtle are supposed to crown her brow. As a fact,
however, other white flowers, such as roses, lilacs, lilies-of-the-valley,
are more frequently chosen.

Where the wedding decorations are of one flower exclusively, that
blossom alone figures in the bridal wreath and bouquet. Some High
Church brides carry an ivory or silver-bound prayer-book in preference
to flowers; thus associating it with the most sacred vows of their
life and hoping to preserve it as an heirloom in the family.

White shoes and gloves are to be worn with this toilet. The best taste
prescribes a high corsage for the bridal costume, and sleeves either
to the elbow or longer, in either case to be met by the long kid
gloves. This gives a certain modesty to the toilet that is in keeping
with the occasion. By many brides who expect to wear their bridal
costume to after evening entertainments, the wedding gown is
frequently supplied with two corsages; the high for the wedding day
and the low for evening wear.

The Veil is usually of thin, sheer tulle, as this is most becoming to
the face, but those brides who can display fine old point on this
occasion will be very apt so to do. If the bridal costume is to be
worn on any other occasion, it must be divested of orange-blossoms and
worn without the veil.

The above-described costume is appropriate for either a morning or
evening wedding. Brides, who are married in traveling costume, should
wear a bonnet rather than a hat.

The Groom's Dress is decided by the hour at which the wedding takes
place. If it is in the evening, the conventional evening dress is
imperative. Black suit, dress coat, low-cut waistcoat, white tie,
white or pale pearl-colored gloves, thin patent leather shoes and
possibly a white flower in the buttonhole, constitute proper costume.


Morning Costume.

At a morning wedding, that is, one taking place at any hour between
ten and seven (before which time a dress suit can by no possibility
appear) full morning costume is worn by the groom. This consists of a
dark frock coat, dark waistcoat and lighter trousers; a stiff hat, a
light scarf and gloves if desired. The gloves should be light but not
evening tints; pale tan or gray being suitable. The Groomsmen's Dress
is decided by the hour and by the dress of the groom, of which it is a
faithful copy.

The Usher's Dress follows the same law as that of the groomsmen, save
that if wedding favors are worn it is by the ushers only. The other
gentlemen present will find it well to copy the same styles, save that
those only who are immediately connected with the ceremony are
expected to wear white gloves.

The Bridemaid's Dress has been already described.

Friends in Mourning are expected to lay aside their somber robings for
this hour. Even the widowed mother is bound to don either a pale gray,
or a deep purple, costume for the occasion, the presence of black at
so joyous a moment always casting a certain shadow over the party.

The Traveling Dress. This is occasionally worn by brides who do not
wish to incur the haste and annoyance of changing their costume
before leaving for the bridal tour. This is done at times even when
the ceremony is performed in church, but is almost always resorted to
where the wedding is quiet. Sometimes this dress is as elaborate as is
at all consistent with good taste for traveling, and when this is the
case it is usually exchanged for the regulation traveling gown at the
first stopping place in their journey. More frequently, and more
appropriately, the plain tailor-made suit, with gloves and hat in
harmony, is made to do duty. In any case where the bride chooses to
wear a traveling costume, even should the ceremony be performed in the
evening, the groom will wear a morning costume.


A Quiet Wedding.

To many people the idea of so much splendor and ceremony on the
occasion of their marriage has in it something distasteful, and to
others the physical weariness thereby incurred is almost an
impossibility. In this case the quietest of ceremonies may be chosen.
It may take place in church if the bride desire this further seal of
solemnity set upon the service, with parents and one or two friends
for witnesses; or at home with the family and clergyman only present,
the bridal couple being driven from thence directly to the depot if
the stereotyped wedding tour is to follow.


Re-marriage.

A widow, re-marrying, no matter how youthful she may be, is prohibited
from wearing the white gown, veil and orange-blossoms of the bride.
Neither may she surround herself with a bevy of bridemaids. Her
wedding, to be absolutely correct, should be quietly solemnized and
her garb a traveling dress.

Still, if she should wish, she may wear the most elegant of tinted
silks, the most elaborate in make-up, and have a large and elegant
assembly to witness her marriage and participate in its festivities,
but no bridemaids are allowable.

At a church wedding she should be attended by her father, brother,
other male relative, or some friend. She should always remove the
first wedding ring from her finger before the service and not again
assume it. Invitations to the marriage of a widow are engraved with
her whole name, maiden and married, thus: ELIZABETH STUART FIELDING.

If she have sons or unmarried daughters at the time of her second
marriage she should prefix their last name to her new one on all
ceremonious occasions in which they also are interested, thus: MRS.
STUART FIELDING GRANT and MISS FIELDING, At Home. 20 Grosvenor Square.


The Ring.

The fourth finger of the left hand, counting from the thumb, is the
finger upon which the engagement and wedding rings are worn. The
engagement ring varies in extravagance according to the means of the
groom, and has almost always a set of some description; the wedding
ring is always the same, a plain, round-edged band of gold. Initials
and dates may be engraved in both.

The engagement ring is usually worn afterward as a guard for the
wedding ring. As to its setting there is a wide latitude given wherein
all the pretty conceits and superstitions attached to precious stones
may be exercised at will. The German consider pearls unlucky for
brides, as significant of tears. Birth-month stones may be used, even
the fateful opal losing its power for harm when worn by an October
maiden. The turquoise is perhaps the favored of precious stones for
this purpose. The old Persian proverb says that "He that hath a
turquoise hath a friend." Its known power of turning pale under
certain climatic influences has invested it in story with the power of
not only warding off evil influences, rendering its wearer constant
and assuring success in love, but still more of revealing by a certain
pallor of coloring, coming danger or the existence of inconstancy in
its wearer. It is also said that in case of a fall the turquoise takes
all injury upon itself; the stone being fractured and the owner being
uninjured. Add to this the item that the stone must be a gift, not a
purchase, to possess these marvelous powers, and it will be seen that
it is admirably suited to adorn an engagement ring. The diamond is
another very appropriate stone for this purpose, either _solitaire_ or
in cluster.

[Illustration: THE WEDDING GIFT.]


Reception Days.

It is necessary for the bride to include her new address with her
wedding invitations, unless, as is still more "chic," cards for
several reception days are issued after her return. These dates being
fixed, it is then that first calls may be made upon her at her new
residence with the happy certainty of finding her at home.

At these quiet, informal receptions, she receives simply as a member
of society, wearing usually a rich, dark silk without any reminders of
her recent bridehood.


WEDDING ANNIVERSARIES.

The wedding anniversaries are numerous, but only a few of these are
habitually observed. Paper, wooden, tin, crystal, silver and golden
are the favorite ones, the others being so rare as to hardly merit
being included in the list.

The following complete list of the anniversaries, with the respective
dates of their occurrence, may be useful for reference:

First Anniversary                                  Paper Wedding.
Second Anniversary                                Cotton Wedding.
Third Anniversary                                Leather Wedding.
Fifth Anniversary                                 Wooden Wedding.
Seventh Anniversary                               Woolen Wedding.
Tenth Anniversary                                    Tin Wedding.
Twelfth Anniversary                       Silk and Linen Wedding.
Fifteenth Anniversary                            Crystal Wedding.
Twentieth Anniversary           China (sometimes Floral) Wedding.
Twenty-Fifth Anniversary                          Silver Wedding.
Thirtieth Anniversary                              Pearl Wedding.
Thirty-Fifth Anniversary                           Coral Wedding.
Fortieth Anniversary                                Ruby Wedding.
Forty-Fifth Anniversary                           Bronze Wedding.
Fiftieth Anniversary                              Golden Wedding.
Sixty-Fifth Anniversary                    Crown-Diamond Wedding.
Seventy-Fifth Anniversary                        Diamond Wedding.

It may be well to mention here that the twentieth anniversary is
considered unlucky to celebrate, or even to mention.

The manner of sending out invitations and accepting and refusing the
same has been fully described in the proper department, and a few
words only will be necessary as to the gifts and entertainment
suitable on such occasions.

Tin and Paper Weddings and some other of the earlier anniversaries are
usually occasions for happy frolics, and merry jests as to the form
the gifts will take, though the paper wedding gives place for the
presentation of elegant books, and a supply of fashionable stationery
that is sufficient to fill the family needs for a long space of time.


Suitable Presents.

The Wooden Wedding is a little more expensive in its demands, and the
gifts range from elegant _suites_ of carved furniture down to dainty
bits of hand-carving in the shape of panels and placques; and from
rolling-pin and potato-masher all the way up to oaken mantles, rich
with all manner of ingenious fret-work of design.

The Crystal Wedding may also show forth a glittering array of gifts
both ornamental and useful.

The Silver Wedding is, perhaps, the most important of all the wedding
anniversaries. This arises partly from the fact that it is most
generally observed, partly because of the value of its gifts, and,
more than aught else, because the date of its observance finds the
happy pair still in the enjoyment of comparative youth and with length
of days still before them. In the matter of presents it is almost
impossible to go amiss, since there is scarcely an article of use or
ornament from dining-room to reception-room and from the library desk
to my lady's toilet table, that has not been made a thing of beauty
and a joy forever by the silversmith's art.

The Golden Wedding, from the advanced age at which it occurs, has an
element of sadness in its celebration. The aged couple who stand so
near the brink of separation can have little of bridal joy as they
look back to the day when they stood before the altar in the first
flush of youth, with life before them, or as they look forward to the
shortened span of years that links them to their loved ones here. The
gifts that are laid before them should be fitly wrought of gold, since
their love has been as gold tried in the furnace of life.

If the family means are insufficient for numerous valuable gifts, let
all the friends "club" together and purchase some fitting souvenir for
the occasion. Golden-rod forms an appropriate floral decoration.

But, after all, the chief idea and the pleasure of this anniversary is
the gathering together of as many as possible of the relatives that
yet remain to greet the pair at this, the golden milestone of their
life's journey.


Speeches and Congratulations.

The Diamond Wedding occurs so seldom, and is so much like the others
in the manner, if not the matter of its gifts, as to scarcely require
mention here.

The entertainment at these anniversary celebrations is very much the
same as at weddings or other gatherings. The refreshments may be
served at tables, or a "stand up" collation given. In this latter
case, there should be one or two tables set for the elders of the
party.

At Silver and Golden Weddings presentation speeches are frequently
made by some friend, and at golden anniversaries a regular program is
oftentimes carried out. Anniversary poems are read, "The Hanging of
the Crane" recited, congratulatory telegrams from absent friends are
announced, and any old acquaintances present that can be persuaded to
say a few words of "ye olden times" are pressed into service. Good
taste, however, would seem to prevent any repetition of the marriage
service on such an occasion.

Cards in acknowledgment of bridal presents are worded in the following
fashion: MR. and MRS. GEORGE H. BRANDON express sincere thanks to ----
for the beautiful wedding gift. June 18th. 62 West 126th street.

An ultra-fashionable bride, supplying herself with several packages of
these stereotyped acknowledgments, has nothing to do but fill in the
name of the sender and thus avoid infinite labor.

[Illustration: AN UNSEASONABLE CALL.]

[Illustration: A FIVE O'CLOCK TEA.]




HOME ETIQUETTE.

[Illustration]


Good manners are a plant of slow growth, and one that should be
cultivated in the home circle.

"Give a boy address, and it opens palaces to him," says Emerson, and
nowhere is this address, "this habit of encounter," so easily gained
as within the walls of home. There his character is formed for life.

Good breeding, in reality, is but the outcome of "much good sense,
some good nature, and a little self-denial exercised for the sake of
others, with a view to obtain the same indulgence from them."

These words of the scholar, Chesterfield, learned as he was in worldly
lore, and satisfied of the expediency of such observances from a
selfish standpoint, are but another, and more selfish, rendering of
the Golden Rule, whose value as a rule of action in life is apparent.

Courtesy, it must be conceded, is not only pleasant, but profitable in
all places, and at all times, but more especially in the home circle
are its virtues most brilliantly set forth.


Courtesies of Married Life.

"Marriage very rarely mends a man's manners," is a sadly true
statement of the playwright Congreve, and one whose truth touches
women also as concerning the marriage state.

If the slight formalities that are the bulwarks of love as well as
friendship, many forbearances, and more of the small, sweet courtesies
of life, were but permitted to blossom forth like unexpected flowers
beneath the family roof-tree, fewer unhappy marriages would catalogue
their miseries in the divorce court.

The man who takes off his hat as politely to his wife when he parts
from her on the street as he would to his lady acquaintance of
yesterday; who opens the door for her to enter; who would no more
speak harshly to her than to any other lady, is very likely to retain
her first affection and to add to it that sweeter, closer love that
comes of knowledge and companionship.


What Women Admire.

Women admire fine manners and graceful attentions. The man who never
forgets their tastes; who remembers wedding anniversaries and
birthdays; is interested in their pursuits, and ready with an
appreciative word of praise, is the man that claims their admiration
by virtue of thoughtfulness and consideration.

This man, too, would be far more apt to hold a woman's affection than
the best and most upright of his sex, who is thoughtless and
indifferent, not of her physical comfort, but of all her pet fancies
and sentiments, who never saw her new gowns, and is profoundly
neglectful of all those trifles, light as air, which go far toward
making up the sum of woman's happiness or misery.


What Men Desire.

Hepworth Dixon, on being asked what men most desire in a wife, and
what quality held them longest, unhesitatingly replied, "That she
should be a pillow." Then, noting the inquiry thus suggested, he went
on to say: "What a man most needs is that he should find in his wife a
pillow whereon to rest his heart. He longs to find a moment's rest
from the outer whirl of life, to win a ready listener that sympathizes
where others wound." And she whose eyes are flattering mirrors, whose
lips console and soothe, will find that she has secured a hold upon
the heart of her husband, that the embodiment of all the virtues of
her sex could not secure, were she wanting in this sympathetic tact.

Sweet-tempered people are the joy of the world. Their civilities,
their self-sacrifice, their thoughtfulness for others it is that oils
the wheels of domestic life. People who, according to the old phrase,
have "tempers of their own," are not, at the best, agreeable
companions. We may respect their good qualities, but we are apt to
give them a wide berth where possible. But when they are inmates of
our own households, the evil spirit must be confronted and exorcised
if possible.

Many a wife has, by exercising her own self-control, subdued and
shamed a tyrannical, evil-tempered husband into a better disposition,
but never by argument, dispute, or anger on her part.

Many a husband, too, has by the firmness and sweetness of his own
temper, won his young, impatient wife, tried by the half-understood
cares of her new existence, to evenness of spirit and control of
temper. "It is impossible to be cross where Charlie is," said one
young wife, taken from a home where self-control had never been
taught. "I am always ashamed of it afterward."


Fault-Finding.

"Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil our vines," and of the
insidious foxes that spoil the tender fruitage of the household vine,
a fault-finding disposition is most dangerous.

A quick, ungovernable temper is not as destructive to household peace
and comfort as the nagging, carping, fault-finding spirit that sees
good in nothing. A temper that is like a tornado in its violence at
least clears the air as it passes, and is usually followed by quick
repentance and ready reparation. But the fault-finding, nagging,
suspicious temperament is a veritable foe in a man's own household.

Where no word of praise is heard, no commendation follows the
best-intentioned efforts, but the ceaseless nagging, the ever
recurring criticism meets one at every turn, it is not strange if the
ties of affection are too often strained even to breaking.

Temper proceeds from, and is an indication of the character. It is
inherited, even as features are; but, like features, it may be
modified by culture and training, and a temper thus conquered becomes
a very desirable possession.


Home Conversation.

Educate yourself, as a wife, to keep up with the times sufficiently to
be at least a companionable conversationalist. Read the papers, read
late books; endeavor to be as entertaining to your husband as you were
to your husband-elect.

[Illustration: ETIQUETTE OF THE DRAWING-ROOM.]

As a husband, share your knowledge of the activities of life with your
wife, who, from the very nature of her occupation is excluded from
much of its exciting whirl. Read together, talk together of art, of
music, of literature, of the stirring events of the outer world, and
put afar the evil day when topics of mutual interest shall have been
worn so threadbare that the average man and women must feel a strange
desire to fall asleep directly dinner is over.

Then, too, the children hunger for new ideas, and one of the greatest
educational advantages they can enjoy is to listen daily to the
conversation of intelligent people. Too many parents who are bright
and entertaining abroad are dull and uninteresting in their own
households, to the great detriment of their children and to their own
loss of intelligent companionship in one another.

"What little Jack learneth not, the same neither learneth great John."
There is a truth in this old saying that the parents and guardians of
children would do well to ponder in their hearts, for it is a well
substantiated statement that the first ten years of a child's life
stamp upon his character the imprint for good or ill-breeding. Thus is
spared the after struggle on their part to attain the grace and
self-possession that should have been theirs by birthright.

[Illustration: SUNSHINE AT HOME.]

Children are naturally imitative, hence the value of example over
precept. The children of courteous parents will imbibe courtesy as
naturally and unconsciously as the growing plant absorbs oxygen from
the air and sunlight that bathes its leaves and petals.

Softly modulated tones should mark the words spoken to a child, and
reproof carries an added weight when lowered tones convey the rebuke.
Even a baby before it can speak recognizes shades of meaning in the
tones the mother utters, and is soothed by the one and startled by the
other.

Kindliness, politeness of the parents one towards another, are the
first steps toward training children in the acquirement of good
manners. Gentleness and sweetness of manner can be taught at the
cradle far more surely than from the school-room desk, and when baby
has learned to preface its little wants with "please," and Master Four
Years-old to run and open the door for mamma, or mamma's visitors, or
to give up the easiest chair without being asked, the firm foundation
has been laid for courteous behavior in after life.

And so on, all through the school years, boys and girls may be so
taught to respect one another's possessions, letters, feelings, and to
discriminate closely between _meum_ and _tuum_ after such wise that
they will be made better husbands, better wives, better citizens, for
all their days.


Slang and Exaggerations.

By our own speech it is that we are sure to be judged, for,--

    "'Tis only man can words create,
    And cut the air to sounds articulate
    By nature's special charter. Nay, speech can
    Make a shrewd discrepance 'twixt man and man.
    It doth the gentleman from the clown discover;
    And from a fool the great philosopher.
    As Solon said to one in judgment weak:--
    'I thought thee wise until I heard thee speak.'"

And if we talk with flippancy and exaggeration, load our sentences
with slang phrases, and preface and punctuate them with oft-repeated
expressions of "Say!" "Well!" "You know," "Do tell," and so on, _ad
infinitum_, all wisdom, or propriety of speech will be lost.

It is difficult to believe in the refinement of a girl who permits her
fresh young lips to utter the slang of the bar-room hanger-on, the
gambler and the street gamin.

Equally difficult is it to believe in the absolute truthfulness of one
who declares to you that the heat of a lovely June day is "simply
awful" or "perfectly terrible," from sheer wonder as to what terms
she would use to characterize the intense heat of some sweeping fire.

[Illustration: THE INDUSTRIOUS HOUSEWIFE.]

Again, it is hard to understand the taste of one who informs you
gravely that "the chicken salad was too lovely for anything!" or the
last evening's sunset was "perfectly elegant!" The Websterian
definition of "elegant" being "polished, stylish, refined, etc.," it
is to be wished that all perpetrators of like sins could meet the
punishment a young lady once dealt to a gentleman who remarked with
great effusion: "This moonlight is perfectly elegant!" To this
observation she answered with gravity, "Yes, it really _is_ very
stylish!"

Let, therefore, all who strive for the grace of good breeding, men and
women, boys and girls alike, "set a watch over their lips and keep the
door of their mouth," for "words have wings, and so soon as their
cage, the mouth, is opened, out they fly and mount beyond our reach,
and past recovery."


Some Do's for Girls.

The following hints for girls, each prefaced by the auxiliary "Do,"
will prove a safe guide, not only for the girls but for any of their
elders who may choose to follow them.

Do answer your letters soon after they are received, and do try to
reply to them with some relation to their contents; a rambling,
ill-considered letter is a satire upon your education.

Do, when you talk, keep your hands still.

Do observe; the faculty of observation, well cultivated, makes
practical men and women.

Do attach as much importance to your mind as to your body.

Do be natural; a poor diamond is better than a good imitation.

Do try to remember where you put your gloves and cardcase; keep the
former mended and the latter filled.

Do recollect that your health is more important than your amusements;
you can live without one, but you'll die early without the other.

Do try to be sensible; it is not a particular sign of superiority to
talk like a fool.

[Illustration: THE PRINCESS OF WALES.]

[Illustration: A SOCIETY BELLE--"CALL AGAIN."]

[Illustration: A CALL FROM BABY'S ADMIRERS.]

Do be ready in time for church; if you do not respect yourself
sufficiently to be punctual, respect the feelings of other people.

Do get up in time for breakfast.

Do avoid causes of irritation in your family circle; do reflect that
home is the place in which to be agreeable.

Do be reticent; the world at large has no interest in your private
affairs.

Do cultivate the habit of listening to others; it will make you an
invaluable member of society, to say nothing of the advantage it will
be to you.

Do be truthful; do avoid exaggeration; if you mean a mile say a mile,
not a mile and a half; if you mean one say one, and not a dozen.


Young Ladies, Take Heed.

Do, sometimes, at least, allow your mother to know better than you do;
she was educated before you were born.

Do sign your full name to your letters.

Do learn to say "No."

Do, if you have brothers, try to gain their confidence, to be
interested in their sports, to cultivate their manners, not by
censure, but by the force of your own example.

Do laugh, girls, not boisterously, not constantly, but clearly and
pleasantly, but _don't_ giggle. If girls from fourteen to eighteen
could only understand the vulgarity of continually putting their heads
together and giggling, as if the whole world was a supremely
ridiculous affair, about which they must chuckle, and whisper, when in
truth their own actions are the one thing ridiculous, they would
refrain from such unmitigated nonsense.

Do be exquisitely neat in your attire. Beware of the lawn dress, the
light kids, the collar, the laces that are worn once too often.

Do be careful about giving away your photographs, especially to men.
You would hardly like to hear the comments that are sometimes passed
upon them. If you cannot learn to say "No," refrain from displaying
them to your gentleman friends.


Some Do's for Boys.

As for boys, there are a few "Do's" for them to consider if they would
become that noblest work of God, a true man, a gentleman.

Do respect your father and mother and give them their proper titles at
all times. To call them "the Governor" and "the old lady," does not in
the least add to your supposed manliness, but rather displays a very
unmanly fear on your part that people might suppose you were in some
degree under their authority; not only an unmanly, but a foolish fear,
since no one is fit for authority until he has first learned
obedience.

Do learn to respect women. Never speak slightingly of their worth, nor
trifle with their name. Learn the lesson now, and you will find its
value in your manhood.

Do treat your sisters and your girl schoolmates in a gentlemanly
manner. You have no idea how much it will add to your own appearance.

Do guard against a profusion of slang that would do credit to a
pickpocket.

Do be determined not to use profane expressions in the presence of
ladies, children, or ministers, or anywhere else.

Do keep your lips from uttering coarse and unclean things that you
would blush to have overheard by mother or sister. More than this, do
not listen to them from the lips of others. A pure-minded boy will be
a pure-minded man.

Do take care of your various belongings; do not expect mother or
sisters to pick up your necktie, your gloves, your schoolbooks, your
hat, from as many different places as there are articles, and put them
properly away. It is quite as necessary for boys or men to have some
neatness in their habits as for girls or women. Do learn to help
yourself occasionally. It is quite possible that you should be able to
arrange a necktie, comb your hair, or get the articles together for a
fresh toilet without calling some one to your assistance. Quite
possible and vastly convenient for other members of the household.

Do close the doors without slamming; don't tear the house down.

Do lower your voice sometimes; everyone is not deaf.

Do be neat in personal appearance; collars, handkerchiefs and cuffs,
should be spotlessly clean, and hands and finger nails receive careful
attention.

Do not fail to use three brushes every day--the tooth-brush, the
clothes-brush and the blacking-brush.

Do break yourself of disagreeable personal habits. Do not yawn in
people's faces, lounge in your chair, scratch head or person, or clean
finger-nails when others are present.

Do not forget to use your handkerchief, and that quietly as possible.

Do decide that temperate habits are more manly than intemperate ones,
and don't think that it is one of your "rights" to smoke cigarettes.

Do learn to say "No," to lead sometimes instead of always following.

Do be careful of your manners. Remember that as the twig is bent, so
the tree is inclined, and that the polished boy will be the polished
man. Polish, it is to be understood, is not inconsistent with
strength, but rather adds to it. The strongest machinery is of the
finest polish, and the Damascus blade is of the surest mettle.

Do be sure to give up your seat in omnibus or car to a lady. Even if
she be not sufficiently grateful, you have shown your good breeding.

Do remember to remove your hat when you enter a house, private office,
hotel elevator (if ladies are present), when you bow to a lady or when
you offer to assist a lady.

Do lay these "do's" up in your memory and practice them in your lives.


Guard the Voice.

A harsh voice, or shrill, high-pitched tones, are a source of
discomfort to all who hear them. Nothing gives a more favorable
impression of good breeding than a voice, musical, clear, low in its
key, and careful in its articulation.

George Eliot, who had a face of extreme plainness, possessed a low
musical voice that had a perfect fascination for the listener. At
times such a voice is the gift of nature, but usually it requires
careful cultivation, and the earlier the age at which this cultivation
begins, the surer and the simpler is the price of success.

Children can be early taught not to raise their voices shrilly to
demand attention, but to speak softly and gently at home, and then
their "company voice" will possess a natural quality. Train the tones
softly and sweetly now, and they will keep in tune through life.

Those whose early education in this respect has been neglected will
win success only at the price of eternal vigilance. A few lessons in
voice culture will work wonders in training the ear to appreciate the
different keys, the voice to acquire lower and richer tones, and the
articulation to become clear and distinct.

Even where there are serious vocal defects, such as stammering,
lisping, etc., they can be relieved by some good teacher of
voice-culture. Indeed, some attention to the culture of voices ought
to become a necessary part of education. A low, sweet voice is like a
lark's song in heart and home, and the self-control necessary to
always keep it at this harmonious level, exercises a most salutary
influence over mind and temper.


How to Treat Servants.

A large proportion of the domestic economy in many households is left
entirely in the hands of servants, and on the good or ill behavior of
these servants depends the comfort of the home, and the behavior of
the servants depends very greatly upon the behavior of their employers
toward them. The manner even of addressing servants in this country is
rather important, offense being so readily taken at what is deemed
disrespect.

Men servants may be addressed by their last name without any prefix.
If they have been in the family a long time the first name may be
used, if desired. In addressing servants that are perfect strangers it
can be generally managed without the use of any name. In writing to
them address without prefix, as, Robert Johnson.

Do not be insolent towards, or demand too much of, servants. They
have very much the same feelings of pride that the house-mistress has,
and the less those feelings are wounded the better help they will
render.

Do not reprimand them before guests. Nothing so injures their
self-respect or so tends to make them careless. Whatever the blunder,
be apparently unmoved in the presence of your guests. Save all reproof
until their departure. Have a perfect understanding of the work you
would have them perform, if you would have them accomplish it
satisfactorily. Ignorance never yet made a good master or mistress,
and always puts a premium on incompetency on the part of employés.


Have Rules and Enforce Them.

Require all house servants to be quiet in their movements, not to slam
doors or rattle china. Impress upon them the importance of dressing
neatly. Teach them to treat all comers with politeness; to answer the
door-bell promptly and to thoroughly understand whatever rules you may
have about being "engaged" or "not at home."

If reproof is to be administered or orders, given, it is much better
that the servant be called upstairs to receive them, than for the
house mistress to descend to the kitchen. This will insure an
opportunity should dispute arise of dismissing the employé to the
kitchen with but loss of dignity on her part; while, if it is in the
kitchen that the difference of opinion may arise, the house-mistress
must herself leave the field.

Insist upon systematic arrangement of the week's work, and punctuality
in carrying out its details. Explain carefully to all newly-engaged
servants the routine of the house and expect them to conform to it. Be
mild but firm in exercising authority, and servants will respect you
and your rules.

If there is a housekeeper, all these details will be committed to her
hands, and she has need to be competent, compelling respect, to be
fitted for the position. Teach servants not to expect fees from your
visitors.

Respect all their privileges. See that their evenings out, and their
precious Sunday afternoons are not encroached upon. Give them all the
needed opportunity to attend their own place of worship. See that
children of the family are respectful toward them, not disturbing them
at their work; prefacing their requests with "please," and thanking
them for any favor.


Rights of Others.

Respect the rights of all members of the household. Remember that each
one has a perfect right to open his or her own correspondence. No
difference if one is ready to confide the contents of the letter the
moment it is read, there is still a pleasure in opening one's own
correspondence.

Respect the belongings of another, no matter how close the
relationship. The careful member of the family suffers at seeing his
belongings misused and destroyed by the careless one. Discourage
borrowing among the members of a family. Teach each one to have all
necessary articles of their own and to care for them properly.

Guests in a family should also be very careful in this respect. Boxes,
drawers, or any repositories of any kind, should be scrupulously
respected. Private papers, even if not protected by lock and key,
should not be glanced at. A due observance of these rules, while
making home life pleasanter, might in after years lead to a little
less tampering with the larger rights of law and property, for
"manners are but the shadows of great virtues."

[Illustration]




ETIQUETTE FOR CHILDREN.

[Illustration]


Jean Paul Richter, in his great work on education (_Levana_),
intimates that we scarcely realize the momentous possibilities that
lie all about us folded up in the heart of childhood, as the blushing
petals of the beauteous blossom yet to be lie folded close within the
sheltering calyx.

"Do you know," he queries, "whether the little boy who plucks flowers
at your side may not one day, from his island of Corsica, descend as a
war-god into a stormy universe to play with hurricanes for
destruction, or to purify and plant the world with harvests?" And just
because we do not know the extent of these possibilities, children
must be carefully trained to fill whatever post or province may be
theirs in the time to come.

Now, they are in our hands to mold as we will; then, they will be the
masters, and much of the character of their sway will depend upon the
guidance of the present. Viewed in this light, the manners and the
morals of children, closely associated as they are, become of the
greatest importance to the world.


Power of Example.

Teach the embryo man or woman, in the nursery, the traits, the habits,
the customs of the best etiquette, and you have stamped upon them, at
an age when the character is impressible as wax, not only the outer
semblance, but, in a great degree, the inner reality, of a true man or
woman.

Let the children grow up in a home where rude gestures, or
ill-tempered words are unknown, where truthfulness, kindliness,
forgetfulness of self and careful consideration of others, permeates
the very atmosphere, and they will go forth into the world armed with
the integrity in which all men may trust, the polish that will win
them admiration, and the true refinement that will render their
friendship elevating.

See, also, that there is perfect unanimity between the parents as to
the government and instruction of the children in the household, and,
if any difference should arise, it should be settled in private.
Children, being strongly imitative, are best taught by example. Never
reprove unless absolutely necessary, and never let the voice rise
excitedly to ensure obedience. By keeping your own voice low and calm,
you do much toward lowering the key of their high-pitched, childish
treble, and soothing the troubled waters of their souls.


Keeping Promises.

Never permit yourself to threaten where you do not perform; children
are quick to learn the value of your promises, and place very accurate
estimates, in their own minds, as to what their parents will, or will
not do under given circumstances. Absolute truthfulness can never be
taught a child by precept, when by constant example he is taught that
the word of his parents has little or no value in his own case, so far
as threats and punishments, or even rewards, extend. If a punishment
is the penalty for a broken law, see that it is inflicted; if a reward
is promised, be sure that it is given.

Enjoin upon children strict justice in their dealings one with
another, even in their games, never allowing the stronger to impose
upon the weak, but teaching forbearance and tenderness in all their
actions.


Talebearing.

Discourage, as far as possible, all talebearing in the home, and, as a
rule, do not listen to complaints, and long recitals of injuries
received from little playfellows. Care in this respect will nip in the
bud the tendency toward exaggeration and talebearing that so early
develops in a child, and so soon matures into the "gossip" of riper
years. This demand for exactitude in childish statements will pave the
way for strictly truthful declarations in the more important affairs
of later life, redounding thus to the lasting benefit of the
individual and the community.


Truthfulness.

The least approach toward prevarication, or concealment of their
childish misdemeanors, should be treated as a grave fault. To prevent,
as far as possible, all attempts at disguising the truth, penalties
for faults should rarely be of so severe a nature that the little
transgressor resorts to evasion through fear of the consequences.


Respectfulness.

Children should be taught to be respectful toward their parents and
others older than themselves, to be polite towards those of their own
age, and very thoughtful for the comfort of the sick and weak. Respect
must also be shown toward servants and dependants, and no unnecessary
demands made upon their time or services.


Obedience.

Prompt obedience should always be demanded of a child, and the spirit
of murmuring and questioning firmly repressed. None can command except
they have first learned to obey.

Do not allow children to tease, nor, having once refused on good and
sufficient ground, suffer your consent to be gained by siege. Make
your refusal final, but do not refuse thoughtlessly, or for mere
caprice. The wishes of a child are as real to him as those of grown
people are to them.


Manner of Address.

Rudeness and abruptness must never be tolerated in the manners of a
child. "Yes," and "no," in reply, and "what?" in interrogatory, are
uncouth and disagreeable in sound. "Yes, sir," "Yes, ma'am," and
"What, ma'am," are much better substituted, but even these are open to
criticism. English etiquette relegates "Sir" and "Ma'am" to the use of
servants, save in case of addressing the higher nobility when "Sir" is
sometimes used.

[Illustration: THE NURSERY.]

The better and more graceful etiquette of the day would teach a child
to say, "Yes, mamma," "No, papa;" or a student at school to address
the teachers as, "Yes, Prof. Stanley," "No, Miss Livingstone." If they
fail to understand a remark, a quick, "Beg pardon," or, "I beg your
pardon," or even, "I did not understand," can soon be taught to even
childish lips and never be forgotten as they advance to maturity. The
use of "Please," and "Thank you," or, "I thank you," (never the
thankless "Thanks,") should be early impressed upon their minds.

Teach them never to speak of grown people without prefixing "Mr.",
"Mrs.", or "Miss," to their name. It is very objectionable for a child
to fall into the habit of saying "Brown did so and so," instead of,
"Mr. Brown, etc." Insist, too, that at school they shall never say
"Teacher," but address their preceptor by his proper name.

Impress upon children that they must answer politely when spoken to,
but strictly repress any tendency on their part toward questioning
visitors at the house. Here let it be added, for the benefit of their
elders, that nothing can be a surer evidence of ill-breeding than for
a grown person to question a child in regard to his family affairs.


Interrupting Conversation.

Never permit children to interrupt the conversation of their elders,
and see, as a preparation for this, that among the little ones
themselves, one who has a story to tell is permitted to finish without
an impatient brother or sister breaking in with his, or her, version
of the same tale. See that each has his turn and many of the noisy
disagreements of the playroom will thus be done away with.

Insist, too, upon the lowering of each eager little voice, and a long
step will have been taken toward doing away with the high-keyed voices
and the all-talking-together habits that afflict so many of their
elders.

See, too, that the children, while not allowed to interrupt the
conversation of grown persons, receive in some degree the same
consideration from them. In other words, let the children talk
sometimes, and listen to them sincerely and respectfully. There is no
better way to train a child in courtesy than to observe toward it the
most scrupulous politeness, and a child whose own conversation is
respected can be easily taught to respect the conversation of others,
and to know when to talk and when to be silent.

This habit of listening, inculcated in childhood, will do much toward
forming agreeable members of society in after years. If a guest should
converse with a child for a moment, watch that it does not make itself
tiresome by engaging his or her entire attention.


"Showing Off."

Never "show off" children to visitors. It fosters in them a feeling of
vanity, and is often very tedious to the persons upon whom it is
inflicted, it being barely possible that your own estimate of their
brilliancy is not shared by outsiders.

Neither should strangers be allowed, under any circumstances, at home
or abroad, to tease a child "just for fun." Its angry answers may be
amusing, but the practice is one that works irreparable injury to the
child. As soon as this tendency is discovered in a visitor, send the
child quietly, but firmly, from the room, remarking casually, when it
is gone, "that children are apt to be troublesome when they talk too
much."


Reproof Before Others.

Never, unless it is absolutely unavoidable, reprove a child in the
presence of strangers. To do this injures their feeling of
self-respect. It is an annoyance to the visitor also. While it
frequently happens that a word of timely admonition is necessary, all
extended reproof should be left until alone with the child.


Cleanliness and Order.

Insist upon cleanliness in dress, and teach the children early that
their hair should be combed, their teeth and finger-nails clean, and
their clothing fresh and neat upon all occasions.

Teach the boys that their shoes should be polished and free from
dust, and their clothes thoroughly brushed. Slippers should be
furnished boys for house wear, and the importance of using a doormat
before entering should be early impressed upon both girls and boys.
Teach them also order and care as to their personal belongings, and
the lessons of neatness thus early inculcated will be of untold value
in their after life.


Home Hints.

Cultivate in children the habit of assuming pleasing attitudes. Do not
let them constantly lounge about over chairs, couches and tables, and
their company manners will not then be a terror in the house. Teach
them the proper use of a handkerchief, and insist that they observe
it.

Instruct them what to do with their hands and feet, never twisting the
former, or swinging the latter. Never permit them to scratch the head
or person, to clean ears or finger nails, or to use a toothpick in
public. Teach them to suppress a yawn or to conceal the mouth with the
hand.

Do not let them pass in front of people in a room, or, if from the
arrangement of the furniture it is impossible to avoid so doing, let
them ask to be excused.

If they should accidently tread upon the toes, or otherwise disturb a
guest, teach them at once to apologize with an "Excuse me," or, "I beg
your pardon." Do not permit them to slam doors, or to shout up and
down stairs. Never allow requests or messages to be called from one
end of the house to the other; insist upon a child coming into the
room with whatever he or she may have to say.

Impress upon boys and girls not to stare at others, nor to take any
apparent notice of personal peculiarities, deformities, or oddities of
dress or demeanor. Teach the children always to play a fair game upon
the playground, and not to lose their tempers over any little
difference of opinion that may arise during its course.

Do not allow them to be cruel in their treatment of animals; to do so,
is to deliberately teach them habits of cruelty for a lifetime and
render them brutal in disposition.


"Visiting."

Children should not be allowed to "visit" other children solely upon
the request of the children. The invitation should come from the
parents. Otherwise great annoyance may result from such unconsidered
calls.

Do not take children while making formal visits. They are often an
annoyance, and always a check upon conversation. If they must be
taken, do not allow them to meddle with anything in the room, nor to
interrupt the conversation. Neither should they be permitted to handle
the belongings, or finger the attire, of callers at the house. Do not
take them to art galleries, artist's or sculptor's studios, and never
allow them to meddle with goods in stores.


Slang, Profanity, Intemperance.

Slang should be eliminated, as much as possible, from the household
vocabulary. Boys should be taught that profanity, or vulgarity in
expression, far from being manly, only lowers them in the estimation
of all sensible people.

It should also be early impressed upon them that there is danger in
the use of liquor in any form, as well as folly in falling into the
tobacco habit.


At Table.

Punctuality at the table should be taught first of all. The little
table observances so necessary to refinement of manner should be early
inculcated. Table manners (see proper department) should be taught at
the earliest age that the child is capable of appearing at the table.
The proper use of knife, fork, spoon and napkin should be impressed
upon their minds from the first, and much after annoyance will be
saved.

Teach them to eat quietly without any noise of mastication, swallowing
or drinking being audible. Insist upon their sitting still while
waiting to be served and not to play with knife, napkin ring or other
small articles on the table.

Insist upon their breaking bread, instead of cutting it, and never to
pick up one piece of bread or cake from the plate and then exchange it
for another.

Teach them to eat fruit properly, to use finger bowls, if such are
provided, and to keep their lips closed as much as possible while
eating. Teach them to pass a pitcher with the handle toward the one
served, and not to eat with one hand and pass some article with the
other.

See that they do not eat too fast--both health and appearances being
considered in this item--and that they do not talk with their mouths
full. Teach them to turn away their heads and cover their mouth with
their hand, if obliged to cough, sneeze or yawn at table, and, as soon
as possible, require them to suppress these exhibitions. Never let
them pick their teeth at the table, or lounge upon it with their
elbows while eating.


Leaving the Table.

If children must leave the table before the meal is over, they should
ask to be excused, and should never rise with their mouth full. When
they have once left the table, do not, as a rule, permit them to
return, for a child soon falls into the habit, if permitted, of
leaving the table to play, and returning to complete his meal.

Teach children not to complain of the food set before them; but, at
the same time, if a child has known likes or dislikes, they should be,
to a certain extent, gratified, since, to some delicately constituted
temperaments, a compelled partaking of some obnoxious dish is a real
torture. Teach them also to acquire a liking for as large a variety of
food as possible. In after life, on many occasions, this may be a
great convenience.

In conclusion, let it be added that the Department on Home Etiquette
should be read in connection with this, especially the section devoted
to children. See to it carefully that children are not taught one code
of manners for company use, and permitted to exercise no manners for
home use.




DINNER GIVING.

[Illustration]


"Man is essentially a dining animal. Creatures of the inferior races
eat and drink; only man dines!" And he should do it properly.

"To invite a friend to dinner," says Brillat Savarin, "is to become
responsible for his happiness so long as he is under your roof."

If, therefore, any lady would entertain her friends in the best manner
that her means permit, it will be well for her to understand the
routine of the table herself, and never trust entirely to the skill of
an ordinary cook. It is hardly to be expected that she should
understand the preparation of each dish, but she must be capable of
judging it when served. If she distrusts her own power of arranging a
_menu_, and seeing it properly carried out, the dinner should be
ordered from the best of caterers. Then, with full assurance of
perfect cookery, and faultless service, one may prepare one's list of
favored guests with a peaceful conscience and a mind free from care.


Invitations.

Forms of invitations suited to all classes of dinners, have been given
at length in the department devoted to that subject, and acceptances
and regrets for the same carefully explained, together with the
obligation upon every one to answer all such invitations at once,
either in the affirmative or negative. Since a dinner is, in all
respects, so important a social event that the least one can do is to
signify immediately one's course of action, Sidney Smith was not so
far out of the way when he burlesqued the solemnity of the occasion,
and the aversion that all dinner-givers have to an empty chair, when
he wittily wrote: "A man should, if he die after having accepted an
invitation to dinner, leave his executors a solemn charge to fill his
place."


Host and Hostess.

The hostess is expected to put her guests, as much as possible, at
their ease. She must encourage the timid, and watch the requirements
of all. No accident must ruffle her temper. In short, she must, for
the time, be that perfect woman who is--

    "Mistress of herself though china fall."

She must not seem to watch her servants; she must not scold them. Her
brow must remain smooth through all embarrassing hitches, her smile be
bright and quick, her attentions close and complimentary to her
guests.

On the host devolves the duty of drawing out any of the guests with
whose particular specialties he is acquainted, and his manners, too,
must at least simulate ease, if he have it not. Let host and hostess
refrain from boasting of the price of any article of food upon the
table.


Whom to Invite.

All the tact and good breeding at the command of the hostess should be
exercised, first in choosing, then in arranging, the guests to be
present. Not too many are to be bidden to the ordinary dinner; six,
eight and twelve are desirable numbers, and four frequently forms the
cosiest party imaginable.

The reason of thus arranging for even numbers arises from the fact
that, in a mixed dinner party, it is well to have as many ladies as
gentlemen. The conversation will then be prevented from dropping into
long, or heated, discussions, both of which are destructive of
pleasure. It will also be found pleasant to invite the young, and
those of more advanced years, together for an occasion of this sort.

Large parties may be made very enjoyable, but where there are more
than eight or ten at table general conversation becomes
impracticable. Twenty-four, and even thirty, guests, however, when
well selected, may make a very brilliant and successful gathering. Too
brilliant a conversationalist is not always a desirable acquisition,
since he may silence and put in the shade the remainder of the company
to an extent that is hardly agreeable even to the meekest among them.

A small dinner of one's most intimate friends is easily arranged. An
eminent artist, author, musician, to pose as chief guest, renders it
always easy to select among one's other acquaintances a sufficient
number who would be pleased with, and pleasing to, this bright,
particular star. Or, if it be a bride, or a woman of fashion, to whom
the courtesy is to be extended, it is equally easy to find a
sufficient number of guests of similar social standing and aspirations
to make the occasion a success.

There is also the satisfaction of knowing that, as one cannot possibly
invite all of one's dear five hundred friends to a little dinner, no
one can be offended at being left out, thus rendering it easy to
choose one's list to fit the circumstances.

Do not invite more guests than there is room to comfortably seat.
Nothing so spoils a dinner as crowding the guests.


Seating the Guests.

Since, at no social entertainment are the guests so dependent upon one
another for mutual entertainment as at a dinner, both by reason of its
smallness and the compactness of arrangement, it will be seen that an
equal care devolves upon the hostess in seating as in inviting her
guests.

The most tedious of one's friends can be tolerated at a party where it
is possible to turn to others for relief, but to be chained for two or
three hours, with the necessity upon you of talking, or trying to
talk, to the same dull or conceited individual that the fates have
unkindly awarded as your companion, is a severe social strain upon
equanimity of soul.

Hence, each hostess should strive to so arrange her guests that
like-minded people should be seated together, and people with hobbies
should either be handed over to those likewise possessed, or into the
hands of some sympathetic listener, thus securing the pleasure of all.

Known enemies should be seated as far apart as possible, and, in
reality, should never be invited to the same dinner. If this should
inadvertently happen, they must remember that common respect for their
hostess demands that they recognize one another with ordinary
politeness.


Laying the Table.

Much has been said upon this subject in the department of "Table
Etiquette," and as laying the table formally for a state affair
approaches so nearly the proper setting of the home table, much will
be found there that is available upon this important topic.

The table, which, since the introduction of the extension, is no
longer the cosy round form which brought the guests so comfortably
near one another, should be first covered with heavy felting, or
double Canton flannel. Over this is to be laid the heaviest, snowiest
damask cloth that the linen closet affords. This should have been
faultlessly laundried, and is accompanied by large, fine napkins
matching the cloth in design. These should be very simply folded, and
without starch, and are laid just beyond the plate toward the center
of the table. Square is the best form for folding, and each should
contain a small thick piece of bread in its folds. This should be
about three inches long and at least an inch thick. This is to be
eaten with the soup, not crumbed into it. A roll sometimes takes its
place. Some hostesses have the bread passed in a silver basket.

A plate is furnished each place, large enough to contain the Majolica
plate for raw oysters. Of course a small plain plate may be used for
these, but those designed for the purpose are much more elegant. A
tiny, fancy salt is provided for each place (see farther in "Table
Etiquette").

Two knives, three forks, and a soup spoon, all of silver, are placed
at each plate. Some dinner-givers place the knives, forks, and spoon,
all on the right side of the plate, excepting the small,
peculiarly-shaped oyster fork, which is placed at the left, it having
been decided that raw oysters shall be eaten with the fork in the left
hand, prongs down.

Still other hostesses place the knives and spoon at the right hand,
the forks at the left, the oyster fork diagonally, with the prongs
crossing the handles of the others, the law of their arrangement being
nowise immutable in its nature.

Silver, glass, and china, should all be of the brightest. At the right
hand of each guest should be placed an engraved glass for water. To
make certain that these are in line all around, it is well to measure
with the hand from the edge of the table to the tip of the middle
finger and there place the glass; following this rule around the
entire circumference. This glass, if wine is used, gives a center,
round which the vari-colored wineglasses may be grouped.


A Well-Furnished Sideboard.

The sideboard should contain relays of knives, forks, and spoons, in
rows; glasses, dinner plates, finger bowls standing on the fruit
plates, as well as any other accessories that may be needed. At
another sideboard, or table, the head waiter, or the butler, does the
carving. If the room is small, this last may be relegated to hall or
pantry.

In luxurious houses the sideboards are often devoted to bewildering
displays of rare china, and cut glass, but in more modest domiciles
they are used simply for the needs of the hour.

Water carafes (water bottles) are placed between every two or three
guests. The table should be laid in time,--thus, if the dinner is to
be at seven, all things should be in readiness on table and sideboard
at six o'clock; this course preventing the slightest confusion. If the
dinner napkins are to be changed for smaller ones, these also should
be laid in readiness. All the cold dishes, salads, relishes,
condiments, etc., should also be on hand.

The most elegant tables frequently have a long mat, or scarf, of ruby,
or some other colored plush, with fringed and embroidered ends, laid
the entire length down through the center of the table. This affords a
charming contrast to the snowy napery, and sets the keynote of color
for the floral decorations. The center decorative pieces are now no
longer high, thus rendering a glimpse of the person opposite almost
impossible, but are low and long.

A mirror, framed in silver, may be set in the center of one of these
plush mats; and upon this artistically arranged floral decorations are
placed to be reflected in its polished depths. Where massive silver
table-wares are heirlooms in the family, they are used, despite their
height. Center pieces that are recent purchases, are usually of glass,
cut and jewelled, until their brilliancy is a marvel in the lamplight.


Table Decorations.

Where the resources of the dinner-giver are limited, the simple
decoration of a few flowers arranged in a fanciful basket, or a rare
old bowl filled with roses, is sufficient, and is far more indicative
of taste and breeding than many of the set floral pieces fresh from
the florist's hand, and speaking more eloquently of the size of his
bill, than of taste or appropriateness.

The fancy of the hour, and a pretty one it is, is for massing one
variety of flower for decorative purposes. Banks of crimson roses down
the center of the snowy cloth, or great clusters of vivid red flowers,
can be very effectively employed. Shells may be filled with flowers
and used as a table decoration. A large one in the middle, and a
smaller one on each side, has a pleasing effect. At each plate a small
bouquet of flowers may be laid, those for the gentlemen arranged as
buttonholes.

In choosing the flowers for decorations, avoid those blossoms having a
heavy fragrance, such as the tuberose, jasmines, syringas, as their
penetrating odor is productive of faintness in some, and is
disagreeable to many, while roses, lilies, lilacs, and many other
delicately-scented blossoms, are pleasant to all.

Naturalness is to be aimed at in these decorations, and set floral
pieces are in bad taste at a private dinner. Though hundreds of
dollars may have been spent in the fleeting loveliness of flowers, the
effect to be aimed at is naturalness rather than display. A border of
holly, or ivy leaves freshly gathered, may be sewed around the plush
scarf through the center of the table, and is a beautiful decoration,
far outshining gold embroidery and lace.

Harmonize the color of this scarf with the decorations of the
dining-room. Blue, however, or green, does not light up well, while
ruby, or some other red, brings out the effect of glass, china, and
silver to the best advantage. Old gold, or olive-brown, is also very
pretty. The dining-room should be carpeted to deaden the sound of
footsteps.


Lighting the Table.

Gas is, perforce, the most common, but not by any means the most
æsthetic means of table illumination, because of its heating and
glaring qualities. Wax candles are extremely pretty with tissue shades
to match the prevailing tint of the other decorations, besides giving
an opportunity for displaying all manner of pretty conceits in
candelabra. About twenty-six candles will, all other conditions being
favorable, light a table for twelve guests. Much depends, however, on
whether the dining-room is finished in light or dark woods as to the
number of candles required. Very carefully filled and carefully
cared-for lamps of pretty designs are also, especially in country
places, an admirable method of lighting the table.


Serving the Dinner.

There are two methods of performing this most important function of
the entire dinner, namely, service _à la Russe_, and the American
service. The first named, the Russian service, is universally adopted
in all countries at dinners where the requisite number of sufficiently
well-trained servants are to be had.

This service, which consists in having all articles of food carved,
and otherwise prepared, and brought to the guests separately by
waiters, or footmen, as they are called in England at private tables,
has the advantage of leaving the host and hostess free to converse
with their guests. It also has another advantage of presenting the
table, as the guests enter the room, free from dishes, save the oyster
plates, glass, silver, flowers, and perhaps at the two ends of the
board, Bohemian glass flagons, of ruby-red, containing such decanted
wines as do not need icing.

The table also, being so carefully cleared at the end of each course,
should present about the same faultless appearance at the close of the
feast as at its beginning. The guests being seated at their respective
places, Majolica plates containing raw oysters on the half-shell, or
otherwise, with a piece of lemon in the center are, if not already in
place, immediately put before each guest. The roll, or piece of bread,
should be at once removed from the folds of the napkin, and the
servants, when all are seated, pass red and black pepper. The oyster
plates are then removed and plates of soup follow, dished from a side
table by the head waiter, and served by two others, who pass down
opposite sides of the table carrying each two dishes. Where two kinds
of soup are provided, each guest is given the choice.


How the Dishes are to be Passed.

The servants, in passing the dishes, begin with the guest upon the
right hand of the master on one side of the table, ending with the
mistress of the house. Upon the other side they begin with the guest
upon her right and end with the host. As one servant passes the meat
or fish, another should follow, bearing the appropriate sauce or
vegetable that accompanies it.

The servants should wear thin-soled shoes, step lightly, be ungloved,
and always have a small-sized damask napkin wrapped around the thumb
of the right hand, as dexterity in handling the dishes requires that
they should extend the thumb over the edge of the dish.

They should pass all dishes at the left of the guests, that their
right hand may be free to take them. Wines only are excepted, these
being always poured at the right. Servants should never lean across
any guest at table in order to reach or pass an article.

In passing an _entrée_ (ongtray), which is simply a dish served in the
first course after fish, the dish should be supplied with a silver
spoon and fork and held low enough so that the guests can help
themselves easily. _Entrées_ follow the roasts sometimes, as well as,
or instead of, coming after fish. Sweetbreads and croquettes come
under this head. These require hot plates.

The soup removed, which should be done quickly as possible, fish
should be immediately served, together with whatever vegetables form
the accompaniment. When these plates are removed the roast meats are
served on hot plates. One vegetable is usually served with each meat
course, and occasionally some vegetable forms a course by itself.
This, however, only lengthens out the repast, and is not to be
recommended.

A fresh plate is served with each course, it being the rule that no
two meals should be eaten from the same plate.


Serving the Different Courses.

Game forms the next course, with such sauces and accompaniments as are
desired. The salad follows and usually forms a course by itself,
accompanied by crackers, or thinly buttered half slices of brown
bread. These are usually passed in a silver breadbasket.

Roman punch, when it is served, comes between the roasts and the game,
thus preparing the palate for the new flavor. Cheese follows the salad
sometimes, and sometimes accompanies it. Then the ices and sweets.
When the ices are removed, the desert plates, overlaid with a dainty
doily, upon which is set a finger-bowl, are passed, and the fruits
appear. Confections are then served, to be followed with black coffee
in tiny after-dinner coffee-cups, which are passed on a salver,
together with lump sugar, and small gold or silver spoons; no cream.