[Illustration: Portrait]




THE HISTORY

OF

Dartmouth College.

BY

BAXTER PERRY SMITH.

BOSTON:

HOUGHTON, OSGOOD AND COMPANY.

The Riverside Press, Cambridge.

1878.




Copyright, 1878,

by Baxter Perry Smith.

The Riverside Press, Cambridge:

_Printed by H. O. Houghton and Company._




PREFACE.


In the preparation of this work the writer has deemed it better to let
history, as far as possible, tell its own story, regarding reliability
as preferable to unity of style.

The imperfect records of all our older literary institutions, limit
their written history, in large measure, to a record of the lives and
labors of their teachers.

To the many friends of the college, and others, who have kindly given
their aid, the writer is under large obligations.

The following names deserve especial notice: Hon. Robert C. Winthrop,
Hon. Charles L. Woodbury, Hon. R. R. Bishop, Wm. H. Duncan, Esq.,
Richard B. Kimball, Esq., Rev. Eden B. Foster, D.D., Hon. James
Barrett, N. C. Berry, Esq., Dr. F. E. Oliver, Hon. J. E. Sargent, Dr.
C. A. Walker, Hon. A. O. Brewster, Hon. A. A. Ranney, Dr. W. M.
Chamberlain, Hon. James W. Patterson, Rev. Carlos Slafter, Hon. J. B.
D. Cogswell, Gen. John Eaton, Rev. H. A. Hazen, Rev. S. L. B. Speare,
H. N. Twombly, Esq., Caleb Blodgett, Esq., Hon. Benj. F. Prescott, Dr.
C. H. Spring, Prof. C. O. Thompson, Hon. Frederic Chase, Rev. W. J.
Tucker, D.D., L. G. Farmer, Esq., and N. W. Ladd, Esq.

With profound gratitude he mentions also the name of Hon. Nathan
Crosby, but for whose valuable pecuniary aid the publication of the
work must have been delayed; and the names of Hon. Joel Parker, Hon.
William P. Haines, Hon. John P. Healy, Hon. Lincoln F. Brigham, John
D. Philbrick, Esq., Dr. Jabez B. Upham, Hon. Harvey Jewell, and Hon.
Walbridge A. Field, who have aided in a similar manner. Particular
mention should also be made of the kindness of gentlemen connected
with numerous libraries, especially that of Mr. John Ward Deane, and
Mr. Albert H. Hoyt, and the late J. Wingate Thornton, Esq., of the New
England Historic-Genealogical Society, by whose kindness the writer
was furnished with the valuable letter from David McClure to General
Knox, and Rev. Alonzo H. Quint, D.D., and Dr. Samuel A. Green, of the
Massachusetts Historical Society, to whom he is indebted for the
invaluable list of English donations given in the Appendix. Valuable
aid has been rendered also by Messrs. Kimball and Secor, of the New
Hampshire State and State Historical Society Libraries, at Concord. In
this connection the well known names of W. S. Butler, Prof. F. B.
Dexter, Hon. C. J. Hoadley, F. B. Perkins, Hon. J. Hammond Trumbull,
and Hon. E. P. Walton also deserve notice.

The writer is deeply indebted to Hon. John Wentworth, of Chicago, for
his kindness in examining the more important portions of the work
previous to its publication.

For the carefully-prepared draught of the original college edifice,
the writer is indebted to the artistic skill of Mr. Arthur Bruce
Colburn.

In closing, especial mention should be made of the kindness of Prof.
Charles Hammond, Marcus D. Gilman, Esq., and others representing the
family of the founder, of the family of Hon. Elisha Payne, an early
and honored Trustee, of the Trustees and Faculty of the college, and
the courteous liberality of the publishers.

BAXTER P. SMITH.

Brookline, Mass., _June_, 1878.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

  Introduction                                                   1

CHAPTER II.

  Ancestry and Early Life of Eleazar Wheelock.--His Settlement
  at Lebanon.--Establishment of the Indian Charity
  School.--Mr. Joshua More                                       6

CHAPTER III.

  Education in New Hampshire.--Action in Regard to a
  College.--Testimonial of Connecticut Clergymen.--Legislative
  Grant to Mr. Wheelock                                         15

CHAPTER IV.

  A College Contemplated by Mr. Wheelock.--Lord
  Dartmouth.--Occom and Whitaker in Great Britain               23

CHAPTER V.

  Sir William Johnson.--Explorations for a Location.--Advice
  of English Trustees                                           29

CHAPTER VI.

  A College Charter                                             40

CHAPTER VII.

  President Wheelock's Personal Explorations in New
  Hampshire.--Location at Hanover                               49

CHAPTER VIII.

  Commencement of Operations.--Course of Study.--Policy of
  Administration                                                57

CHAPTER IX.

  Progress to the Death of President Wheelock.--Prominent
  Features of his Character                                     65

CHAPTER X.

  Progress During the Administration of the Second President,
  John Wheelock                                                 76

CHAPTER XI.

  Lack of Harmony Between President Wheelock and Other
  Trustees.--Removal of the President From Office.--Estimate
  of His Character                                              88

CHAPTER XII.

  Administration of President Brown.--Contest Between The
  College and the State.--Triumph of the College               100

CHAPTER XIII.

  Character of President Brown.--Tributes by Professor
  Haddock And Rufus Choate                                     117

CHAPTER XIV.

  Progress From 1820 to 1828.--Administrations of President
  Dana and President Tyler                                     126

CHAPTER XV.

  Inauguration of President Lord                               143

CHAPTER XVI.

  The Policy of the College, its Progress and Enlargement
  under President Lord's Administration from 1828 to 1863      157

CHAPTER XVII.

  Character of President Lord                                  168

CHAPTER XVIII.

  Administration of President Smith                            177

CHAPTER XIX.

  Inauguration of President Bartlett                           190

CHAPTER XX.

  Prof. John Smith.--Prof. Sylvanus Ripley.--Prof. Bezaleel
  Woodward                                                     211

CHAPTER XXI.

  Prof. John Hubbard.--Prof. Roswell Shurtleff                 225

CHAPTER XXII.

  Prof. Ebenezer Adams.--Prof. Zephaniah S. Moore.--Prof.
  Charles B. Haddock                                           241

CHAPTER XXIII.

  Prof. William Chamberlain.--Prof. Daniel Oliver.--Prof.
  James Freeman Dana                                           256

CHAPTER XXIV.

  Prof. Benjamin Hale.--Prof. Alpheus Crosby.--Prof. Ira
  Young                                                        276

CHAPTER XXV.

  Prof. Stephen Chase.--Prof. David Peabody.--Prof. William
  Cogswell                                                     298

CHAPTER XXVI.

  Prof. John Newton Putnam.--Prof. John S. Woodman.--Prof.
  Clement Long.--Other Teachers                                316

CHAPTER XXVII.

  Medical Department.--Professors Nathan Smith, Reuben D.
  Mussey, Dixi Crosby, Edmund R. Peaslee, Albert Smith, and
  Alpheus B. Crosby--Other Teachers                            339

CHAPTER XXVIII.

  The Chandler Scientific Department.--The Agricultural
  Department.--The Thayer Department of Civil Engineering      367

CHAPTER XXIX.

  Benefactors.--Trustees                                       380

CHAPTER XXX.

  Labors of Dartmouth Alumni.--Conclusion                      395




DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.


The most valuable part of a nation's history portrays its institutions
of learning and religion.

The alumni of a college which has moulded the intellectual and moral
character of not a few of the illustrious living, or the more
illustrious dead,--the oldest college in the valley of the
Connecticut, and the only college in an ancient and honored
State,--would neglect a most fitting and beautiful service, should
they suffer the cycles of a century to pass, without gathering in some
modest urn the ashes of its revered founders, or writing on some
modest tablet the names of its most distinguished sons.

The germ of Dartmouth College was a deep-seated and long-cherished
desire, of the foremost of its founders, to elevate the Indian race in
America.

The Christian fathers of New England were not unmindful of the claims
of the Aborigines. The well-directed, patient, and successful labors
of the Eliots, Cotton, and the Mayhews, and the scarcely less valuable
labors of Treat and others, fill a bright page in the religious
history of the seventeenth century. To numerous congregations of red
men the gospel was preached; many were converted; churches were
gathered, and the whole Bible--the first printed in America--was given
them in their own language.

This interest in the Indian was not confined to our own country, in
the earlier periods of our history. In Great Britain, sovereigns,
ecclesiastics, and philosophers recognized the obligations
providentially imposed upon them, to aid in giving a Christian
civilization to their swarthy brethren, who were sitting in the
thickest darkness of heathenism in the primeval forests of the New
World. Societies, as well as individuals, manifested a deep and
practical interest in the work.

We can only touch upon some of the more salient points of this
subject. But it is especially worthy of note, that the elevation of
the Indian race, by the education of its youth, was not an idea of New
England, nor indeed of American, birth.

In Stith's "History of Virginia" (p. 162), we find in substance the
following statements: At an early period in the history of this State,
attempts were made to establish an institution of learning of a high
order. In 1619, the treasurer of the Virginia Company, Sir Edwin
Sandys, received from an unknown hand five hundred pounds, to be
applied by the Company to the education of a certain number of Indian
youths in the English language and in the Christian religion. Other
sums of money were also procured, and there was a prospect of being
able to raise four or five thousand pounds, for the endowment of a
college. The king favored the design, and recommended to the bishops
to have collections made in their dioceses, and some fifteen hundred
pounds were gathered on this recommendation. The college was designed
for the instruction of English, as well as Indian, youths. The Company
appropriated ten thousand acres of land to this purpose, at Henrico,
on James River, a little below the present site of Richmond. The plan
of the college was, to place tenants at halves on these lands, and to
derive its income from the profits. The enterprise was abandoned in
consequence of the great Indian massacre, in 1622, although operations
had been commenced, and a competent person had been secured to act as
president. This is believed to have been the first effort to found a
college in America.

Passing to the middle of the century, we find the distinguished
Christian philosopher, Robert Boyle, appointed governor of "a company
incorporated for the propagation of the gospel among the heathen
natives of New England, and the parts adjacent in America," and that,
after his decease, in 1691, a portion of his estate was given, by the
executors of his will, to William and Mary's College, which was
possibly, in a measure, the outgrowth of the efforts of Mr. Sandys and
his coadjutors, for the support of Indian students.

In 1728, Col. William Byrd, in writing upon this subject, laments "the
bad success Mr. Boyle's charity has had in converting the natives,"
which was owing in part, at least, to the fact, that the interest of
their white brethren in their welfare was confined chiefly to their
residence at college.

Pursuing these researches, we come to the name of another
distinguished British scholar and divine, George Berkeley, who has
been styled "the philosopher" of the reign of George II.

We quote a portion of a letter relating to his educational plans, from
Dean Swift to Lord Carteret, Lieutenant of Ireland, dated Sept. 3,
1724, in which he says:

"He showed me a little tract which he designs to publish, and
there your Excellency will see his whole scheme of a life
academico-philosophic, of a college at Bermuda for Indian scholars and
missionaries. I discourage him by the coldness of courts and
ministers, who will interpret all this as impossible and a vision, but
nothing will do. And therefore I do humbly entreat your Excellency
either to use such persuasions as will keep one of the first men in
this kingdom for learning and virtue quiet at home, or assist him by
your credit to compass his romantic design, which, however, is very
noble and generous, and directly proper for a great person of your
excellent education to encourage."

The pamphlet alluded to begins, as one of his biographers informs us,
by lamenting "that there is at this day little sense of religion and a
most notorious corruption of manners in the English colonies settled
on the continent of America, and the islands," and that "the Gospel
hath hitherto made but very inconsiderable progress among the
neighboring Americans, who still continue in much the same ignorance
and barbarism in which we found them above a hundred years ago." After
stating what he believes to be the causes of this state of things, he
propounds his plan of training young natives, as missionaries to their
countrymen, and educating "the youth of our English plantations," to
fill the pulpits of the colonial churches. His biographer is
doubtless correct in the opinion, that "it was on the savages,
evidently, that he had his heart."

He obtained a charter from the crown for his proposed college, and a
promise, never fulfilled, of large pecuniary aid from the government,
and early in 1729 he arrived in America, settling temporarily at
Newport, R. I. Failing to accomplish his purpose, he remained in this
country but two or three years, yet long enough to form the
acquaintance of many eminent men, and among them President Williams,
of Yale College.

Finding that there was no prospect of receiving the promised aid for
his college, Berkeley returned to England in 1731. Soon after, in
addition to a large and valuable donation of books for the library, he
sent as a gift, to Yale, a deed of his farm in Rhode Island, the rents
of which he directed to be appropriated to the maintenance or aid of
meritorious resident graduates or under-graduates.

Although he failed to carry out his plan of establishing a college
himself, in America, perhaps he "builded better than he knew." Most
fitting is it, as we shall see hereafter, for the current literature
of our day to place in intimate association, the names of Boyle,
Berkeley, and Dartmouth.

Passing to 1734, we find Rev. John Sergeant commencing missionary
labor among the Indians at Stockbridge, Mass. After a trial of a few
years, he writes in a manner showing very plainly that he believes
civilization essential to any permanent success. In one of his letters
to Rev. Dr. Colman, of Boston, he says: "What I propose, in general,
is, to take such a method in the education of our Indian children as
shall in the most effectual manner change their whole manner of
thinking and acting, and raise them as far as possible into the
condition of a civil, industrious, and polished people, while at the
same time the principles of virtue and piety shall be instilled into
their minds in a way that will make the most lasting impression, and
withal to introduce the English language among them instead of their
own barbarous dialect."

"And now to accomplish this design, I propose to procure an
accommodation of 200 acres of land in this place (which may be had
gratis of the Indian proprietors), and to erect a house on it such as
shall be thought convenient for a beginning, and in it to maintain a
number of children and youth." He proposes "to have their time so
divided between study and labor that one shall be the diversion of the
other, so that as little time as possible may be lost in idleness,"
and, "to take into the number, upon certain conditions, youths from
any of the other tribes around." His plan included both sexes. Mr.
Sergeant died in 1749. Besides accomplishing much himself, he laid the
foundations for the subsequent labors of Jonathan Edwards.

This rapid glance at the earlier efforts in behalf of the Aborigines
of our country, shows that the next actor upon the stage, undaunted by
any lack of success on their part, measurably followed in the
footsteps of learned and philanthropic predecessors.




CHAPTER II.

ANCESTRY AND EARLY LIFE OF ELEAZAR WHEELOCK.--HIS SETTLEMENT AT
LEBANON, CONN.--ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INDIAN CHARITY SCHOOL.--MR.
JOSHUA MORE.


Eleazar Wheelock, the leading founder of Dartmouth College, was a
great-grandson of Ralph Wheelock, a native of Shropshire, in England,
through whom Dartmouth traces her academic ancestry to the ancient and
venerable Clare Hall, at Cambridge, where he graduated in 1626, the
contemporary of Thomas Dudley, Samuel Eaton, John Milton, John Norton,
Thomas Shepard, and Samuel Stone.

Coming a few years later to this country, he became a useful and an
honored citizen of the then new, but now old, historic town of Dedham,
from which place he removed to Medfield, being styled "founder" of
that town, where he remained till his death. He devoted his time
largely to teaching, although, having been educated for the ministry,
he rendered valuable service to the infant community as an occasional
preacher. His name is also conspicuous among the magistrates and
legislators of that period.[1]

      [1] His daughter Rebecca married John Craft, whose birth is the
          earliest on record among the pioneer settlers at Roxbury. Some
          of his descendants (by another marriage) are conspicuous in
          history. Medfield records connect the names of Fuller,
          Chenery, and Morse with the Wheelock family.

In the character of his son, Eleazar Wheelock, of Mendon, we are told
there was a union of "the Christian and the soldier." Having command
of a corps of cavalry, he was "very successful in repelling the
irruptions of the Indians," although he treated them with "great
kindness," in times of peace. From him, his grandson and namesake
received "a handsome legacy for defraying the expenses of his public
education," and from him, too, he doubtless acquired, in some
measure, that peculiar interest in the Indian race which so largely
moulded his character and guided the labors of his life.

Near the time of Ralph Wheelock's arrival in America, were two other
arrivals worthy of notice: that of Thomas Hooker, at Cambridge, "the
one rich pearl with which Europe more than repaid America for the
treasures from her coasts," and that of the widowed Margaret
Huntington, at Roxbury, of which there is still a well-preserved
record, in the handwriting of John Eliot. The guiding and controlling
influence of Hooker's masterly mind upon all, whether laymen or
divines, with whom he came in contact, must be apparent to those who
are familiar with the biography of one, to whom the learned and
religious institutions of New England are more indebted, perhaps, than
to any other single person. Hooker's settlement at Hartford is fitly
styled "the founding of Connecticut."

When a little later the family of Margaret Huntington settled at
Saybrook, their youthful pastor, who was just gathering a church, was
James Fitch, a worthy pupil of Thomas Hooker. Not satisfied with their
location, pastor and people sought an inland home, and in 1660 laid
the foundations of what is now the large and flourishing town of
Norwich. From this time Huntington and Fitch are honored names in the
history of Connecticut.

A quarter of a century after the settlement of Norwich, an English
refugee from religious oppression began the settlement of the
neighboring town of Windham. To this place, Ralph Wheelock the
younger, a grandson of the Dedham teacher and preacher, was attracted,
marrying about the same time, Ruth, daughter of Dea. Christopher
Huntington, of Norwich. Mr. Ralph Wheelock was a respectable farmer,
universally esteemed for his hospitality, his piety, and the virtues
that adorn the Christian character, and in his later years was an
officer of the church.

Of Mrs. Wheelock, it is said:[2] "Every tradition respecting her makes
her a woman of unusual intelligence and rare piety. Her home, the main
theatre of her life, was blessed equally by her timely instructions,
her holy example, and the administration of a gentle yet firm
discipline." Their son Eleazar was born at Windham, April 22, 1711.

      [2] Huntington Family Memoir, p. 78.

The first minister of this honored town was Rev. Samuel Whiting, a
native of Hartford, and trained in the "Hooker School." For a helpmeet
he had secured a lineal descendant of that noble and revered puritan,
Gov. Wm. Bradford. The labors of this worthy pair were largely blessed
to their people. At one period, in a population of hundreds, it is
said "the town did not contain a single prayerless family."

Thus kindly and wisely did the Master arrange, by long and closely
blended lines of events, that the most genial influences should
surround the cradle of one for whom He designed eminent service and
peculiar honor.

The mother of Eleazar Wheelock having died in 1725, for a second wife
his father married a lady named Standish, a descendant of Myles
Standish, whose heroic character she perhaps impressed, in some
measure, upon her adopted son. "Being an only son," says his
biographer,[3] "and discovering, at an early age, a lively genius, a
taste for learning, with a very amiable disposition, he was placed by
his father under the best instructors that could then be obtained." At
"about the age of sixteen, while qualifying himself for admission to
college, it pleased God to impress his mind with serious concern for
his salvation. After earnest, prayerful inquiry, he was enlightened
and comforted with that hope in the Saviour, which afterwards proved
the animating spring of his abundant labors to promote the best
interests of mankind." At the time of his admission to the Windham
church, the distinguished Thomas Clap was its pastor.

      [3] Memoirs of Wheelock, by McClure and Parish.

Having made the requisite preparation, he entered Yale College, of
which President Williams was then at the head, "with a resolution to
devote himself to the work of the Gospel ministry." Among his college
contemporaries were Joseph Bellamy and President Aaron Burr.

"His proficiency in study, and his exemplary deportment, engaged the
notice and esteem of the rector and instructors, and the love of the
students. He and his future brother-in-law, the late Rev. Doctor
Pomeroy of Hebron, in Connecticut, were the first who received the
interest of the legacy, generously given by the Rev. Dean Berkeley,"
for excellence in classical scholarship.

Soon after his graduation, in 1733, he commenced preaching. Having
declined a call from Long Island, to settle in the ministry, he
accepted a unanimous invitation from the Second Congregational Society
in Lebanon, Connecticut, and was ordained in June, 1735.

This town occupies a conspicuous place in American history; for,
whoever traces the lineage of some of the most illustrious names that
grace its pages, finds his path lying to or through this "valley of
cedars," in Eastern Connecticut. Here the patient, heroic Huguenot
aided in laying foundations for all good institutions. Here the
learned, indefatigable Tisdale taught with distinguished success. Here
lived those eminent patriots, the Trumbulls. By birth or ancestry, the
honored names of Smalley, Ticknor, Marsh, and Mason, are associated
with this venerable town.

Mr. Wheelock's parish was in the northern and most retired part of the
town, and the least inviting, perhaps, in its physical aspects and
natural resources. The products of a rugged soil furnished the
industrious inhabitants with a comfortable subsistence, but left
nothing for luxury. It was at that period a quiet agricultural
community, living largely within itself. As at the present day, there
was but one church within the territorial limits of the parish. The
"council of nine," selected from the more discreet of the male
members, somewhat in accordance with Presbyterian usage, aided in the
administration of a careful and thorough discipline.

There can be no doubt that Mr. Wheelock was accounted one of the
leading preachers and divines of his day. Both as a pastor, and the
associate of the eminent men who were prominent in the great revival
which marked the middle of the last century, his labors were crowned
with large success. Rev. Dr. Burroughs, who knew him intimately, says:
"As a preacher, his aim was to reach the conscience. He studied great
plainness of speech, and adapted his discourse to every capacity, that
he might be understood by all." His pupil, Dr. Trumbull, the
historian, says: "He was a gentleman of a comely figure, of a mild and
winning aspect, his voice smooth and harmonious, the best by far that
I ever heard. He had the entire command of it. His gesture was
natural, but not redundant. His preaching and addresses were close and
pungent, and yet winning beyond almost all comparison."[4] By an
intermarriage of their relatives, he was allied to the family of
Jonathan Edwards, whose high regard for him is sufficiently indicated
in a letter dated Northampton, June 9, 1741, from which we make brief
extracts. "There has been a reviving of religion of late amongst us,
but your labors have been much more remarkably blessed than mine. May
God send you hither with the like blessing as He has sent you to some
other places, and may your coming be a means to humble me for my
barrenness and unprofitableness, and a means of my instruction and
enlivening. I want an opportunity to concert measures with you, for
the advancement of the kingdom and glory of the Redeemer."

      [4] The venerable Prof. Stowe states that, when a professor in the
          College, he was informed by an aged man, living in the
          vicinity, that President Wheelock's earnestness in preaching
          at times led him to leave the pulpit, and appeal to
          individuals in his audience.

We are fortunate in having the testimony of a member of his own
family, in regard to the beginning of Mr. Wheelock's more practical
interest in the unfortunate Aborigines. His grandson, Rev. William
Patten, D.D., says,[5] "One evening after a religious conference with
a number of his people at Lebanon, he walked out, as he usually did on
summer evenings, for meditation and prayer; and in his retirement his
attention was led to the neglect [from lack of means] of his people in
providing for his support. It occurred to him, with peculiar
clearness, that if they furnished him with but half a living, they
were entitled to no more than half his labors. And he concluded that
they were left to such neglect, to teach him that part of his labors
ought to be directed to other objects. He then inquired what objects
were most in want of assistance. And it occurred to him, almost
instantaneously, that the Indians were the most proper objects of the
charitable attention of Christians. He then determined to devote half
of his time to them."

      [5] Memoirs of Wheelock, p. 177.

We will now allow this eminent Christian philanthropist to speak for
himself. In his "Narrative," for the period ending in 1762, after
referring to the too general lack of interest in the Indian, he says:

"It has seemed to me, he must be stupidly indifferent to the
Redeemer's cause and interest in the world, and criminally deaf and
blind to the intimations of the favor and displeasure of God in the
dispensations of His Providence, who could not perceive plain
intimations of God's displeasure against us for this neglect,
inscribed in capitals, on the very front of divine dispensations, from
year to year, in permitting the savages to be such a sore scourge to
our land, and make such depredations on our frontiers, inhumanly
butchering and captivating our people, not only in a time of war, but
when we had good reason to think (if ever we had) that we dwelt safely
by them. And there is good reason to think that if one half which has
been expended for so many years past in building forts, manning, and
supporting them, had been prudently laid out in supporting faithful
missionaries and schoolmasters among them, the instructed and
civilized party would have been a far better defence than all our
expensive fortresses, and prevented the laying waste so many towns and
villages; witness the consequence of sending Mr. Sergeant to
Stockbridge, which was in the very road by which they most usually
came upon our people, and by which there has never been one attack
made upon us since his going there." After referring to the ordinary
obligations of humanity, patriotism, and religion, he says:

"As there were few or none who seemed to lay the necessity and
importance of Christianizing the natives so much to heart as to exert
themselves in earnest and lead the way therein, I was naturally put
upon consideration and inquiry what methods might have the greatest
probability of success; and upon the whole was fully persuaded that
this, which I have been pursuing, had by far the greatest probability
of any that had been proposed, viz.: by the mission of their own
[educated] sons in conjunction with the English; and that a number of
girls should also be instructed in whatever should be necessary to
render them fit to perform the female part, as house-wives,
school-mistresses, and tailoresses. The influence of their own sons
among them will likely be much greater than of any Englishmen
whatsoever. There is no such thing as sending English missionaries, or
setting up English schools among them, to any good purpose, in most
places, as their temper, state, and condition have been and still
are." In illustration of his theory, he refers to the education, by
the assistance of the "Honorable London Commissioners,"[6] of Mr.
Samson Occom, "one of the Mohegan tribe, who has several years been a
useful school-master and successful preacher of the Gospel."[7]

      [6] Agents of the Corporation in London referred to on page 2, of
          which Robert Boyle was governor.

      [7] See Appendix.

"After seeing the success of this attempt," he continues, "I was more
encouraged to hope that such a method might be very successful, and
above eight years ago I wrote to Rev. John Brainerd [brother of the
distinguished David Brainerd], missionary in New Jersey, desiring him
to send me two likely boys for this purpose, of the Delaware tribe. He
accordingly sent me John Pumpshire in the fourteenth, and Jacob
Woolley in the eleventh years of their age. They arrived December 18,
1754.

"Sometime after these boys came, the affair appearing with an
agreeable aspect, I represented it to Col. Elisha Williams, late
Rector of Yale College, and Rev. Messrs. Samuel Moseley, of Windham,
and Benjamin Pomeroy, of Hebron, and invited them to join me. They
readily accepted the invitation. And Mr. Joshua Moor,[8] late of
Mansfield, deceased, appeared, to give a small tenement in this place
[Lebanon], for the foundation, use and support of a charity school,
for the education of Indian youth, etc." Mr. More's grant contained
"about two acres of pasturing, and a small house and shop," near Mr.
Wheelock's residence.

      [8] Mr. M.'s own orthography is More.

This gentleman was one of the more prominent of the early settlers at
Mansfield. He owned and resided upon a large estate on the Willimantic
river, a few miles north of the present site of the village bearing
that name. There is sufficient evidence to warrant the belief, that
the first husband of Mr. More's mother was Mr. Thomas Howard (or
Harwood), of Norwich, who was slain in the memorable fight at
Narragansett Fort, in December, 1675, and that her maiden name was
Mary Wellman. From the church records, he appears to have been of a
professedly religious character, as early as 1721. As his residence
was in the neighborhood of Mr. Wheelock's early home, and but little
farther removed from Lebanon "Crank," as the north parish in that town
was styled, Mr. More had ample opportunities for a thorough
acquaintance with the person to whom he now generously extended a
helping hand. It is not known that this worthy man left any posterity,
to perpetuate a name which will be cherished with tender regard, so
long as the institution to which he furnished a home, in its infancy,
shall have an existence.

In a summary of his work for the eight years, Mr. Wheelock says: "I
have had two upon my hands since 1754, four since April, 1757, five
since April, 1759, seven since November, 1760, and eleven since
August, 1761. And for some time I have had twenty-five, three of the
number English youth. One of the Indian lads, Jacob Woolley, is now in
his last year at New Jersey College."

There is reason to believe that Occom would have taken a collegiate
course, but for the partial failure of his health. On the whole, we
are fully warranted in the opinion that, from the outset, Mr. Wheelock
designed to have all his missionaries, whether Indian or English,
"thoroughly furnished" for their work.

Before closing the "Narrative," he gives an interesting account of
material resources.

"The Honorable London Commissioners, hearing of the design, inquired
into it, and encouraged it by an allowance of £12 lawful money, by
their vote November 12, 1756. And again in the year 1758 they allowed
me £20; and in November 4, 1760, granted me an annual allowance of £20
for my assistance; and in October 8, 1761, they granted me £12 towards
the support of Isaiah Uncas, son of the Sachem of Mohegan, and £10
more for his support the following year. In October, 1756, I received
a legacy of fifty-nine dollars of Mrs. Ann Bingham, of Windham. In
July, 1761, I received a generous donation of fifty pounds sterling
from the Right Hon. William, Marquis of Lothian; and in November,
1761, a donation of £26 sterling from Mr. Hardy, of London; and in
May, 1762, a second donation of £50 sterling from that most honorable
and noble lord, the Marquis of Lothian; and, at the same time, £20
sterling from Mr. Samuel Savage, merchant in London; and a collection
of ten guineas from the Rev. Dr. A. Gifford, in London; and £10
sterling more from a lady in London, unknown, which is still in the
hands of a friend, and to be remitted with some additional advantage,
and to be accounted for when received. And, also, for seven years
past, I have, one year with another, received about £11 lawful money,
annually, interest of subscriptions. And in my journey to Portsmouth
last June, I received, in private donations, £66 17_s._ 7-1/4_d._,
lawful money. I also received, for the use of this school, a bell of
about 80 lb. weight, from a gentleman in London. The Honorable Scotch
Commissioners,[9] in and near Boston, understanding and approving of
the design of sending for Indian children of remote tribes to be
educated here, were the first body, or society, who have led the way
in making an attempt for that purpose. While I was in Boston they
passed a vote, May 7, 1761, 'that the Reverend Mr. Wheelock, of
Lebanon, be desired to fit out David Fowler, an Indian youth, to
accompany Mr. Samson Occom, going on a mission to the Oneidas; that
said David be supported on said mission for a term not exceeding four
months; and that he endeavor, on his return, to bring with him a
number of Indian boys, not exceeding three, to be put under Mr.
Wheelock's care and instruction, and that £20 be put into Mr.
Wheelock's hands to carry this design into execution.' In November,
1761, the Great and General Court or Assembly of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, voted that I should be allowed to take under my
care six children of the Six Nations, for education, clothing, and
boarding, and be allowed for that purpose, for each of said children,
£12 per annum for one year."[10]

      [9] Agents of the Scotch "Society for Propagating Christian
          Knowledge."

      [10] For tribes represented in the school, and other donors to the
           school and college, see Appendix.




CHAPTER III.

EDUCATION IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.--ACTION IN REGARD TO A
COLLEGE.--TESTIMONIAL OF CONNECTICUT CLERGYMEN.--LEGISLATIVE GRANT TO
MR. WHEELOCK.


The importance of education to the welfare of any community, has been
duly appreciated by the people of New Hampshire from the earliest
periods of her history.

Such an item as the following is worthy of notice:

"At a publique Town Meeting held the 5: 2 mo. 58 [1658,] It is agreed
that Twenty pounds per annum shall be yearly rayzed for the
mayntenance of a School-master in the Town of Dover."[11] Harvard
College being in need of a new building in 1669, the inhabitants of
Portsmouth "subscribed sixty pounds, which sum they agreed to pay
annually for seven years to the overseers of Harvard College. Dover
gave thirty-two pounds, and Exeter ten pounds for the same
purpose."[12] Very few towns at the present day are as liberal, in
proportion to their ability.

      [11] Dover Town Records.

      [12] Adams's Annals of Portsmouth, p. 50.

Classical schools were established in all the more populous towns, and
these were furnished with competent teachers, who were graduates of
Harvard College, or European universities.

In 1758, in the midst of the din and tumult of the French war, we find
the clergy--ever among the foremost in laudable enterprise--making an
earnest effort for increased facilities for liberal education.

We give official records:

"The Convention of the Congregational Ministers in the Province of New
Hampshire, being held at the house of the Rev. Mr. Pike in
Somersworth on the 26th day of Sept. 1758: The Rev. Joseph Adams was
chosen Moderator." After the sermon and transaction of some business:

"The Convention then taking into consideration the great advantages
which may arise, both to the Churches and State from the erecting [an]
Academy or College in this Province, unanimously Voted that the
following Petition shall be preferred to the Governor, desiring him to
grant a Charter for said purpose:

"To his Excellency, Benning Wentworth, Esq., Capt.-General and
Governor-in-Chief in and over his Majesty's Province of New Hampshire
in New England. May it please your Excellency,--

"We, the Ministers of the Congregational Churches in this Province of
New Hampshire under your Excellency's Government now assembled in an
Annual Convention in Somersworth, as has been our custom for several
years past, the design of which is to pray together for his Majesty
and Government, and to consult the interests of religion and virtue,
for our mutual assistance and encouragement in our proper business:
Beg leave to present a request to your Excellency in behalf of
literature, which proceeds, not from any private or party views in us,
but our desire to serve the Government and religion by laying a
foundation for the best instruction of youth. We doubt not your
Excellency is sensible of the great advantages of learning, and the
difficulties which attend the education of youth in this Province, by
reason of our distance from any of the seats of learning, the
discredit of our medium, etc. We have reason to hope that by an
interest among our people, and some favor from the Government, we may
be able in a little time to raise a sufficient fund for erecting and
carrying on an Academy or College within this Province, without
prejudice to any other such seminary in neighboring Colonies, provided
your Excellency will be pleased to grant to us, a number of us, or any
other trustees, whom your Excellency shall think proper to appoint, a
good and sufficient charter, by which they may be empowered to choose
a President, Professors, Tutors, or other officers, and regulate all
matters belonging to such a society. We therefore now humbly petition
your Excellency to grant such a charter as may, in the best manner,
answer such a design and intrust it with our Committee, viz.: Messrs.
Joseph Adams, James Pike, John Moody, Ward Cotton, Nathaniel Gookin,
Woodbridge Odlin, Samuel Langdon, and Samuel Haven, our brethren, whom
we have now chosen to wait upon your Excellency with this our
petition, that we may use our influence with our people to promote so
good a design, by generous subscriptions, and that we may farther
petition the General Court for such assistance, as they shall think
necessary. We are persuaded, if your Excellency will first of all
favor us with such a charter, we shall be able soon to make use of it
for the public benefit; and that your Excellency's name will forever
be remembered with honor. If, after trial, we cannot accomplish it, we
promise to return the charter with all thankfulness for your
Excellency's good disposition. It is our constant prayer that God
would prosper your Excellency's administration, and we beg leave to
subscribe ourselves your Excellency's most obedient servants.

                              Joseph Adams, Moderator.
    "Proceedings attested by  Samuel Haven, Clerk."

"The Convention of Congregational Ministers in the Province of New
Hampshire being held at the house of the Rev. Mr. Joseph Adams in
Newington on the 25th of September, 1759, the Rev. Mr. Adams was
chosen Moderator. We then went to the house of God. After prayer and a
sermon:

"A draught of a charter for a college in this Province being read:
Voted, That the said charter is for substance agreeable to the mind of
the Convention. Whereas a committee chosen last year to prefer a
petition to his Excellency the Governor for a charter of a college in
this Province have given a verbal account to this Convention of their
proceedings and conversation with the Governor upon said affair, by
which, notwithstanding the Governor manifests some unwillingness, at
present, to grant a charter agreeable to the Convention, yet there
remains some hope, that after maturer consideration and advice of
Council, his Excellency will grant such a charter as will be agreeable
to us and our people, therefore, Voted, that Rev. Messrs. Joseph
Adams, James Pike, Ward Cotton, Samuel Parsons, Nathaniel Gookin,
Samuel Langdon, and Samuel Haven, or a major part of them, be and
hereby are a Committee of this Convention, to do everything which to
them shall appear necessary, in the aforesaid affair, in behalf of
this Convention; and, moreover, to consult upon any other measures for
promoting the education of youth, and advancing good literature in the
Province, and make report to the next Convention.

    Attested by               Samuel Haven, Clerk."

The Convention was holden at Portsmouth, September 30, 1760, and at
the same place in September, 1761, but nothing appears in the
proceedings of those years concerning the charter. But at the
convention held at Portsmouth, September 28, 1762, the Rev. Mr. John
Rogers having been chosen moderator, after prayer and sermon, the
following testimonial was laid before the Convention:

"Chelsea, Norwich, July 10, 1762.

"We ministers of the gospel and pastors of churches hereafter
mentioned with our names, having, for a number of years past, heard of
or seen with pleasure the zeal, courage, and firm resolution of the
Rev. Eleazar Wheelock of Lebanon, to prosecute to effect a design of
spreading the gospel among the natives in the wilds of our America,
and especially his perseverance in it, amidst the many peculiar
discouragements he had to encounter during the late years of the war
here, and upon a plan which appears to us to have the greatest
probability of success, namely, by a mission of their own sons; and as
we are verily persuaded that the smiles of Divine Providence upon his
school, and the success of his endeavors hitherto justly may, and
ought, to encourage him and all to believe it to be of God, and that
which he will own and succeed for the glory of his great name in the
enlargement of the kingdom of our divine Redeemer, as well as for the
great benefit of the crown of Great Britain, and especially of his
Majesty's dominions in America; so we apprehend the present openings
in Providence ought to invite Christians of every denomination to
unite their endeavors and to lend a helping hand in carrying on so
charitable a design; and we are heartily sorry if party spirit and
party differences shall at all obstruct the progress of it; or the old
leaven of this land ferment upon this occasion, and give a watchful
adversary opportunity so to turn the course of endeavors into another
channel as to defeat the design of spreading the gospel among the
heathen. To prevent which, and encourage unanimity and zeal in
prosecuting the design, we look upon it our duty as Christians, and
especially as ministers of the gospel, to give our testimony that, as
we verily believe, a disinterested regard to the advancement of the
Redeemer's kingdom and the good will of His Majesty's dominions in
America, were the governing motives which at first induced the Rev.
Mr. Wheelock to enter upon the great affair, and to risk his own
private interest, as he has done since, in carrying it on; so we
esteem his plan to be good, his measures to be prudently and well
concerted, his endowments peculiar, his zeal fervent, his endeavors
indefatigable, for the accomplishing this design, and we know no man,
like minded, who will naturally care for their state. May God prolong
his life, and make him extensively useful in the kingdom of Christ. We
have also, some of us, at his desire examined his accounts, and we
find that, besides giving in all his own labour and trouble in the
affair, he has charged for the support, schooling, etc., of the youth,
at the lowest rate it could be done for, as the price of things have
been and still are among us; and we apprehend the generous donations
already made have been and we are confident will be laid out in the
most prudent manner, and with the best advice for the furtherance of
the important design: and we pray God abundantly to reward the
liberality of many upon this occasion. And we hope the generosity,
especially of persons of distinction and note, will be a happy lead
and inducement to still greater liberalities, and that in consequence
thereof the wide-extended wilderness of America will blossom as the
rose, habitations of cruelty become dwelling places of righteousness
and the blessing of thousands ready to perish come upon all those
whose love to Christ and charity to them has been shown upon this
occasion. Which is the hearty prayer of your most sincere friends and
humble servants:

    Ebenezer Rosetter Pastor of ye 1^st Chh: in Stonington.
    Joseph Fish Pastor of ye 2^d Chh: in Stonington.
    Nath^l Whitaker Pastor of ye Chh: in Chelsea in Norwich.
    Benj^a Pomeroy Pastor of ye 1^st Chh: in Hebron.
    Elijah Lothrop Pastor of ye Chh: of Gilead in Hebron.
    Nath^l Eells Pastor of a Chh: in Stonington.
    Mather Byles Pastor of ye First Chh: in New London.
    Jona. Barber Pastor of a Chh: in Groton.
    Matt. Graves Missionary in New London.
    Peter Powers Pastor of the Chh: at Newent in Norwich.
    Daniel Kirtland Former Pastor of ye Chh: in Newent Norwich.
    Asher Rosetter Pastor of ye 1^st Chh: in Preston.
    Jabez Wight Pastor of ye 4 Chh: in Norwich.
    David Jewett Pastor of a Chh: in New London.
    Benj^a Throop Pastor of a Chh: in Norwich.
    Sam^l Moseley Pastor of a Chh: in Windham.
    Stephen White Pastor of a Chh: in Windham.
    Richard Salter Pastor of a Chh: in Mansfield.
    Timothy Allen Pastor of ye Chh: in Ashford.
    Ephraim Little Pastor of ye 1^st Chh: in Colchester.
    Hobart Estabrook Pastor of a Chh: in East Haddam.
    Joseph Fowler Pastor of a Chh: in East Haddam.
    Benj^a Boardman Pastor of a Chh: in Middletown.
    John Norton Pastor of a Chh: of Christ in Middletown.
    Benj^a Dunning Pastor of a Chh: of Christ in Marlborough."

"Voted, the Rev. Messrs. Moody, Langdon, Haven, and Foster be a
Committee of this Convention to consider and report on the above. Said
committee laid the following draft before the Convention, which was
unanimously voted and signed by the moderator:

"We, a Convention of Congregational Ministers assembled at Portsmouth,
September 28, 1762, having read and considered the foregoing
attestation from a number of reverend gentlemen in Connecticut, taking
into consideration the many obligations the Supreme Ruler has laid
upon Christian churches to promote his cause and enlarge the borders
of his kingdom in this land, the signal victories he has granted to
our troops, the entire reduction of all Canada, so that a way is now
open for the spreading of the light and purity of the gospel among
distant savage tribes, and a large field, white unto the harvest, is
presented before us; considering the infinite worth of the souls of
men, the importance of the gospel to their present and everlasting
happiness, and the hopeful prospect that the aboriginal natives will
now listen to Christian instruction; considering also the great
expense which must unavoidably attend the prosecution of this great
design, think ourselves obliged to recommend, in the warmest manner,
this subject to the serious consideration of our Christian brethren
and the public. It is with gratitude to the Great Head of the Church,
who has the hearts of all in his hands, that we observe some hopeful
steps taken by the societies founded for the gospelizing the Indians,
and the hearts of such numbers, both at home and in this land, have
been disposed to bestow their liberalities to enable such useful
societies to effect the great ends for which they are founded. But as
we wish to see every probable method taken to forward so benevolent
and Christian a design, we, therefore, rejoice to find that the Rev.
Mr. Wheelock has such a number of Indian youths under his care and
tuition; and in that abundant testimony which his brethren in the
ministry have borne to his abilities for, and zeal and faithfulness
in, this important undertaking. And we do hereby declare our hearty
approbation of it, as far as we are capable of judging of an affair
carried on at such a distance; and think it our duty to encourage and
exhort all Christians to lend a helping hand towards so great and
generous an undertaking. We would not, indeed, absolutely dictate
this, or any other particular scheme, for civilizing and spreading the
gospel among the Indians; but we are persuaded that God demands of the
inhabitants of these colonies some returns of gratitude, in this way,
for the remarkable success of our arms against Canada, and that peace
and security which he has now given us; we must, therefore, rely on
the wisdom and prudence of the civil authority to think of it as a
matter in which our political interests as well as the glory of God
are deeply concerned; and we refer to our churches and all private
Christians as peculiarly called to promote the Redeemer's kingdom
everywhere, to determine what will be the most effectual methods of
forwarding so noble and pious a design, and to contribute, to the
utmost of their power, either towards the execution of the plan which
the Rev. Mr. Wheelock is pursuing, or that of the corporation erected
in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, or any other which may be
thought of here or elsewhere, for the same laudable purpose.

    John Rogers, Moderator."

The first Legislative action in New Hampshire relative to Mr.
Wheelock's work is also worthy of notice. The following is from the
Journal of the House of Representatives:

"June 17, 1762, Voted, that the Hon. Henry Sherburne and Mishech
Weare, Esquires, Peter Gilman, Clement March, Esq., Capt. Thomas W.
Waldron, and Capt. John Wentworth be a committee to consider of the
subject-matter of Rev. Mr. Eleazar Wheelock's memorial for aid for his
school." This committee made a favorable report, saying: "We think it
incumbent on this province to do something towards promoting so good
an undertaking," and recommending a grant of fifty pounds sterling per
annum for five years. The action of the Legislature was in accordance
with this report. Later records, however, indicate that the grant was
not continued after the first, or possibly the second, year. Gov.
Benning Wentworth, after careful investigation, gave his official
sanction to the action of his associates, in aid of Mr. Wheelock.




CHAPTER IV.

A COLLEGE CONTEMPLATED BY MR. WHEELOCK.--LORD DARTMOUTH.--OCCOM AND
WHITAKER IN GREAT BRITAIN.


Mr. Wheelock held relations more or less intimate with the leading
educational institutions of the country. But his favorite college was
at Princeton, New Jersey, far removed from his own residence. A warm
friendship subsisted between him and many of its officers, and thither
he sent most of his students for a considerable period. The
inconvenience of doing this, may have suggested the idea of a college
in connection with his school. However this may have been, nothing
short of a college could satisfy him. The following letter, written in
April, 1763, needs no further preface:

"TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL JEFFREY AMHERST, BARONET.

"May it please your Excellency,--The narrative herewith inclosed,
gives your Excellency some short account of the success of my feeble
endeavors, through the blessing of God upon them, in the affair there
related.

"Your Excellency will easily see, that if the number of youth in this
school continues to increase, as it has done, and as our prospects are
that it will do, we shall soon be obliged to build to accommodate them
and accordingly to determine upon the place where to fix it, and I
would humbly submit to your Excellency's consideration the following
proposal, viz.: That a tract of land, about fifteen or twenty miles
square, or so much as shall be sufficient for four townships, on the
west side of Susquehannah river, or in some other place more
convenient in the heart of the Indian country, be granted in favor of
this school: That said townships be peopled with a chosen number of
inhabitants of known honesty, integrity, and such as love and will be
kind to, and honest in their dealings with Indians. That a thousand
acres of, and within said grant, be given to this school, and that
the school be an academy for all parts of useful learning; part of it
to be a college for the education of missionaries, interpreters,
schoolmasters, etc.; and part of it a school to teach reading,
writing, etc., and that there be manufactures for the instruction both
of males and females, in whatever shall be necessary in life, and
proper tutors, masters, and mistresses be provided for the same. That
those towns be furnished with ministers of the best characters, and
such as are of ability, when incorporated with a number of the most
understanding of the inhabitants, to conduct the affairs of the
school, and of such missions as they shall have occasion and ability
for, from time to time. That there be a sufficient number of laborers
upon the lands belonging to the school; and that the students be
obliged to labor with them, and under their direction and conduct, so
much as shall be necessary for their health, and to give them an
understanding of husbandry; and those who are designed for farmers,
after they have got a sufficient degree of school learning, to labor
constantly, and the school to have all the benefit of their labor, and
they the benefit of being instructed therein, till they are of an age
and understanding sufficient to set up for themselves, and introduce
husbandry among their respective tribes; and that there be a moderate
tax upon all the granted lands, after the first ten or fifteen years,
and also some duty upon mills, etc., which shall not be burdensome to
the inhabitants, for the support of the school, or missionaries among
the Indians, etc. By this means much expense, and many inconveniences
occasioned by our great distance from them, would be prevented, our
missionaries be much better supported and provided for, especially in
case of sickness, etc. Parents and children would be more contented,
being nearer to one another, and likely many would be persuaded to
send their children for an education, who are now dissuaded from it
only on account of the great distance of the school from them.

"The bearer, Mr. C. J. S.,[13] is able, if your Excellency desires it,
to give you a more full and particular account of the present state of
this school, having been for some time the master and instructor of
it, and is now designed, with the leave of Providence, the ensuing
summer, to make an excursion as a missionary among the Indians, with
an interpreter from this school.

"And by him your Excellency may favor me with your thoughts on what I
have proposed.

"I am, with sincerest duty and esteem, may it please your Excellency,
your Excellency's most obedient and humble servant,

    Eleazar Wheelock."

      [13] Charles J. Smith.


In 1764, the Scotch Society, already referred to, manifested
increasing interest in Mr. Wheelock's work, by appointing a Board of
Correspondents, selected from gentlemen of high standing, in
Connecticut, to coöperate with him.

We here insert entire, Mr. Wheelock's first letter to Lord Dartmouth:

"TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DARTMOUTH.

"Lebanon, Connecticut, New England, March 1, 1764.

"May it please your Lordship,--

"It must be counted amongst the greatest favors of God to a wretched
world, and that which gives abundant joy to the friends of Zion, that
among earthly dignities there are those who cheerfully espouse the
sinking cause of the great Redeemer, and whose hearts and hands are
open to minister supplies for the support and enlargement of His
kingdom in the world.

"As your Lordship has been frequently mentioned with pleasure by the
lovers of Christ in this wilderness, and having fresh assurance of the
truth of that fame of yours, by the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, from his own
acquaintance with your person and character, and being encouraged and
moved thereto by him, I am now emboldened, without any other apology
for myself than that which the nature of the case itself carries in
its very front, to solicit your Lordship's favorable notice of, and
friendship towards, a feeble attempt to save the swarms of Indian
natives in this land from final and eternal ruin, which must
unavoidably be the issue of those poor, miserable creatures, unless
God shall mercifully interpose with His blessing upon endeavors to
prevent it.

"The Indian Charity School, under my care (a narrative of which,
herewith transmitted, humbly begs your Lordship's acceptance), has
met with such approbation and encouragement from gentlemen of
character and ability, at home and abroad, and such has been the
success of endeavors hitherto used therein, as persuade us more and
more that it is of God, and a device and plan which, under his
blessing, has a greater probability of success than any that has yet
been attempted. By the blessing and continual care of heaven, it has
lived, and does still live and flourish, without any other fund
appropriated to its support than that great one, in the hands of Him,
whose the earth is, and the fullness thereof.

"And I trust there is no need to mention any other considerations to
prove your Lordship's compassions, or invite your liberality on this
occasion, than those which their piteous and perishing case does of
itself suggest, when once your Lordship shall be well satisfied of a
proper and probable way to manifest and express the same with success.
Which I do with the utmost cheerfulness submit to your Lordship,
believing your determination therein to be under the direction of Him
who does all things well. And, if the nature and importance of the
case be not esteemed sufficient excuse for the freedom and boldness I
have assumed, I must rely upon your Lordship's innate goodness to
pardon him who is, with the greatest duty and esteem, my lord,

    "Your Lordship's most obedient,
    "And most humble servant,
    "Eleazar Wheelock."

It is interesting to observe here the agency of Mr. Wheelock's old and
intimate friend, Whitefield. As early as 1760, after alluding to
efforts in his behalf in Great Britain, he wrote to Mr. Wheelock:

"Had I a converted Indian scholar, that could preach and pray in
English, something might be done to purpose."

After much deliberation, Mr. Wheelock determined to send Mr. Occom and
Rev. Nathaniel Whitaker of Norwich, who was deeply interested in his
work, to solicit the charities of British Christians, with a purpose
of more extended operations.

They left this country late in 1765, carrying testimonials from a
large number of eminent civilians and divines.

The following letter indicates that they were cordially welcomed in
England:

"London, February 2, 1766.

My dear Mr. Wheelock,--This day three weeks I had the pleasure of
seeing Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Occom. On their account, I have deferred
my intended journey into the country all next week. They have been
introduced to, and dined with the Daniel of the age, viz., the truly
noble Lord Dartmouth. Mr. Occom is also to be introduced by him to his
Majesty, who intends to favor their design with his bounty. A short
memorial for the public is drawn, which is to be followed with a small
pamphlet. All denominations are to be applied to, and therefore no
mention is made of any particular commissioners or corresponding
committees whatsoever. It would damp the thing entirely. Cashiers are
to be named, and the moneys collected are to be deposited with them
till drawn for by yourself. Mr. Occom hath preached for me with
acceptance, and also Mr. Whitaker. They are to go round the other
denominations in a proper rotation. As yet everything looks with a
promising aspect. I have procured them suitable lodgings. I shall
continue to do everything that lies in my power. Mr. S.[14] is
providentially here,--a fast friend to your plan and his dear country.


"I wish you joy of the long wished for, long prayed for repeal, and
am, my dear Mr. Wheelock,

"Yours, etc., in our glorious Head,

    "George Whitefield."

      [14] Mr. John Smith, of Boston.

We are now introduced to Mr. Wheelock's most valuable coadjutor, the
son of Mark Hunking Wentworth,--another active and earnest friend:

"Bristol, [England,] 16th Dec., 1766.

"The Rev. Mr. Whitaker having requested my testimony of an institution
forming in America, under the name of an Indian School, for which
purpose many persons on that continent and in Europe have liberally
contributed, and he is now soliciting the further aid of all
denominations of people in this kingdom to complete the proposed plan,
I do therefore certify, whomsoever it may concern, that the said
Indian School appears to me to be formed upon principles of extensive
benevolence and unfeigned piety; that the moneys already collected
have been justly applied to this and no other use. From repeated
information of many principal gentlemen in America, and from my own
particular knowledge of local circumstances, I am well convinced that
the charitable contributions afforded to this design will be honestly
and successfully applied to civilize and recover the savages of
America from their present barbarous paganism.

    "J. Wentworth,

    "Governor of New Hampshire."

The annals of philanthropy unfold few things bolder or more romantic
in conception, or grander in execution, or sublimer in results than
this most memorable, most successful pilgrimage. The unique, but
magnetic, marvelous eloquence of this regenerated son of the forest,
as he passed from town to town, and city to city, over England and
Scotland, engaged the attention and opened the hearts of all
classes--the clergy, the nobility, and the peasantry. The names of the
men and women and children, who gave of their abundance or their
poverty, primarily and apparently to civilize and evangelize their
wild and savage brethren across the sea, but ultimately and really to
found one of the most solid and beautiful temples of Christian and
secular learning, in the Western hemisphere, deserve affectionate and
perpetual remembrance, along with those of their kindred, who in a
preceding century dedicated their whole treasure upon Plymouth Rock.

With sincere regret that we have not the name of every donor, yet with
devout gratitude for the preservation of so full a record, we append
the original list of donors in England, as prepared and published at
the time, by Lord Dartmouth and his associates.[15]

      [15] See Appendix.

Never was more timely aid given to a worthy cause. When Mr. Wheelock's
agents went abroad he had a school of about thirty, and an empty
treasury. These funds gave him present comfort, and enabled him to
effect the long-desired removal.




CHAPTER V.


SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON.--EXPLORATIONS FOR A LOCATION. ADVICE OF ENGLISH
TRUSTEES.


Mr. Wheelock was in friendly correspondence, for several years, with
Sir William Johnson, the distinguished Indian agent and
superintendent, who resided in the province of New York, near the Six
Nations. Through his agency, the famous Mohawk, Joseph Brant, was sent
to Mr. Wheelock's school. After enjoying some opportunities for an
estimate of his abilities and character, Mr. Wheelock speaks of him in
highly complimentary terms, as a gentleman, "whose understanding and
influence in Indian affairs, is, I suppose, greater than any other
man's, and to whose indefatigable and successful labors to settle and
secure a peace with the several tribes, who have been at war with us,
our land and nation are under God chiefly indebted."

In September, 1762, Mr. Wheelock writes to Sir William: "I understand
that some of our people are about to settle on a new purchase on
Susquehannah river. It may be a door may open for my design on that
purchase." He also intimates that he desires to set up the school in
his neighborhood. This plan does not meet Sir William's approval, but
in January, 1763, Mr. Wheelock addresses him again, saying: "Gov.
Wentworth has offered a tract of land in the western part of the
province of New Hampshire which he is now settling, for the use of the
school if we will fix it there, and there has been some talk of fixing
it in one of the new townships in the province of the Massachusetts
which lie upon New York line near Albany. I much want to consult your
Honor in the affair." Mr. Wheelock's confidence in his friend having
been strengthened by the receipt of several cordial letters, and
other circumstances, he writes to him, July 4, 1766: "I apprehend you
are able above any man in this land to serve the grand design in
view," desiring to "act in every step" agreeable to his mind, and
informing him that he has sent his son, with Dr. Pomeroy, to confer
with him about a location for the school. He also refers to "arguments
offered to carry it into the Southern governments." But Mr. Johnson
did not see fit to invite the settlement of the school in the
neighborhood of the Six Nations, deeming it unwise, apparently, to
encourage a movement which might be regarded by them as an invasion of
their territory, especially if they were asked to give lands to the
school. This decision virtually determined the location. If Mr.
Wheelock could not follow his old neighbors and friends to the
westward, and plant himself beside the great Indian Confederacy, he
must turn his attention to the northward, where other neighbors and
friends were settling within easy reach of the far-extended Indian
tribes of Canada. Other localities, as we shall see hereafter,
presented some inducements, but they were all of minor importance.
Hence, when his agents returned from Great Britain placing the
long-desired funds for the accomplishment of his purposes in his
hands, we may well imagine that Mr. Wheelock gladly turned toward that
worthy magistrate, who had already shown "a willing heart," for more
aid.

In the meantime, Mr. Wheelock was giving the matter of a location his
most earnest and careful attention. In a letter to Mr. Whitefield,
dated September 4, 1766, he says: "We cannot get land enough on Hudson
river." Nor has he any more hope of success on the Mohawk. "Large
offers have been made in the new settlements on Connecticut river. It
is likely that near twenty thousand acres would be given in their
several towns." After stating that "Col. Willard" has made generous
offers of lands, "on Sugar river," he says: "that location would be
the most inviting of any part of that country. Samuel Stevens, Esq.,
offers two thousand acres to have it at No. 4. Col. Chandler offers
two thousand acres in the centre of the town of Chester, opposite to
No. 4, nine miles from the River. The situation of Wyoming, on
Susquehannah river, is very convenient."[16] A few months later,
General Schuyler earnestly advocated the claims of Albany as a
favorable location.

      [16] See Appendix.

But Mr. Wheelock's friends were very unwilling that he should leave
Connecticut. Windham and Hebron[17] made earnest efforts to obtain the
school. We quote from Lebanon parish records:

      [17] See Appendix.

"At a legal and full meeting of the Inhabitants, legal voters of the
second society in Lebanon [now Columbia], in Connecticut, held in said
society on the 29th day of June, Anno Domini 1767, We made choice of
Mr. James Pinneo to be moderator of said meeting, and passed the
following votes, _nemine contradicente_:

"1. That we desire the Indian Charity School now under the care of the
Rev. Mr. Eleazar Wheelock, may be fixed to continue in this society:
provided it may consist with the interest and prosperity of said
School.

"2. That as we have a large and convenient house for public and divine
Worship, we will accommodate the members of said school with such
convenient seats in said house as we shall be able.

"3. That the following letter be presented to the Rev. Mr. Eleazar
Wheelock, by Messrs. Israel Woodward, James Pinneo, and Asahel Clark,
Jun., in the name and behalf of this society; and that they desire him
to transmit a copy of the same, with the votes foregoing, to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Dartmouth, and the rest of those Honorable and
Worthy Gentlemen in England who have condescended to patronize said
school; and to whom the establishment of the same is committed.

"The Inhabitants of the Second Society in Lebanon in Connecticut to
the Rev. Mr. Eleazar Wheelock, Pastor of said Society.

"Rev. and ever dear Pastor,--As you are witness to our past care and
concern for the success of your most pious and charitable undertaking
in favor of the poor perishing Indians on this continent, we are
confident you will not be displeased at our addressing you on this
occasion; but that you would rather think it strange if we should
altogether hold our peace at such a time as this; when we understand
it is still in doubt both with yourself and friends where to fix your
school; whether at Albany or more remote among the Indian tribes, in
this society where it was first planted, or in some other part of this
colony proposed for its accommodation.

"We have some of us heard most of the arguments offered for its
removal, and however plausible they appear we are not at all convinced
of their force, or that it is expedient, everything considered, it
should be removed, nor do we think we have great reason to fear the
event, only we would not be wanting as to our duty in giving such
hints in favor of its continuance here as naturally and easily occur
to our minds, for we have that confidence in you and the friends of
the design, that you will not be easily carried away with appearances:
but will critically observe the secret springs of those generous
offers, made in one place and another, (some of which are beyond what
we can pretend to,) whether some prospect of private emolument be not
at the bottom; or whether they will finally prove more kind to your
pious institution as such considered, (whatever their pretenses may
be,) than they have been or at present appear to be to the Redeemer's
Kingdom in general. We trust this institution, so well calculated to
the advancement of its interest, will flourish best among the
Redeemer's friends; and although with respect to ourselves we have
little to boast as to friendship to our divine Redeemer or his
interest, yet this we are sure of, that he has been very kind to us,
in times past, and we trust has made you the instrument of much good
to us, and to lay a foundation for it to succeeding generations; we
humbly hope God has been preparing an habitation for himself here, and
has said of it, this is my resting place, here will I dwell forever,
(not because they deserved it,) but because I have desired it, and
where God is pleased to dwell, under his influence your institution
(which we trust is of Him) may expect to live and thrive. We desire it
may be considered that this is its birth place, here it was kindly
received, and nourished when no other door was set open to it--here it
found friends when almost friendless, yea when despised and contemned
abroad--its friends are now increased here as well as elsewhere, and
although by reason of our poverty and the hardness of the times, our
subscriptions are small compared with what some others may boast,
being at present but about £810 lawful money, yet there are here some
other privileges which we think very valuable and serviceable to the
design, viz. 400 acres of very fertile and good land, about forty
acres of which are under improvement, and the remainder well set with
choice timber and fuel, and is suitably proportioned for the various
branches of Husbandry which will much accommodate the design as said
land is situated within about half a mile of our Meeting House, and
may be purchased for fifty shillings lawful money per acre. There is
also several other small parcels of land suitably situate for building
places for the use of the school to be sold at a reasonable rate. We
have also a beautiful building place for said school within a few rods
of said meeting house, adjacent to which is a large and pleasant
Green: and we are confident that wood, provisions, and clothing, etc.,
which will be necessary for the school, may be had here not only now,
but in future years, at as low a rate as in any place in the colony,
or in any other place where it has been proposed to settle your
school. These privileges, we think, are valuable and worthy your
consideration, and also of those honourable and worthy gentlemen in
England to whom you have committed the decision of the affair, and
from the friendly disposition which has so many years past and does
still reign in our breasts towards it, we think it may be presumed we
shall from time to time be ready to minister to its support as
occasion shall require and our circumstances permit. We take the
liberty further to observe that such has hitherto been the peace and
good order (greatly through your instrumentality), obtaining among us
that the members of your school have all along been as free from
temptations to any vicious courses or danger of fatal error as perhaps
might be expected they would be on any spot of this universally
polluted globe.

"Here, dear sir, your school has flourished remarkably. It has grown
apace; from small beginnings how very considerable has it become; an
evidence that the soil and climate suit the institution--if you
transplant it you run a risk of stinting its growth, perhaps of
destroying its very life, or at least of changing its nature and
missing the pious aim you have all along had in view; a danger which
scarce needs to be hinted, as you are sensible it has been the common
fate of institutions of this kind that charitable donations have been
misapplied and perverted to serve purposes very far from or contrary
to those the pious donors had in view; such is the subtilty of the old
serpent that he will turn all our weapons against ourselves if
possible. Aware of this, you have all along appeared to decline and
even detest all such alliances and proposals as were calculated for,
or seemed to promise any private emolument to your self or your
friends. This, we trust, is still your prevailing temper, and rejoice
to hear that your friends and those who are intrusted with the affair
in England are exactly in the same sentiments, happy presage not only
of the continuance of the institution itself but we hope of its
immutability as to place. One thing more we beg leave to mention (not
to tire your patience with the many that occur), viz. if you remove
the school from us, you, at the same time, take away our Minister, the
light of our eyes and joy of our hearts, under whose ministrations we
have sat with great delight; whose labors have been so acceptable, and
we trust profitable, for a long time; must, then, our dear and worthy
Pastor and his pious institution go from us together? Alas, shall we
be deprived of both in one day? We are sensible that we have abused
such privileges and have forfeited them; and at God's bar we plead
guilty--we pray Him to give us repentance and reformation, and to
lengthen out our happy state; we own the justice of God in so heavy
losses, if they must be inflicted; and even in the removal of our
Candlestick out of its place, but we can't bear the thought that you
our Dear Pastor and the dear friends to your pious institution should
become the executioners of such a vengeance. However, we leave the
matter with you, and are with much duty and filial regard, dear sir,
Your very humble servants or rather obedient children.

    "By order of said Society,    Israel Woodward,
                                  James Pinneo,
                                  Asahel Clark, Jr."

    "June 29, 1767."

This interesting document bears the same date with Mr. Wheelock's
Doctorate in Divinity, from the University of Edinburgh.

Dr. Wheelock, appreciating the importance of a better knowledge of the
comparative advantages of the various proposed locations, finally
determined to commission trustworthy agents, to make thorough
explorations. We give his language, in substance:


    "Lebanon, Connecticut, July 20, 1768.

"Whereas the number in my Indian Charity School is now, by the
blessing of God, become so large as that it is necessary the place
where to fix it should be speedily determined, and so many and
generous have been the offers made for that purpose by gentlemen of
character and distinction in several neighboring governments, I do,
therefore, hereby authorize and appoint the Rev. Mr. Ebenezer
Cleaveland, of Gloucester, in the province of the Massachusetts Bay,
and my son, Ralph Wheelock (while the Rev. Dr. Whitaker is performing
the like part in Pennsylvania) in my name and stead, to wait upon his
Excellency John Wentworth, Esq., Governor of New Hampshire, and his
associates in office, to know what countenance and encouragement they
will give to accommodate and endow said school, in case it should be
fixed in the western part of that province."

Deep interest in Dr. Wheelock's work being manifested by Rev. Thomas
Allen and others, at Pittsfield; Timothy Woodbridge and others, at
Stockbridge;[18] and Abraham J. Lansing, the founder of
Lansingburg,[19] and many others in that Province, they were also
instructed to extend their explorations to Western Massachusetts and
to New York.

      [18] See Appendix.

      [19] See Appendix.

The following is the material portion of Mr. Cleaveland's report:

"I waited upon his Excellency John Wentworth, Esq., Governor of New
Hampshire. He appeared very friendly to the design--promised to grant
a township, six miles square, to the use of the school, provided it
should be fixed in that Province, and that he would use his influence
that his Majesty should give the quit-rents to the school, to be free
from charge of fees except for surveying. Esquire Whiting, the Deputy
Surveyor, being present, offered his assistance to look out the
township and survey it, and give the service to the school. His
Excellency the Governor recommended him to me for that purpose (since
which, we found Landaff, a good township, to have forfeited the
charter, of which we advised the Governor, and were informed [that] he
promised to reserve it for the school). After spending a few days on
our way with gentlemen of the lower towns, who appeared universally
desirous that the school should come into that Province, and were
generous in their offers to encourage the same, but proposed their
donations, generally, where their interests in land lay we proceeded
to Plymouth, Romney, and Compton, where Mr. Whiting left me. Five
thousand acres of land were proposed to be given, on condition the
school be fixed in either of these towns. Seventy-five pounds sterling
and twenty thousand feet of boards (besides land) are offered on
condition it should be fixed in Compton. The arguments used for fixing
the school here are--'t is the centre of that province; good and easy
portage by land and water to Portsmouth and Newbury; but twenty-seven
miles further than Connecticut river from the Indians.

"From thence I travelled to Cohos, on Connecticut river; the
inhabitants of that new country were universally much engaged to have
the school fixed there, both from a respect to Dr. Wheelock's person
and a regard to the general design; it would be too lengthy to mention
the particular offers that were generously made. Besides what has been
already mentioned, upwards of sixteen thousand acres are already
subscribed, chiefly by gentlemen of the most noted and public
characters in the Province of New Hampshire; and more is subscribing
to have it fixed in the country of Cohos. Besides which, large
subscriptions have been made and are still making which centre in
particular towns, the principal of which and those where I was
advised, and thought proper to take the most particular view, were
Haverhill and Orford. These places are about equally distant from
Portsmouth, ninety-two miles, thirty of which is good water carriage,
the rest may be made a good wagon road. In this new country there are
more than two hundred towns chartered, settled, and about to settle,
and generally of a religious people, which do, and soon will, want
ministers; and they have no college or public seminary of learning for
that purpose in that Province, which want they apprehend may be
supplied by this school without any disadvantage to, or interfering in
the least, with the general design of it. These places are situate
about forty miles nearer to the Six Nations than the place where the
school now is; they are about one hundred miles from Mount Royal and
about sixty from Crown Point; and, perhaps, about sixty from the
Indians at St. Francis, to whom there is water portage by Connecticut
and St. Francis Rivers, except a mile or two; there is also water
carriage from hence by the Lakes and St. Lawrence River, etc., by the
Six Nations and the tribes many hundred miles west, except very small
land carriages. Population in this new country is very rapid, and will
doubtless be much more so if the Doctor should remove there with his
school, and their lands will soon bear a great price. From hence I
went with Mr. John Wright (whom the Doctor sent to accompany me in my
further inquiry) to Hatfield, in the Province of the Massachusetts;
and found gentlemen there universally desirous to have the school
fixed in Berkshire County in the western part of that Province."

This region was visited by them, as well as New York. During the
autumn of 1768, by commission of Dr. Wheelock, Mr. Cleaveland, in
company with Mr. Allen Mather, also attended a large "Congress" of
several Indian tribes, at Fort Stanwix. In his report, after referring
to friendly conference with other chiefs, he says: "I also saw one
from Caghnawaga near Montreal, who desired to know if he could get his
son into Dr. Wheelock's school, and manifested a great desire to send
him. I told him there was talk of the school's going to Cohos. He said
if it should be fixed there, he believed that many of that tribe would
send their children to it."[20] This Canadian chief's statement was
considered, most carefully, by Dr. Wheelock. The proper documents were
forwarded with the least practicable delay to the English Trustees,
and elicited the following response:

      [20] See Appendix.

    "London, 3d April, 1769.

"Reverend Sir:--Last week we received your letters of the 22d and 23d
December, 1768, and 10th of January, 1769; and being convinced how
necessary it is for the prosperity of your pious institution, as well
as for the peace of your own mind, that a place should be fixed upon
for the future establishment of your school as soon as possible, we
have attentively considered the report of Mr. Ebenezer Cleaveland,
whom you employed to take a view of the several spots proposed for
that purpose, together with the other papers which have now and
heretofore been transmitted to us relative to that matter; and, upon
weighing the several generous offers and proposals that have been made
to you by gentlemen of different governments for the benevolent
purpose of promoting the important design of your institution, and the
reasons that have been offered or have occurred to us in support of
each, we are unanimously of opinion that the most advantageous
situation for carrying on the great purposes of your school, will be
in one of the townships belonging to the District of Cowas, in the
Government of New Hampshire, agreeable to the proposal of Governor
Wentworth and the gentlemen who have generously expressed their
intention of contributing to that design; but whether Haverhill or
Orford may be the most eligible for this purpose, we must leave to
your judgment to determine. According to the best information we can
procure of the state of those towns, we think you may possibly give
the preference to the former, especially if the farm which you mention
as very convenient for an immediate supply of provisions, can be
procured upon reasonable terms.

"We found our opinion, principally, upon this reason, that it appears
to us that Cowas is the most central of the situations that have been
proposed between the Indians of the Six Nations, on the one hand, and
those of St. Francis and of the other tribes to the eastward, on the
other; and that it is not inferior to any of the rest in other
respects. For this reason, we cannot but recommend to you to accept
the offers of Governor Wentworth and the Gentlemen in New Hampshire.
And we heartily pray that the same good Providence which has so
remarkably blessed your undertaking hitherto, may continue to protect
and prosper it in its farther progress, and may prolong your life,
that you may have the satisfaction to see it fixed upon such a plan as
may afford a reasonable hope of answering all the good purposes you
have in view.

    "We are, Reverend Sir,

    "Your most obedient servants,

    Dartmouth,
    S. S. Smythe,
    Samuel Roffey,
    John Thornton,
    Daniel West,
    Charles Hardy,
    Samuel Savage,
    Jos. Robarts,
    Robert Keen."

    "Received August 10, 1769."




CHAPTER VI.

A COLLEGE CHARTER.


The long-protracted efforts of Mr. Wheelock,[21] to provide legal
safeguards for donations in aid of his great work, now demand careful
attention.

      [21] It will be observed that the appropriate title, at the period
           under consideration, is given to the founder of the college
           here as elsewhere in this work.

The deed of Mr. Joshua More, conveying two acres of land with
buildings attached, was dated July 17, 1755, a short time previous to
his death. Mr. Wheelock now placed himself in confidential relations
with two eminent lawyers in New York, William Smith, and his son
William Smith, Jr., the latter of whom, perhaps, may be said to have
left his impress upon the Constitution of the United States, through
his distinguished pupil, Gouverneur Morris. The correspondence, at
first, seems to have been chiefly with Mr. Smith, Senior. August 6,
1755, he writes to Mr. Wheelock: "The means for the accomplishment of
so charitable a design seem at present very imperfect." He suggests,
that there is "no incorporation" of Mr. Wheelock and the other
gentlemen to whom Mr. More conveyed the property; that the deed
contains "no consideration;" and that the estate is at most only "for
life." He advises Mr. Wheelock, at least, to procure a better deed,
which was afterwards executed by Mrs. More. The death of Mr.
Wheelock's most influential and valuable associate trustee,
ex-President Williams, only a few days after the conveyance by Mr.
More, was a severe loss, and a temporary embarrassment to his
associates. But Mr. Wheelock determined to proceed in his efforts for
an incorporation, relying mainly upon the dictates of his own judgment
for direction. After the lapse of some five years, in February, 1760,
he gives the results to Mr. Smith, in language of which the following
is the substance: "We sent home some years ago for the royal favor of
a Charter. Lord Halifax approved the design, but [to save expense]
advised, instead of a Charter, the establishment of the school by a
law of Connecticut Colony, and promised that when sent there it should
be ratified in Council, which he supposed would be as sufficient as
any act there. Hereupon I attended our Assembly, in May, 1758, with a
memorial, the prayer of which was granted by the House of
Representatives; the Governor and Council negatived it, upon the
ground that their action would not be valid, if ratified in England,
beyond this Colony, and that a corporation within a corporation might
be troublesome, as Yale College had sometimes been. I am since
informed that the Earl of Dartmouth has promised, if the matter shall
be put into a proper channel, to undertake and go through with it at
his own expense."

Thus it appears that Lord Dartmouth was desirous of aiding Mr.
Wheelock by his influence, and otherwise, long before being asked by
him for pecuniary aid. In explanation of the governor's objections, it
should be stated, that Mr. Wheelock desired such an incorporation as
would enable him to locate his school in any of the American Colonies,
and that there was just at that period an earnest contest between the
corporation of Yale College, led by President Clap, and the Colonial
government, in regard to the control of that institution.

Nothing having been accomplished in the meantime, Mr. Wheelock writes
in July, 1763, to his friend, Dr. Erskine, as follows: "Governor Fitch
privately proposes my removing my prayer for an incorporation from
this government [Connecticut]. It is likely we shall delay, it till we
see the success of our suit for the Royal favor." In September
following, he writes to his friend, Mr. De Berdt, in London, that he
has sent to him "materials, by General Lyman[22] and Colonel
Dyer,"[23] to enable him to "make application for an incorporation."
Unsuccessful as before in England, for reasons which will become more
apparent hereafter, in May, 1764, we find Mr. Wheelock petitioning
the Connecticut Assembly "to incorporate" six gentlemen of the Colony,
including George Wyllis, of Hartford, and himself, as legal guardians
of his school. But he did not procure the long-desired incorporation.

      [22] The distinguished Gen. Phineas Lyman.

      [23] Hon. Eliphalet Dyer, of Windham.

In 1765, being about to send solicitors of charity on a larger scale
to England, Mr. Wheelock decided to make yet one more effort there for
an act of incorporation. A letter from Mr. Smith, written evidently
about this time, no date being attached, contains advice to Mr.
Wheelock in which we trace one of the most prominent features of the
Charter. He proposes, in substance: "an application to the King for a
short Charter incorporating. First, A sett of gentlemen in the
Colonies near Mr. Wheelock, who shall have all the power of a
corporation, as to managing estates, supplying vacancies, etc. Second,
Another sett in England and elsewhere in Europe, who, shall be
correspondents of the first sett, and only have the general power of
securing donations to be transferred to them."

Lord Dartmouth and the other gentlemen in England who were
constituted, by Mr. Wheelock, a Board of Trust for the moneys
collected in that country, by Messrs. Occom and Whitaker, seem to have
thought this private incorporation amply sufficient for the security
of these funds. In writing to Mr. Keen, in November, 1767, Mr. (now
Dr.) Wheelock alludes to the fact that this gentleman had expressed an
opinion that his successor should be "in all respects accountable to
the present Trust." Although dissenting from this opinion, Dr.
Wheelock seems to have been prudent and conciliatory in his
intercourse with his worthy benefactors, wisely deeming it an object
of primary importance to raise the requisite funds for his operations.

Messrs. Occom and Whitaker having fulfilled their mission abroad, and
generous promises of aid having been made by Governor Wentworth, we
find Dr. Wheelock, in October, 1768, writing to him as follows: "As
soon as the place to fix the school shall have been determined to be
in your Province, I will appoint your Excellency, or the Governor for
the time being, to be a Trustee on this side the water till a legal
incorporation may be obtained." This shows that Dr. Wheelock was not
averse to a judicious admixture of the clerical and lay elements in
the Board of Trust, although the Trustees named in his will, the germ
of the charter, were clergymen.

The suggestion seems to have been most kindly received by Governor
Wentworth. Dr. Wheelock now determined to avail himself of the aid of
his firm and valuable friend, Rev. Dr. Langdon, of Portsmouth. A
letter from him to this gentleman is as follows:

    "Lebanon, April 7, 1769.

"Reverend and dear Sir,--Yours by Captain Cushman is safe arrived, and
I have considered the contents. And for several reasons I am of
opinion that it will be best that the Trustees be the same for the
present, as I have already appointed in my will, which I have made at
the desire of the Trust in England, whose names were, with the will,
some time ago transmitted to them. The affair is very delicate, and as
such must be conducted, or it will disgust those worthy gentlemen, and
overset all. Their sentiments of an incorporation have been differing
from mine. They have insisted that I should conduct the whole affair
without one, and that my successor should be nominated and appointed
by my will. Experience, they think, has fully taught them that, by
means of an incorporation, such designs become jobs, and are soon
ruined thereby. They choose to hold the moneys collected there in
their own hands for this purpose, and accordingly have publicly
declared their Trust of the same under their hands and seals, and have
disposed of it, as their wisdom directed, for the benefit of the
school. I have, therefore, after much study and consultation in the
affair, appointed two setts of Trustees, namely, those in England who
have voluntarily condescended to make themselves so, to take care of
whatever concerns the object in view on that side the water; and a
sett in this vicinity, to take care of and perform whatever shall
concern it on this side. I have appointed a successor, to take care of
the school, etc., only till he shall be approved and confirmed by the
concurrence of both setts of Trustees, or till they all agree in
another, nominated by either and approved by both, each sett to have
power to supply vacancies in their Trust, made by death or
resignation, by the major vote of the survivors; something like this I
conceive will be most agreeable to the Right Honorable, Honorable, and
generous benefactors who have accepted the Trust in England, and I
apprehend it will make the design popular and respectable.

"The Trustees here will hold and have the disposal of lands given in
America for this use; and I apprehend it will be proper for his
Majesty's Governor of the Province for the time being to be a Trustee,
but at present I have not light enough to determine a propriety in
making his Majesty himself one on this side the water.

"I have several reasons, which appear to me weighty, for having the
body of the Trustees first incorporated in this vicinity.

"1. They will be at hand to conduct the affairs of the school,
missionaries, schoolmasters, etc., till I can get settled in the
wilderness, which will be impracticable, if they are at the distance
of Portsmouth.

"2. Several of the Trustees talk of removing with me to settle in that
vicinity; and if so, they may for a time act as a committee, till a
sufficient number suitable for that Trust shall be settled (as you
will observe will be expedient) near to the school.

"3. Till this be done, my connections will likely be such as will
oblige me to make frequent visits to these parts, where we may have a
full meeting of the Board without any expense.

"4. Gentlemen here have been so much concerned in Indian affairs, that
I suppose it not to be immodest to say _ceteris paribus_, they are at
present better qualified to act therein than those who will have to
encounter a thousand dangers and difficulties before unthought of.

"5. By having the body corporate here, I can claim a valuable
subscription of £400 or £500 for the use and support of the school,
payable as soon as it becomes a body corporate, besides a tenement in
this place, given for the same purpose.

"If the school should once be settled in those parts, it is likely
population will proceed with much greater rapidity than ever, and the
whole will be soon effected.

"I design to consult some gentlemen of the law relative to an
incorporation, and get a rough draught made, with a view to save time
if the School should be fixed in your Province. Please to discourse
his Excellency of thoughts I have here suggested, and transmit such
remarks as he shall please to make thereon. Please to commend my
respects suitably to him, and accept the same yourself from, reverend
and dear sir,

    Your Friend and Brother, etc.,
    "Eleazar Wheelock."

"Colonel Wyllis and Esquire Ledyard," of Hartford, were among Dr.
Wheelock's legal advisers in 1768, and probably at this period.

June 7, 1769, we find Dr. Wheelock addressing Governor Wentworth as
follows:

"I have been making some attempt to form a Charter, in which some
proper respect may be shown to those generous benefactors in England
who have condescended to patronize this school, and I want to be
informed whether you think it consistent to make the Trust in England
a distinct corporation, with power to hold real estate, etc., for the
uses and purposes of this school."

But the impress of Governor Wentworth does not appear till a somewhat
later period. August 22, 1769, Dr. Wheelock informs him that he is
about to present him a "rough draught" of a Charter, for an "Academy,"
adding this somewhat significant postscript: "Sir, if you think proper
to use the word College instead of Academy in the Charter, I shall be
well pleased with it."

Dr. Wheelock's son-in-law, Mr. Alexander Phelps, and Rev. Dr. Whitaker
seem to have been the principal agents to confer with Governor
Wentworth in regard to the Charter.

October 18, 1769, he gives his views at length, in a letter to Dr.
Wheelock, advising some amendments. Proposing some additions to the
Board of Trust, he says: "The nomination of the Provincial officers I
strongly recommend, though I do not insist upon. It was indeed
resolved on my side that the Governor should be one" of the Board.
"That I did not mention any other than the Governor can by no means be
preclusive. Neither did I so intend it. The three Provincial officers
will be a natural defense, honor and security to the institution."

The following letter indicates that Governor Wentworth had eminent
legal counsel:

"Rev. Sir: I have had an opportunity of conferring with Colonel Phelps
on the affair of the College proposed to be erected here. You'll find
some alterations in the scheme and draft of the Charter; they are
supposed to be amendments, and I think they, to say the least, will
not be impediments. I cannot stay to enumerate them; the Charter will
show them and the Colonel will be able to explain the grounds and
reasons of them. I have spent some considerable time with the Governor
to form the plan in such a manner as will make it most beneficial, and
to prevail on him to make such concessions as would suit the gentlemen
with you. I am apt to think the plan will be more serviceable as it
now stands than as it was before.

I shall be glad to serve the cause, and have persuaded Colonel Phelps
to communicate it before the finishing stroke, though it will cost him
another journey. I have only to add that I am, with great esteem,

    "Your most obedient humble servant,
    "William Parker.
    "Portsmouth, October 28, 1769."

Six Connecticut clergymen, selected by Dr. Wheelock, with one member
of the Connecticut Colonial government, Governor Wentworth, with three
of his Council, and the Speaker of the New Hampshire House of
Representatives, were constituted the first Board of Trust. This
arrangement, the result of friendly negotiation, appears to have been
satisfactory to both parties.

October 25, 1769, Dr. Wheelock writes to Governor Wentworth,
expressing much satisfaction with his "catholic views," and warm
friendship, as indicated by his letter of the 18th, and says: "If your
Excellency shall see fit in your wisdom and goodness to complete the
Charter desired, and it will be the least satisfaction to you to
christen the House to be built after your own name, it will be
exceedingly grateful to me, and I believe to all concerned." He deems
it important that the public should understand, "that the benevolent
charities are not designed to be applied merely and exclusively to the
advancement of sectaries, with a fixed view to discourage the
Established Church of England." It should here be remarked that
three of the original Trustees of the College were nominally
Episcopalians, and the remaining nine were, most or all, nominally
Congregationalists, although some had Presbyterian tendencies.

In writing to Lord Dartmouth, March 12, 1770, after referring to the
"enclosed copy of incorporation," which was dated December 13, 1769,
President Wheelock says: "Governor Wentworth thought best to reject
that clause in my draught of the Charter which gave the Honorable
Trust in England equal power with the Trustees here to nominate and
appoint the president, from time to time, apprehending it would make
the body too unwieldy, but he cheerfully consented that I should
express my gratitude and duty to your Lordship, by christening after
your name; and as there seemed to be danger of many embarrassments, in
many ways, in the present ruffled and distempered state of the
kingdom, I thought prudent to embrace the first opportunity to
accomplish it." The letter indicates that Dr. Wheelock determined what
should be the name of the institution without conferring with his
distinguished benefactor on that point.

That the English Trustees were somewhat dissatisfied, temporarily,
with the measure of responsibility assumed by Dr. Wheelock, there is
no doubt. But nearly perfect harmony was restored, by the prudence of
that excellent diplomatist. In writing to these gentlemen, June 20,
1771; he says: "I am confident that, had you been upon the spot, you
would have approved every step I have taken, unless it was my attempt
to effect so great an affair as settling in this wilderness in so
short a time, which the event has fully justified, although my trials
have been very great." He also expresses the opinion, that, if they
will compare his plan proposed in his former letters with his
procedure since, they will find that he has "invariably kept the same
object in view." Later records indicate that President Wheelock still
numbered Lord Dartmouth and others of the English Board among his
faithful friends. Although not officially connected with the college,
they evidently cherished an abiding interest in its welfare.

The Charter, so remarkable in its history, is a valuable and an
enduring monument to the genius, skill, and learning of its
distinguished framers.[24] Like the Charters of Harvard and Yale, it
indicates that the clergy were regarded, generally, as the best
depositaries of educational trusts. In the former case, the "teaching
elders" of the "six next adjoining towns" were ex-officio,
"Overseers;" in the latter, the original Trustees were all clergymen.
It may safely be asserted that, of the large number of eminent
gentlemen, who, as Trustees, have administered the affairs of
Dartmouth College, none have been more eminent for their wisdom or
fidelity than the reverend clergy.

      [24] See Appendix.

[Illustration: Handwritten letter]




CHAPTER VII.

PRESIDENT WHEELOCK'S PERSONAL EXPLORATIONS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.--LOCATION
AT HANOVER.


In his "Narrative" for 1771, President Wheelock tells the story of
Dartmouth's location in the Granite State so plainly and
satisfactorily, that we can do no better than to give his own
recapitulation and condensation of the leading facts.

"The smiles of heaven upon this school were such that it appeared
quite necessary to build to accommodate it; and the plan which I laid
for this purpose was to secure a sufficient tract of good land for the
only use and benefit of the school, and that the English charity
scholars should be led to turn their exercises for the relaxation of
their minds from their studies, and for the preservation of health,
from such exercises as have been frequently used by students for these
purposes, to such manual labor as might be subservient to the support
of the school, thereby effectually removing the deep prejudices, so
universal in the minds of the Indians, against going into the business
of husbandry."

"The necessity of building, and also that I proposed to fix it at any
distance where the design might be best served by it, became publicly
known, whereupon great numbers in Connecticut and in neighboring
Provinces made generous offers to invite the settlement of it in their
respective places. In which affair I employed proper agents to view
the several situations proposed, and hear the several arguments and
reasons that might be offered by the solicitors for it, and make a
faithful report of the same.

"The magistracy of the city of Albany offered an interest estimated at
£2,300 sterling, besides private donations, which it was supposed
would be large, to fix it in that city. Several other generous offers
were made to fix it in that vicinity. His Excellency, Sir Francis
Bernard, Governor of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in
company with two others, offered 2,000 acres of good land in a central
town[25] in the county of Berkshire in said Province. To which were
added several other donations, amounting in the whole to 2,800 acres
of land, and a subscription said to be about £800 sterling. Also
generous offers were made to it in Stockbridge and other towns in that
Province. Several generous offers were made by particular towns and
parishes in the Colony of Connecticut, and particularly to continue it
where it had its rise. But the country being so filled up with
inhabitants, it was not practicable to get so large a tract of lands
as was thought to be most convenient and useful for it in those old
settlements. The Honorable Trust in England gave the preference to the
western part of the Province of New Hampshire, on Connecticut river,
as the site of the school."

      [25] Pittsfield.

Before this period he "began to be convinced by many weighty reasons
that a greater proportion of English youth must be prepared for
missionaries to take entirely the lead of the affairs in the
wilderness." He also was deeply impressed with the want of ministers
in a large number of towns, nearly two hundred in all, just then newly
settling in the Connecticut valley. In view of all the circumstances,
and especially the fact that there was a disposition on the part of
many young men who had the ministry in view to seek preparation for it
elsewhere, than at Yale or Harvard, he felt it his duty to adhere to
his plan of extension.

"As neither the Honorable Trust in England nor the Charter had fixed
upon the particular town or spot on which the buildings should be
erected, wherefore to complete the matter, as soon as the ways and
streams would allow, I took the Rev. Mr. Pomeroy, and Esq. [Samuel]
Gilbert (a gentleman of known ability for such a purpose) with me to
examine thoroughly, and compare the several places proposed, within
the limits prescribed for fifty or sixty miles on or near said River;
and to hear all the reasons and arguments that could be offered in
favor of each of them, in which service we faithfully spent eight
weeks. And in consequence of our report and representation of facts,
the Trustees unanimously agreed that the southwesterly corner of
Hanover adjoining upon Lebanon was the place above any to fix it in;
and that for many reasons, namely, it is most central on the River,
and most convenient for transportation up and down the River; as near
as any to the Indians; convenient for communication with Crown Point
on Lake Champlain, and with Canada. The situation is on a beautiful
plain, the soil fertile and easy of cultivation. The tract on which
the college is fixed, lying mostly in one body, and convenient for
improvement, in the towns of Hanover and Lebanon, contains upwards of
3,000 acres."

We quote from official records:

    "Portsmouth, New Hampshire, July 5, 1770.

"We, the subscribers nominated Trustees of Dartmouth College, in the
Charter of said college, and being duly qualified as directed by said
Charter, have taken into consideration the places whereon said college
might be situated; and do hereby certify that it is our advice,
opinion and vote that said Dartmouth College be situated and erected
upon lands in the township of Hanover upon Connecticut river in the
Province aforesaid, provided the lands, moneys, and other aids
subscribed for the use of said Dartmouth College, if placed in Hanover
aforesaid, be firmly and securely conveyed to the Trustees of and for
the use of said College. And also that the said town of Hanover, and
Lebanon, previously consent and petition to the Legislature that a
contiguous parish of at least three miles square, in and adjoining to
these aforesaid towns of Hanover and Lebanon, be set off and
incorporated into a separate and distinct parish under the immediate
jurisdiction of the aforesaid Dartmouth College.

"In witness whereof we have hereunto signed this instrument for
placing buildings and establishing the said college in Hanover
aforesaid, upon the aforesaid conditions.

    "J. Wentworth.
    "Theodore Atkinson.
    "Eleazar Wheelock.
    "George Jaffrey.
    "D. Pierce.
    "P. Gilman.
    "Benj. Pomeroy."

    "Hartford, 17th July, 1770.

"We, the subscribers, being nominated Trustees of Dartmouth College,
and being duly qualified according to the Charter of such college, do
hereby agree to the situation of said college as determined by the
Trustees as above signed; provided (in addition to the conditions they
have specified), that Dr. Wheelock may be accommodated with a suitable
farm, at or near the college; apprehending that his past labors and
expenses, and his present connection with said institution, justly
merit such consideration.

    "Wm. Pitkin,
    "James Lockwood,
    "Timothy Pitkin,
    "John Smalley."

The "Coos" region now demands our more careful attention.

While southern New England was largely occupied by emigrants from the
Mother Country, and their descendants, in the seventeenth century,
much of its northern portions, and especially the rich valley of the
upper Connecticut, was still covered with the virgin forests. As early
as 1752, Theodore Atkinson (whose name will become more familiar to
us) and others in Eastern New Hampshire, had formed a plan for
acquiring and colonizing the best portion of this unoccupied, but
fertile and inviting, basin. But the proud and lordly Indian disputed
their right to invade this ancient and charming hunting-ground, whose
meadows almost spontaneously produced the choicest corn, and they
desisted from their purpose.

The immediate occasion of the settlement of this part of the
Connecticut valley was the French war. In the progress of that war,
the New England troops had cut a road from the older settlements in
the south part of the Province through Charlestown, then called No. 4,
to Crown Point. The soldiers in passing through this valley became
acquainted with its fertility and value.

The soil of Eastern Connecticut being exhausted in some measure, her
hardy and enterprising yeomanry now gladly turned toward a region
where honest industry would find a surer and better reward. Many of
them knew the value of religion by a vital experience, and all knew
the value of sound learning by experience or close observation.

The leading founders of Hanover were of the highly respectable Freeman
family, of Mansfield, Conn. The early history of this family in
America connects it with the Bradford and Prince families. The pioneer
settler at Hanover was Edmund Freeman. Of this worthy and enterprising
man, sincere Christian, earnest patriot, and valuable coadjutor of
President Wheelock, it is said: "Of distinguished uprightness and
integrity, he commanded universal respect and esteem." Hon. Jonathan
Freeman was his brother.

Another family to whom Hanover is largely indebted for its solid
foundations bears the no less distinguished name of Storrs, also of
Mansfield, the old ancestral home of all, or nearly all, of that name,
who in various ways have been conspicuous in giving "strength and
beauty" to American institutions. Of Joseph Storrs, an early donor to
Dartmouth, it is said: "He was the younger son of Samuel Storrs the
second, and grandson of Samuel Storrs the elder, from whom all of the
name in America are descended, excepting one family near Richmond, Va.
He was a member of the first board of selectmen of the town of
Hanover."

The town contained about twenty families at the period of which we are
writing. The relations of some other early settlers with President
Wheelock deserve equally careful notice. John Wright, from Lebanon,
Conn., was a man of marked ability and decided religious character. He
was deeply interested in the new college, and as pioneer explorer and
artisan rendered its founder invaluable aid. His name also heads the
list of the Hanover donors of lands.

David Woodward, formerly a parishioner of President Wheelock, and
afterward widely known for his strong mind, his public spirit, and
patriotism, also coöperated earnestly with him while he was laying
foundations. His house appears to have furnished the venerable
president his first headquarters, while planning future operations.

Nathaniel Wright, from Coventry, Conn., was a relation of John
Wright. His descendants have honored the college, as some of them
still honor the memory of an ancestor, whose name is inseparably and
prominently connected with the civil and religious history of the
town. His heart and hand were with President Wheelock, and his log
cabin was a welcome resting-place.

James Murch, one of the more enterprising among the early settlers,
was also from Connecticut, where he had formed some acquaintance with
President Wheelock and his plans. Upon him it seems to have devolved,
in some measure at least, to set forth in homely but vigorous language
the leading attractions of this locality.

Reverting to the "Narrative," we give President Wheelock's own graphic
account of labor and privation, which, in view of all the
circumstances, has few parallels in history:

"After I had finished this tour [of exploration] and made a short stay
at home, to settle some affairs, I returned again into the wilderness,
to make provision for the removal and settlement of my family and
school there before winter. I arrived in August [1770], and found
matters in such a situation as at once convinced me of the necessity
of being myself upon the spot. And as there was no house conveniently
near, I made a hutt of logs about eighteen feet square, without stone,
brick, glass, or nail, and with thirty, forty, and sometimes fifty
laborers appointed to their respective departments, I betook myself to
a campaign. I set some to build a house for myself and family, of
forty by thirty-two feet, and one story high, and others to build a
house for my students of eighty by thirty-two, and two stories high."

His family and about twenty or thirty students arriving before the
completion of his house, difficulty in locating having arisen, he
says: "I housed my stuff with my wife and the females of my family in
my hutt. My sons and students made booths and beds of hemlock boughs,
and in this situation we continued about a month, till the 29th day of
October, when I removed with my family to my house."

A few last words to one who for a long period had regarded his work
with more than fraternal interest, and himself with more than
fraternal affection, fitly portray the state of President Wheelock's
mind and heart in those days of toil and trial and hope:

"From my Hutt in Hanover Woods in the Province of New Hampshire,
August 27, 1770.

"My dear Sir:--I long to see you and spend one day with you on the
affairs of the Redeemer's kingdom. It would be vain to attempt to tell
you of the many and great affairs I am at present involved in, in all
which I have had much of the loving-kindness, faithfulness, and
goodness of God. I am this day sending for my family and expect the
house will be made comfortable for their reception by the time they
arrive. My prospects are, by the goodness of God, vastly encouraging.
A series of merciful occurrences has persuaded me that God designs
great good to his church among English as well as Indians by this
institution. I was informed at Boston, in my late journey, that the
Commissioners have plenty of their constituents' money which lies
useless for want of missionaries, and for many weighty reasons I have
thought that the Redeemer's cause might be much served by Mr.
Kirtland's[26] going to their pay. This was an important point I
wished to consult you in. Likely your own thoughts may suggest some
reasons and such as you shall think sufficient without my disclosing
many that are not public. If you think favorably of it, please to
propose it to them, as you will likely have an opportunity for before
you leave the continent. I have a number fitted and fitting for
missions more than the fund already collected will support, and if
that may be saved, and at the same time uniformity and good agreement
between the Boards is promoted, it will be well. I wrote you from
Dedham on my late journey from Boston. I rejoice to hear that your bow
yet abides in strength; that God has once more made you useful in
America. I am chained here; there is no probability that the buildings
will be seasonably and well accomplished if I should leave them. I
don't expect to see you till we meet in the general convention on the
other shore. Please to favor me with a line, and your thoughts on the
question proposed. You may send from Boston by the Northfield post,
directed to me at Hanover in this Province. Oh, how glad should I be
to see you in this wilderness!

      [26] The modern orthography is Kirkland.

"My dear sir, farewell.

    "I am yours in the dear Jesus.
    "Eleazar Wheelock.
    "Rev. George Whitefield."

There appears to have been no subsequent meeting, on earth, of these
eminent coadjutors in all good works. The one was called to his reward
above, just as the other was beginning to enjoy the fruition of his
labors on earth. Few names deserve more honor, in connection with the
founding of Dartmouth College, than that of

    George Whitefield.[27]

      [27] Many things, which cannot be specified, illustrating the
           history of this period and others, are necessarily placed
           in the Appendix.

[Illustration: GROUND PLAN OF THE FIRST COLLEGE EDIFICE:

Erected in 1770, near what is now the Southeast corner of the
Common.]




CHAPTER VIII.

COMMENCEMENT OF OPERATIONS.--COURSE OF STUDY.--POLICY OF
ADMINISTRATION.


Instruction at Dartmouth appears to have commenced in December
following the removal, with four classes in attendance.

In writing to Dr. Erskine, December 7, 1770, President Wheelock says:
"I am now removed into the wilderness with my family, and about thirty
students, English and Indians, who are all designed for the Indian
service." After referring to the erection of a house for his family,
and "another" for his students, he says: "I have also built a
school-house, which is convenient. My nearest neighbor in the town is
two and one half miles from me. I can see nothing but the lofty pines
about me. My family and students are in good health, and well pleased
with a solitude so favorable to their studies."

In President Wheelock's account-book, David Huntington, Thomas
Kendall, Ebenezer Gurley, Augustine Hibbard, James Dean, and Joseph
Grover, are charged with tuition from various dates, ranging from
December 7th to December 14th. The rate is _1s. 4d._ per week,
"deducting abscences." In Connecticut, the tuition, for classical
instruction in the school, had been _1s. 6d._ per week.

The following, from President Wheelock to a distant correspondent,
indicates sufficient patronage of the new institution:

    "Hanover, December 3, 1770.

"Dear Sir,--Your son, with companion, are safely arrived. I've sent
back part of my students to Connecticut. I've just got studies fitted,
and made provision for the support of the rest of them. The great
difficulty in taking your son is the want of provisions in this
starved country. I send to Northfield and Montague for my bread, and
expect supply chiefly from thence."

The facilities for acquiring classical and scientific education appear
to have been substantially the same at Dartmouth, at the outset, as in
other American colleges of that period.

The discoveries of Newton and Franklin had a marked, if not
controlling, influence upon the thought of the eighteenth century.

No American college, perhaps, felt this influence more than President
Wheelock's Alma Mater, in which Franklin took a deep interest.

At the period of the founding of Dartmouth, we find that, in Yale
College, the Faculty consisted of Dr. Daggett, who was President, and
Professor of Divinity; Rev. Nehemiah Strong, Professor of Mathematics
and Natural Philosophy, and two or three tutors.

President Wheelock doubtless had his Alma Mater especially in mind, in
planning the curriculum of Dartmouth. He was himself Professor of
Divinity, as well as President. His first associate in instruction,
who acted in the capacity of tutor, was Mr. Bezaleel Woodward, who had
graduated at Yale College in 1764, during the presidency of Rev.
Thomas Clap, of whom his associate in the Faculty, the future
President Stiles, says: "In Mathematics and Natural Philosophy I have
reason to think he was not equaled by more than one man in America."
The fact that Mr. Woodward was subsequently, for many years, a highly
esteemed professor of Mathematics in the college, indicates that he
was a worthy pupil of his distinguished teacher.

There can be no doubt that the college was highly favored, in its
beginnings, in having a president who had been, while at college,
distinguished as a classical scholar, and in later life as an able and
a learned divine, aided by a younger teacher, whose scientific
attainments well qualified him for the duties of his position.

The first preceptor of the Charity School, at Hanover, was David
McClure, who had recently graduated at Yale College. He was an able
and a successful teacher. The various relations of the school and
college were so intimate at this period, that it is nearly impossible
to dissociate them. The word "school," as used by President Wheelock,
frequently includes the college.

Three of Dartmouth's first class were prepared for college at the
"Indian Charity School" in Lebanon, and passed their first three years
at Yale.

The following letter from an eminent teacher, referred to in a
previous chapter, addressed to President Wheelock, introduces their
only new classmate:

"Lebanon, August 10, 1770.

"Rev. Sir: The bearer, Samuel Gray, entered my school about two years
ago, and in that time has been about four months absent. He was well
fitted for college when he was first under my care, and having applied
himself with proper diligence to his studies, and being favored with a
genius somewhat better than common, has made a progress in his
learning answerable to his industry. He will be found upon examination
to be pretty well acquainted with Virgil, Tully, and Horace. He is
likewise able to construe any part of the Greek Testament. He parses
and makes Latin rather better than common. He has been through the
twelve first books of Homer, but, as 't is more than a year since he
recited that author, am afraid he has lost the greater part of what he
then understood pretty well. In Arithmetic, vulgar and decimal, he is
well versed. I have likewise taught him Trigonometry, Altimetry,
Longimetry, Navigation, Surveying, Dialing, and Gauging. He has been
through Martin's 'Philosophical Grammar' twice,--the greater part of
which he understands very well. He has likewise studied Whiston's
'Astronomy,' all except the calculations, which he doth not
understand. He is likewise pretty well acquainted with Geography and
the use of the globes. He went through Watts' 'Logic' last winter, but
having no taste for that study, or rather an aversion to it, he is not
so well skilled in that as in some other parts of learning. About a
year ago he went through so much of rhetoric as is contained in the
'Preceptor,' but suppose he has forgot the most of it. Upon the whole,
though he may not, perhaps, be so well versed in some parts of
learning as the class which he proposes to enter, yet if he applies
himself to his studies with proper diligence, he will be rather an
honor than a disgrace to any college where he shall be graduated. I
ought in justice to him to add, that he is an orderly, well-behaved
youth, and has conducted so well in my school ever since he has been
with me that I have never had the least difference with him on any
account whatever.

    "I am, reverend sir, with much esteem,
    "Your most humble servant,
    "Nathan Tisdale.

"P. S. I have another pupil whom I shall offer for admission into your
college at the end of the vacancy [vacation], if I can fit him by that
time."



A portion of a letter from a somewhat distinguished clergyman and
teacher, Rev. Simeon Williams, of Windham, N. H., introducing several
prominent members of the class of 1774, is worthy of notice here,
although written in 1772. In connection with the reply, it throws
additional light upon the first prescribed course of study at
Dartmouth. After expressions indicating confidence that President
Wheelock will attend, faithfully, to the welfare of the young men, the
language is as follows:

"When they first came to my school they had read enough of Virgil and
the lower Latin classics, together with a sufficient knowledge of the
Greek Testament, to enable them to pass into any of the colleges as
Freshmen. But when their fathers informed me that they intended their
residence only for two years, and that they expected, if they were
under my care, I would qualify them in all the parts of the Freshman
and Sophomore years, so as they might with honor and ability enter the
Junior class, with mature deliberation, I undertook the arduous task.
The first year I confined their studies to Virgil, Cicero's
'Orations,' together with their improvement in Geography, Rhetoric,
and occasional declamations, etc. This second year they have been
reading Homer and Horace, Cicero de Oratore, and a part of Xenophon. I
have also carefully instructed them in all the four parts of Logic
from Doctor Finlay's 'Latin Compend,' expounding the same by familiar
lectures, for the most part extracted from Mr. Locke and Doctor Watts.
There is one kind of study which this last year they have been much
employed in,--I mean double translation,--their improvement therein
will appear to you by casting your eye on their various manuscripts. I
would observe to you that I have not introduced them to the knowledge
of mathematical learning, knowing it is most usual in colleges to put
them to those studies in the Junior year."

In reply President Wheelock says: "We have examined the youth you
sent, and find them deficient in several parts of learning which the
[Junior] class have made some proficiency in, viz., Mathematics,
Geography, and parsing Greek. They have studied Tullie de Oratore, and
Xenophon, and some in Homer, more than that class have done. On the
whole I have concluded to take them into that class, only with this
condition, that they recite those things in which they are deficient
with the Sophomore class while their own class recite other parts in
which they exceed them." The studies of the Senior year do not appear
to have differed materially from those of other colleges, of that
period. Jonathan Edwards was a favorite author in metaphysics and
theology.

President Wheelock in his "Narrative," for 1771, gives the following
lucid statement of the policy and aims of the school and college: "It
is earnestly recommended to the students both in college and school,

"1. That all the English students in the college and school treat the
Indian children with care, tenderness and kindness, as younger
brethren, and as may be most conducive to the great ends proposed.

"2. That they turn the course of their diversions and exercises for
their health to the practice of some manual arts, or cultivation of
gardens, and other lands, at the proper hours of leisure and
intermission from study and vacancies in the college and school.

"3. That no English scholar, whether supported by charity or
otherwise, shall, at any time, speak diminutively of the practice of
labor, or by any means cast contempt upon it, or by word or action
endeavor to discredit or discourage the same, on penalty of his being
obliged, at the discretion of the president or tutor, to perform the
same or the equivalent to that which he attempted to discredit; or
else (if he be not a charity scholar) to hire the same done by others,
or, in case of refusal and obstinacy in this offense, that he be
dismissed from college, and denied all the privileges and honors of
it.

"4. That no scholar shall be employed in labor in the hours of study,
or so as to interrupt him in his studies, unless upon special
emergencies, and with liberty from the president or a tutor.

"5. That accounts be faithfully kept of all the labor so done by them,
either for the procuring provisions for the support of the college and
school, or that which shall be for real and lasting advantage to this
institution; and such accounts shall be properly audited, and a record
kept of the same for the benefit of such scholars, if they should be
called by the providence of God to withdraw from their purpose of
serving as missionaries in the wilderness, or to leave the service
before they have reasonably compensated the expense of their
education.

"6. That such as are not charity scholars, but pay for their
education, may have liberty to labor for the benefit of the
institution at such times as are assigned to charity scholars, and the
just value of their labor be accounted towards the expense of their
support.

"7. That no Freshman shall be taken off, or prevented labor, by any
errand for an under-graduate, without liberty obtained from the
president or a tutor.

"_N. B._ Occasional errands and services for the college and school
are not designed to be accounted, nor their procuring fuel for their
fires, and things equivalent for their own and their chamber's use in
particular, nor anything which shall not be of real or lasting benefit
for the whole, unless in cases where they are incapacitated for labor,
and yet are able to perform such errands for or in the room of those
who can and do labor in their stead.

"Lastly. That this Indian Charity School, connected with Dartmouth
College, be constantly hereafter and forever called and known by the
name of 'Moor's School.'

"Moreover poor youth, who shall seek an education here, at their own
expense, may not only have the advantage of paying any part of that by
turning their necessary diversions to manual labor, but also, as all
that will be paid by such as support themselves will be disposed of
for the support of the Indian, or other charity scholars, therefore,
whatever clothing or provisions shall be necessary for the school will
be good pay at a reasonable price.

"His Excellency Governor Wentworth, among many other expressions of
his care and zeal to preserve the purity and secure the well-being of
this seminary against such evils as have been the ruin of, or at least
have a very threatening aspect upon others which have come within his
knowledge, has insisted upon it as a condition of location, to which
all the trustees have cheerfully subscribed, that wherever it should
be fixed, there should be a society of at least three miles square,
which should be under the jurisdiction of the college, that thereby
unwholesome inhabitants may be prevented settling, and all hurtful or
dangerous connections with them, or practices among them may be
seasonably discovered and prevented in a legal way.[28]

      [28] The town of Hanover, at three different times within the next
           twenty-five years, by their vote sanctioned this
           incorporation of the "College District." But the plan was
           never favorably regarded, apparently, by the New Hampshire
           Legislature.

"As this institution is primarily designed to christianize the
heathen, that is, to form the minds and manners of their children to
the rules of religion and virtue; and to educate pious youth of the
English to bear the Redeemer's name among them in the wilderness; and
secondarily to educate meet persons for the sacred work of the
ministry, in the churches of Christ among the English; so it is of the
last and very special importance, that all who shall be admitted here
in any capacity, and especially for an education, be of sober,
blameless and religious behavior, that neither Indian children nor
others may be in danger of infection by examples which are not
suitable for their imitation. And accordingly I think it proper to let
the world know there is no encouragement given that such as are vain,
idle, trifling, flesh-pleasing, or such as are on any account vicious
or immoral, will be admitted here; or, if such should by disguising
themselves obtain admittance, that they will not be allowed to
continue members after they are known to be such; nor will it be well
taken, if, on any pretense whatever, any shall attempt to introduce or
impose any youth upon this seminary, whose character shall be
incongruous to, and militates against, the highest, chiefest, and
dearest interests of the first objects of it.

"And it is my purpose, by the grace of God, to leave nothing undone,
within my power, which is suitable to be done, that this school of the
prophets may be and long continue to be a pure fountain.

"And I do with all my heart will this my purpose to all my successors
in the presidency of this seminary, to the latest posterity; and it is
my last will never to be revoked, and to God I commit it, and my only
hope and confidence for the execution of it is in Him alone, who has
already done great things for it and does still own it as his cause;
and blessed be his name that every present member of it, as well as
great numbers abroad, I trust, do join their hearty Amen with me."




CHAPTER IX.

PROGRESS TO THE DEATH OF PRESIDENT WHEELOCK.--PROMINENT FEATURES OF
HIS CHARACTER.


The foundations being completed, the superstructure now claims our
attention. We give somewhat full details of affairs during the opening
years. The following is an extract from a letter from Mr. M'Clare to
his early friend, General Knox, dated at Hanover, March 20, 1771:

"The winter has been very moderate and the heavens clear and serene.
The situation is much more agreeable than I imagined it would be last
fall, before I set out from Connecticut. The number of the students in
the college and school is about thirty. I have at present the care of
the Grammar School, and I find no small pleasure in 'teaching the
young idea how to shoot.' Heaven has remarkably smiled upon the
generous and pious design of the Reverend Doctor, and supported it
amidst numberless difficulties and embarrassments, and it affords a
prospect of being in time a great and extensive blessing to this part
of the world and to the tawny inhabitants of our continent."

The first Commencement, in August, 1771, attracted a large audience,
including many from a distance, among them Governor Wentworth. Dr.
Langdon had previously manifested his deep interest in the college by
a personal visit.

In his "Narrative," for the period from May, 1771, to September, 1772,
President Wheelock says:

"I have now finished (so far as to render comfortable and decent) the
building to accommodate my students, of eighty by thirty-two feet, and
have done it in the plainest and cheapest manner, which furnishes
sixteen comfortable rooms, besides a kitchen, hall, and store-room. I
have also built a saw-mill and grist-mill, which appear to be well
done, and are the property of the school, and will likely afford a
pretty annual income to it. I have also built two barns, one of
twenty-eight by thirty-two feet, the other of fifty-five by forty, and
fifteen feet post. I have also raised, and expect to finish, within a
few days, a malt-house of thirty feet square, and several other lesser
buildings which were found necessary. I have cleared, and in a good
measure fitted for improvement, about seventy or eighty acres of land,
and seeded with English grain about twenty acres, from which I have
taken at the late harvest, what was esteemed a good crop, considering
the land was so lately laid open to the sun. I have cut what is judged
to be equal to fourteen or fifteen tons of good hay, which I stacked,
by which the expense of supporting a team and cows the ensuing winter
may be considerably lessened. I have also about eighteen acres of
Indian corn now on the ground, which promises a good crop. My laborers
are preparing more lands for improvement; some to sow with English
grain this fall, and others for pasturing, which sad experience has
taught me the necessity of, as I have suffered much by being
disappointed of this benefit, through the negligence of a number, who
subscribed labor to encourage the settlement of the school in this
place, and, in excuse for their not being as punctual in performing as
they appeared liberal in subscribing, plead their poverty and the
necessities of their families in their new beginnings in this
wilderness.

"I hope through the blessing of God, even the ensuing year, we shall
find that near sufficient has been raised on these lands to supply the
school with bread, which will be a great relief not only as to the
expense, but as to care and fatigue in procuring it; as the greatest
and cheapest part of the support of my family has been transported
above an hundred, and much of it near two hundred miles through new
and bad roads; which has made the expense of some articles equal to
the first cost, and many of them much more. The cheapest fodder I had
the last winter to support my team and a few cows was brought forty
miles on sleds by oxen.

"It is not easy for one who is not acquainted with the affair of
building and settling in such a wilderness to conceive of the many
difficulties, fatigues, and extraordinary expenses attending it; nor
does it make the burden at all less, if there are numbers settling
within a few miles, who are poor and needy, and so far from having
ability to contribute their assistance to others, as to stand in
constant need of help themselves.

"The number of my students belonging to the college and school has
been from forty to fifty, of which from five to nine have been
Indians. The English youth on charity are all fitting for
missionaries, if God in his providence shall open a door for their
serving him in that capacity, and they have been about twenty.

"My students have been universally well engaged in their studies, and
a number of independent as well as charity scholars, have only by
turning a necessary diversion to agreeable manual labor, done much to
lessen the expense of their education the last year."

In an appendix to this "Narrative," dated September 26, 1772, after
referring to a prospect of obtaining sons of some of the Caghnawaga
chiefs, President Wheelock says: "One was a descendant from the Rev.
Mr. Williams, who was captivated from Deerfield in 1704. Another was a
descendant from Mr. Tarbell, who was captivated from Groton [in 1707],
who is now a hearty and active man, and the eldest chief, and chief
speaker of the tribe. The other was son to Mr. Stacey, who was
captivated from Ipswich, and is a good interpreter for that tribe."

In view of all the facts within our knowledge, it seems more than
possible that the influence of these and other captives, now venerable
with age, upon their red brethren, on the one hand, and dim but
precious memories of their own childhood, on the other, had aided
materially in determining the location of the college. The patronage
of the Canadian tribes was President Wheelock's main reliance for
Indian students after his removal to Hanover.

In regard to the missionaries sent out by President Wheelock at this
period, his biographer says: "Some went into the Mohawk and Oneida
country, others to the Indians upon the Muskingum, and several to the
tribes within the bounds of Canada. They found the Indians, the
Oneidas excepted, universally opposed to them."[29]

      [29] Memoirs of Wheelock, p. 63.

Perhaps it will be safe to make a slight abatement from the somewhat
sweeping statement which closes this quotation.

In his "Narrative" for the period between September, 1772, and
September, 1773, President Wheelock says: "My crops were considerably
shortened the last year, by an uncommon rain at the beginning of
harvest, and by an untimely frost, yet the benefit of that which is
saved is very sensible. I have this year cut about double the quantity
of hay which I cut last year, namely, about thirty tons. I have reaped
about twenty acres of English grain, which crop appeared to be very
heavy before harvest, and proved too much so, as a considerable part
of it fell down of its own weight before maturity; however, though it
be much less than the prospect was, it is a very considerable relief.
I have about twenty acres of Indian corn on the ground, which,
considering the newness and imperfect tillage of the land, promises a
considerable crop.

"I have cleared sufficient for pasturing, _i. e._ have cut and girdled
all the growth upon five hundred acres, and a part of it have sowed
with hay-seed; the rest I expect will be ready to receive the seed as
soon as it shall be dry enough to burn the trash upon it in the
spring. The soil is generally good, and I hope the school will
experience the benefit of it in due time. I have inclosed with a fence
about two thousand acres of this wilderness, that I might be able to
restrain oxen, cows, horses, etc., from rambling beyond my reach.

"I have seven yoke of oxen and about twenty cows, all the property and
employed in the service of the school. The number of my laborers for
six months past has generally been from thirty to forty, besides those
employed at the mills, in the kitchen, wash-house, etc. The number of
my students, dependent and independent, the last year was about
eighty. A little more than three years ago there was nothing to be
seen here but a horrid wilderness; now there are eleven comfortable
dwelling-houses (beside the large one I built for my students), built
by tradesmen and such as have settled in some connection with, and
have been admitted for the benefit of, this school, and all within
sixty rods of the college. By this means the necessities of this
school have been relieved in part as to room for my students. Yet the
present necessity of another and larger building appears to be such
that the growth of this seminary must necessarily be stinted without
it.

"When I think of the great weight of present expense for the support
of sixteen or seventeen Indian boys, which has been my number all the
last year, and as many English youth on charity, eight in the
wilderness who depend upon their support wholly from this quarter,
which has been the case a considerable part of this year, such a
number of laborers, and under necessity to build a house for myself
(as the house I have lived in was planned for a store-house, and must
be used for that purpose) and expense for three and sometimes four
tutors, which has been the least number that would suffice for well
instructing my students, I have sometimes found faintness of heart.
But I have always made it my practice not to exceed what my own
private interest [property] will pay, in case I should be brought to
that necessity to do my creditors justice."

In his "Narrative" for the period between September, 1773, and
February, 1775, President Wheelock says: "The number of Indians in
this school since my last 'Narrative,' has been from sixteen to
twenty-one, and the whole number of charity or dependent scholars
about thirty." The whole number of students was now about one hundred.

"The progress of husbandry on this farm, the last year, has not been
equal in every respect to my hope, the season proving so wet as not to
favor some branches of it. However, the progress of it and the benefit
by it, have been very considerable. I have raised and reaped upon the
school land, the last year, about three hundred bushels of choice
wheat, but the crop of Indian corn fell much short of my expectations,
being but about two hundred and fifty bushels. I have cut sixty tons
of hay the last season, and have a prospect of a very considerable
addition to that quantity the next, if Providence shall favor it.

"I have begun to prepare and have a prospect that I shall be able to
fit about sixty acres of new land to sow with wheat the next season. I
have improved about twelve or fourteen oxen, and about twenty cows,
the property of the school, and have a prospect of plenty for their
support for summer and winter, and I find already the great benefit of
having wherewith to do it this winter without the fatigue and expense
of going forty miles for it, as I have been forced to do till this
year."

He also refers to important agricultural operations, and the erection
of buildings at Landaff--Governor Wentworth's first choice as a
location for the college--and preparations for a new college edifice.

To Messrs. Savage and Keen, he writes, October 24, 1775: "The progress
of the great design under my hand has been as rapid since resources
from your side the water have been suspended as ever. Every day turns
out some new wonder of Divine favor towards it. I have this day been
out to see my laborers who have near finished sowing one hundred and
ten acres of wheat and rye, but mostly of wheat, one hundred acres of
it on new land. No providences, however calamitous to others, not even
our present public distresses, but seem as though they were calculated
to favor this design. God gives me all I ask for, and He is a
prayer-hearing God."

We are indebted to the present librarian of the college[30] for the
following interesting facts relating to this period:

      [30] Professor C. W. Scott.

"The library of Dartmouth College may be considered as older than the
college itself, as it had its origin in the 'Indian Charity School,'
and existed as a handful of books before the granting of the college
Charter. These books are found principally among the theological
works, in folio volumes, with Latin texts or notes, and uninviting
type. Received as they were more than a hundred years ago, they were
then publications of the preceding century; and they would hardly find
their way into the library to-day, if admitted upon the demand of
readers, yet in their bindings and worn leaves they show that by some
one they were thoroughly used. A copy of 'Lightfoot's Harmony of the
New Testament,' under date of June, 1764, has written across a leaf:
'Received from the Rev. Dr. Gifford, of London, sundry second-hand
books given by poor persons to the Indian Charity School in Lebanon,
of which this is one.' Marks on other volumes show that Dr. Gifford
was a contributor as well as a collector. Edinburgh, too [through Dr.
Erskine], sent its offering of books, and as the struggling school
came to be better known in England, through the commissioners sent to
solicit aid, and through other sources, such gifts probably became not
infrequent. The early history and intentions of the college were such
as to particularly interest clergymen, and in proportion to their
means they were doubtless the most generous givers of books. Their
names written across fly-leaves show that many volumes, in different
parts of New England, did service in their studies before finding a
place in the college library. One of the most noteworthy of such
benefactors was Rev. Diodate Johnson, of Millington, Conn., who,
besides other gifts, in 1773 bestowed his entire library."

Nearly at the same period with Mr. Johnson's donation, Hon. John
Phillips, of Exeter, made a handsome donation, for a philosophical
apparatus. The subsequent appropriation of the money, for another
purpose, compelled the college to dispense with this useful furniture
for a considerable period.

The commencement of the Revolutionary struggle soon proved a serious
embarrassment to President Wheelock: "The din of war drowned the
feeble voice of science; men turned away from this 'school of the
prophets' to hear tidings from the camp." But the heroic founder stood
manfully at his post, faithfully performing his duty, with only brief
interruptions, until, in the midst of that great conflict which made
us a nation, he was called to his reward. He died, after a lingering
illness, at Hanover, on the 24th of April, 1779. His first wife, Mrs.
Sarah (Davenport) Maltby Wheelock, of the distinguished John Davenport
family, died in Connecticut. His second wife, Mrs. Mary (Brinsmead)
Wheelock, was spared to minister to the last earthly wants of her
revered companion.

President Wheelock lived to see his earnest efforts to promote sound
learning crowned with a good measure of success.

The graduates of this period attained such eminence, in nearly all
the paths of professional usefulness, as to indicate most plainly that
they had laid good foundations in college. They were honored as
teachers, as divines, and as legislators. The condition of the college
and the country gave them abundant opportunities for appreciating the
inscription on the armor of the Dartmouth family: "Gaudet tentamine
virtus."

Instead of burning the "midnight oil" of the modern student, they kept
the midnight watch against savage foes, at least at certain periods.
To us, this all looks like romance. To them, it was stern reality.

In a fitting tribute to President Wheelock,[31] Rev. Dr. Allen says:

      [31] Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit.

"If it should be asked what success attended the efforts of Dr.
Wheelock to communicate the gospel to the Indian nations, it may be
replied that he accomplished something for their benefit, and that
great and insuperable obstacles in the providence of God prevented him
from accomplishing more. It was soon after he sent out missionaries
into the wilderness, that the controversy with Great Britain blighted
his fair and encouraging prospects. During the last four years of his
life there was actual war, in which many of the Indian tribes acted
with the enemy. Yet the Oneidas, to whom Mr. Kirkland was sent as a
missionary, kept the hatchet buried during the whole Revolutionary
struggle, and by means of this mission, probably, were a multitude of
frontier settlements saved from the tomahawk and the scalping-knife.
But even if nothing had been accomplished for the benefit of the
Indians, yet the zeal which chiefly sought their good, reared up a
venerable institution of science, in which many strong minds have been
disciplined and made to grow stronger, and nerved for professional
toils and public labors, and in which hundreds of ministers have been
nurtured for the church of Christ.

"For enlarged views and indomitable energy, and persevering and most
arduous toils, and for the great results of his labors in the cause of
religion and learning, Dr. Wheelock must ever be held in high honor.
He early placed one great object before him, and that object held
his undivided attention for nearly half a century. It is not
easy to describe the variety of his cares and the extent of his
toils. When he removed to Hanover his labors were doubled. The two
institutions--the school and the college--were ever kept distinct; in
both he was a teacher; of both he was the chief governor. He was also
the preacher of the college and village. In the government of his
school and college, Dr. Wheelock combined great patience and kindness
with the energy of proper and indispensable discipline. He was of a
cheerful and pleasant temper and manifested much urbanity in his
deportment."

This clear and forcible language has additional weight when we
consider, that, during nearly the whole period of his administration,
he had only the aid of tutors, with no other professor.

President Wheelock's usefulness in the great field of education was
not confined to the sons of the forest, during his residence in
Connecticut. He sought out John Smalley, the son of one of his
parishioners, in his humble home, prepared him for college, and
thereby gave him the primary impulse and aid, without which one of New
England's ablest theologians, and the teacher of others of widely
extended influence, might have remained in life-long retirement. He
took Samuel Kirkland, the son of a worthy but indigent brother in the
ministry, and, to use his own language, "carried him" in his arms,
till he had completed a thorough preparation for the ministry, and
finally furnished him a wife from his own kindred and his own
household. His distinguished beneficiary, beside all his other labors,
laid the foundation of Hamilton College, and gave to Harvard the
president of its "Augustan age," his son, John Thornton Kirkland. He
left the impress of his intellectual and religious character upon his
pupil, Benjamin Trumbull, the records of whose life give him a
conspicuous place among the earnest preachers and careful historians
of his day. The valuable influence of others of his early pupils will
be felt in ever extending circles, down to "the last syllable of
recorded time."

There was no need that Eleazar Wheelock should found a college at that
advanced period of life when men naturally seek a measure of repose,
in order to secure for his name an honorable position in the long and
brilliant catalogue of American educators. The crowning act of his
life, in the mellowed maturity of age, was scarcely more or less than
the logical, inevitable result of what preceded it.

The scope of our work does not permit any extended eulogy of President
Wheelock, nor any thorough analysis of his character. With a brief
reference to some leading points, we must close the record.

He was eminent as a scholar. The constantly recurring and ever
pressing duties of earnest and varied professional life, left him
little leisure for indulging in the luxuries of mere æsthetic culture;
but his active mind ranged widely through the realms of ancient and
modern thought, and freely appropriated of the richest of their
treasures.

He was eminent as an orator. His eloquence was not graced with the
well-rounded periods of a Burke, or a Webster; but in many a village
and hamlet, the burning words which fell from his lips stirred the
hearts of men to their profoundest depths.

He was eminent as a teacher. Through life he gladly embraced every
opportunity of opening the treasuries of knowledge to his fellow-men;
and many who sat under his instruction were thereby laid under large
obligations, although, in the rude halls of the infant college, he was
always more or less embarrassed by the cares of business and the
infirmities of advancing years.

He was eminent in affairs. He raised funds; procured corporate
franchises and safeguards; leveled forests, and reared edifices in the
face of apathy, opposition, and rivalry, with a fertility of resources
in planning, and an energy in executing, which won the admiration of
contemporaries in both hemispheres.

He was eminent as a patriot. When his faithful friend, the last Royal
Governor of New Hampshire, upon whom through years of toil and trial
he had leaned as upon a strong staff, abandoned his office, and
resolutely adhered to his Sovereign, and many others to whom he was
strongly attached, arrayed themselves on the same side, he as
resolutely espoused the cause of American Independence, and labored to
the extent of his ability for its accomplishment.

But neither the scholar, nor the orator, nor the teacher, nor the man
of affairs, nor the patriot, nor all combined, would have secured to
any man that conspicuous position upon the page of history which the
leading founder of Dartmouth College will occupy, so long as solid
worth and successful achievement shall command the attention of the
discriminating, thoughtful reader.

Religion was the mainspring of his entire life, the real source of all
his success. Without it, he might have been honored of men; with it,
he was honored of God. Encircling all the separate parts of his
character, like a golden chain, it bound them in one grand, beautiful,
harmonious whole.

In the hallowed seclusion of that thrice-honored valley, where
Jonathan Edwards was born and Thomas Hooker died,--on the western
verge of that modest plain, where his long and fruitful life bore its
latest, richest fruit,--his precious dust will slumber "till the
heavens be no more," and not till then will the Christian scholar, who
lingers among the hills of central New England, cease to pay his
devotions at the grave of

Eleazar Wheelock.




CHAPTER X.

PROGRESS DURING THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SECOND PRESIDENT, JOHN
WHEELOCK.


The first President of the College, availing himself of a provision in
the Charter, named three persons in his will, some one of whom he
desired should be his successor in the office. These were his son, Mr.
John Wheelock, Rev. Joseph Huntington, of Coventry, Conn., and Prof.
Sylvanus Ripley. Mr. Wheelock, although a young man, in response to
the somewhat earnest solicitation of the Trustees, after mature
deliberation decided to accept the position. His son-in-law, Rev. Dr.
Allen, gives the leading points in his earlier life in the following
language:

"He was born [a son by the father's second marriage] at Lebanon,
Conn., January 28, 1754, and graduated in Dartmouth's first class, in
1771. In 1772, he was appointed a tutor, and was devoted to the
business of instruction until the beginning of the Revolution. In
1775, he was a member of the [N. H.] Assembly. In the spring of 1777,
he was appointed a Major in the service of New York, and in November,
a Lieutenant-colonel in the Continental army under Colonel Bedel. In
1778 he marched a detachment from Coos to Albany. By direction of
Stark he conducted an expedition into the Indian country. At the
request of General Gates, he entered his family, and continued with
him, until he was recalled to Hanover by the death of his father, in
1779."

The following pages, extracted from the "Sketches of the History of
Dartmouth College and Moor's Charity School," prepared and published
under President Wheelock's sanction, are deemed worthy of insertion in
this connection.

"The founder and first president spent nine years in planting
and raising up a new society, in converting forests into
fields,--supporting many youths on charity. Persevering through
difficulties, without any stipend for his labors, the seminary grew in
vital strength;--but destitute of patronage in America, its resources
in Europe mostly expended, and the residue wholly obstructed, beset
with calamities by the troubles and disasters of the Revolutionary
War, it was reduced, in childhood, to nakedness and want, in the year
1779. Soon after the treasurer, making an estimate of the demands upon
it, pronounced that all the property of the corporation, if sold at
vendue, would not be sufficient to cancel its debts. Under these
clouds, the successor of the founder came into office, with a humble
sense of his duty, and a belief that God, who had protected and
sustained the seminary in floods of trouble, would relieve and build
it up. He solicited benefactions abroad for support of the charity
youths of the school in 1780, 1781, and 1782.

"In the latter part of that year Dr. Wheelock, the president, set off
for Europe. The Institution and his design were known, and sanctioned
by very ample recommendations, unnecessary to be inserted here,
issuing from the highest sources in America--from the President and a
great majority of the members of Congress, in their official
characters;--it ought to be recorded--from the Father of his Country,
George Washington, who well knew Dr. Wheelock, while an officer in the
Revolutionary War, and honored him with his particular notice and
friendship; from many of the most celebrated generals of the army, and
Governors of the different states, with introductory letters from the
Chevalier de Luzerne, minister plenipotentiary from the court of
Versailles, to Count de Vergennes, prime minister of France, from the
Secretary of the United States, and other eminent characters to
different parts of Europe.

"After some weeks spent in France, Dr. Wheelock, receiving
introductory and friendly letters to Mr. Dumas, the American _Chargé
d'Affaires_, and others in Holland, from Dr. Franklin, and John Adams,
proceeded to the Netherlands. A considerable sum was obtained in the
Netherlands; but we omit a particular account of the respectful
treatment and generous benefactions he received from the Prince of
Orange and others high in office.

"Thence he embarked for Great Britain, partly with a view, much
lessened by the public feelings from the Revolution in America, to
obtain some new aids; but chiefly to reclaim and negotiate for the
fund in Scotland, belonging to the school. It had been barred from
before the death of his predecessor, whose bills were protested, and
still lay with their charges unredeemed, besides large accounts for
the support of Indian youths, without the means of payment, unless by
exhausting the residue of the property of the college. He traveled
from Poole to London, where he paid his first and grateful respects to
the Earl of Dartmouth, Mr. John Thornton and others, who, being
formerly of the Board of Trust, had been in friendly relations with
the founder, and patronized and cherished the seminary, in the
jeopardies of its infancy. With his eyes invariably on the object, by
an introductory letter from Dr. Macclion, to Ralph Griffith, Esq., LL.
D., he obtained friendly access to Mr. Straghn, member of parliament
and the king's printer, and became acquainted with his son-in-law, Mr.
Spotswood. This respected gentleman, largely connected, and concerned
in the agencies of Scotland, took a benevolent and decisive part in
consulting, and adopting measures to restore the fund, at Edinburgh,
in the care of the Society, to its primitive channel. Communications
were opened--the bills were paid; and the way prepared for future
negotiations, till the Society were convinced of the justice of the
claim. The money has since been applied to the support of the school
in its original design; and arrearages of interest remitted to the
president to cancel the debts overwhelming the seminary. He, also,
while in England, as on the continent, procured some coins and
articles appreciated by the _virtuosi_. By the benevolence of Paul
Wentworth, Esq., Doctor Rose, and other friends to the college, some
valuable philosophical instruments were obtained, and others promised,
the making of which the two former kindly engaged to superintend, and
forward the whole, so soon as completed, to America. A way, besides,
was preparing to provide natural curiosities for a museum. Those
instruments, with their additions, well constructed, forming an
apparatus sufficient for all the more important experiments and
observations in Natural Philosophy, afterwards arrived; and at the
same time a curious and valuable collection of stones and fossils from
India, and different parts of Europe, for the museums from the
beneficent Mr. Forsythe, keeper of the king's gardens, at Kensington.
All these with costs of transportation, were gifts received at the
college, by the Trustees. Only a word more; a large and elegant gold
medal was presented by Mr. Clyde of London, to Dr. Wheelock, in his
official character. It is wholly irrelevant to our purpose, and
needless to speak of the personal civilities and friendly notices of
Lord Rawden, by whose goodness he was introduced at the House of
Lords, of Sir John Wentworth, Sir J. Blois, Dr. Price, and others,
besides those before mentioned.

"Within three months after the President's return (in 1784) the Board
of Trustees convened and resolved, if sufficient means could be
obtained, to erect an edifice of about one hundred and fifty by fifty
feet, three stories in height, for the college, with convenient
accommodations for the members. The president, professors, and some of
the Trustees in the vicinity, were requested by the Board to solicit
subscriptions for the purpose. They depended on Dr. Wheelock's
exertions, he cheerfully undertook. By his arrangement and exertions,
in that and the following year 1785, and by his agents, near fifteen
thousand dollars were given but mostly subscribed to be paid, and
chiefly by responsible men in different places. The subscriptions and
payments were all put into the hands of the contractor. He commenced
and carried on the building. But in 1786 he was unable to procure
supplies and nothing but an immediate cessation of the business
appeared. Dr. Wheelock afforded relief, by furnishing the joiners,
about twenty in number, with sustenance through the season, and aiding
in the collection of materials. In the succeeding years, the
subscriptions and means in the hands of the contractor being
exhausted, he procured by bills on Mrs. Wheelock's agent in the West
Indies, and by a residue remitted from Holland and in other ways by
his friends abroad, and his own donation of $333.00, all the glass,
the nails, the vane and spire and other articles and some pay towards
the labor. A bell he had by solicitation obtained before. By the
seventh year from the beginning of its foundation, the edifice
[Dartmouth Hall] was finished, and well prepared for the reception of
the students. We will now return to trace another chain of operation.

"Dr. Wheelock, though not at the particular request of the Board,
attended the Legislature of Vermont, June 14, 1785. He solicited; and
they made a grant of a township [Wheelock], 23,040 acres, one half to
the college and the other half to the school, to be free from all
public taxes forever. As soon as practical he procured a survey,
obtained a charter, and made calculations for its settlement. Families
rapidly moved in, till near the number of one hundred. He disposed of
a large part of the tract in small portions on long leases. A few
years rent free, the annual product has been to the college and
school, each, six hundred dollars.

"We now turn to the State of New Hampshire. Dr. Wheelock had applied,
by the desire of the Board, to the General Court for a lottery, and
obtained it; but from unexpected events not answering the purpose,
they requested him in 1787 to present a memorial to the Legislature
for another lottery under different modifications. Professor Woodward
attended as agent--the design was effected, and the avails received by
the Board.

"The pressure of demands on the college induced him to apply and
attend the Legislature, in the month of January, 1739, for the charter
of a tract of land on Connecticut river and near the northern confine
of the State. A committee was appointed; occasional discussions arose
for several days; the matter was finally brought before the House. The
Senate and House of Representatives passed an act granting to the
Trustees of Dartmouth College a valuable tract of eight miles square,
about 42,000 acres adjoining north of Stewarts town. [Ebenezer Webster
was the chairman of the Legislative committee recommending this
grant.] The forcible and energetic eloquence of General Sullivan, that
eminent commander in the Revolutionary War, in the debate on this
subject cannot be forgotten. It drew him from his bed, amidst the
first attacks of fatal disease--and it was the last speech which he
ever made in public. This interesting grant scattered the clouds just
bursting on the institution. It was now harrassed with heavy debts of
an early standing in its losses at Landaff, which amounted to $30,000.

"At the time of obtaining the above grant, Dr. Wheelock also
negotiated to recover the donation of $583, made by Dr. John Phillips,
in 1772 [for a philosophical apparatus], to the college, and deposited
in the hands of Governor Wentworth, which, after he left the country
was considered, from his circumstances, as wholly lost. But Dr.
Wheelock adopted measures and secured an account of the same and
interest out of confiscated property $1,203, in notes and
certificates, which he received of the Treasurer of the State, for the
Trustees. He also received, about that period, $125, committed to his
agency by the same great benefactor, in a particular conference to
transact with the Board, said sum to be given in his name to them;
only on the express condition, that they would agree to sequester with
it his gift of about 4,000 acres of land by deed to them in 1781, as
an accumulating fund for the express purpose of supporting a professor
of Theology. They accepted the gift and sequestered the property on
the terms of the donor.

"The president had taken into his own hands, at the desire of the
Board, the management of the finances and external interest of the
college, and continued to conduct, and regulate them, for five years,
through its difficult and trying scenes. Having, besides what has been
mentioned, among other arrangements, leased a number of lots
permanently productive, secured the appropriation of several valuable
tracts, in the vicinity of the college, to the use of professorships,
and provided relief by obtaining the means to free the seminary from
its weight of debts, he resigned to the Board, in August following,
the particular charge of the finances, except retaining in trust the
disposal of the college moiety of the township in Vermont till a few
years after, when he had completed the proposed object of settling and
leasing the same.

"The next year, 1790, there being no proper place for the public
religious and literary exercises of the members of the seminary, the
apartment of the old building falling into decay and ruin, he
undertook, made arrangements, provided the means, and erected by
contract, in five months, a chapel, near the new college edifice. It
is fifty feet by thirty-six, of two stories height, arched within and
completely finished, and painted without--convenient, and well adapted
to the objects proposed.

"He caused a new building [for Moor's School] to be erected and
finished, with a yard, in 1791--two stories high, the lower apartment
convenient to accommodate near a hundred youths. The school was
improved in the order and regulation of its members under the
distinguished talents and fidelity of their instructor Mr. [Josiah]
Dunham, the present Secretary of Vermont. At the request of the
Society three years after it was visited by a committee of their
Boston commissioners charged with the solution of a number of queries
in regard to its state, relations, and property. Their favorable
report was transmitted to Scotland.

"Of the large debts accumulated for the support of the school, in the
latter years of the first president, to discharge the most pressing
part, the Trustees had consented to the disposal of lands and property
in their hands, hoping that the amount would be replaced. The
advances, thus made, the president considered himself as holden in
justice to refund; and accordingly paid them for the college, in the
year 1793, $4,000, besides some items of small amount before. [Lands
also appear to have been sold to aid in building Dartmouth Hall.]

"The Rev. Israel Evans [of Concord] at that time was a member of the
Board. He had expressed more than once, in intimate conversation to
Dr. Wheelock, their friendship having been long cemented in scenes of
war and peace, his desire to do something for the good of mankind and
the institution. He finally remarked, that he had made up his mind to
sequester a portion of his property as the foundation for a
professorship of eloquence; which he knew would also be agreeable to
Mrs. Evans. Confined by sickness the succeeding year, at his earnest
request, by a special message, the Doctor paid him a visit. The latter
expressed in his family, his views and design; and receiving from the
former an assent to his wishes to insert his name as one of the
executors, proceeded in the full exercise of his mental faculties, to
complete his will. Besides his bequests otherwise, he gave of money in
the funds, and real estate, the amount of about $7,000, or upwards, in
reversion to the Trustees of Dartmouth College, after the death of his
wife, as a permanent fund for a professor of eloquence.

"About the same time, Dr. Wheelock attended the General Court, to open
the way for their favorable attention to the important objects of the
institution. Matters were in suspense till the next session in June
1807, when he again personally appeared before the Legislature. His
memorial was considered, committed, and after report an act was made,
granting to the Trustees of the college a township of the contents of
six miles square, to be laid out on the border of the District of
Maine, to the approbation of the Governor and Council. The land was
surveyed: mostly an excellent tract, watered by a branch of the river
Androscoggin running central through the whole, and near the northern
turnpike road--he waited on them with the plan, and obtained their
ratification in 1808."

The grant of Landaff to the college had great weight with President
Wheelock, in deciding upon a location. But after he had expended
several thousand dollars in improvements there, the title was found to
be defective, and prior grantees secured the whole. In view of this
loss, the State with commendable liberality made the above grants.

There seems to have been no material change in the policy of the
college, or the course of study, in the earlier years of this
administration.

The following items from the official records of the Trustees are
worthy of notice, the first bearing date, August, 1794:

"Voted that those Freshmen who wish to be excused from going errands
for other students be not obliged to go, and that those who do not go
such errands have not afterwards the privilege of sending Freshmen.

"Adjourned Meeting, February, 1796. No person shall be admitted into
the Freshman class unless he be versed in Virgil, Cicero's Select
Orations, the Greek Testament, be able accurately to translate English
into Latin, and also understands the fundamental rules of
Arithmetic."[32]

      [32] Memoirs of Wheelock.

The following statement was published in 1811:

"The immediate instruction and government of the students is with the
president, who is also professor of civil and Ecclesiastical History,
a professor of the Latin, Greek, Hebrew and Oriental Languages, a
professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, a professor of
Divinity, and two tutors. The qualifications for admission into the
Freshman class are, a good moral character, a good acquaintance with
Virgil, Cicero's Select Orations, the Greek Testament, knowledge to
translate English into Latin, and an acquaintance with the fundamental
rules of Arithmetic. The members of the classes, in rotation, declaim
before the officers in the chapel every Wednesday, at two o'clock, P.
M.

"The Senior, Junior, and Sophomore classes, successively pronounce
such orations and other compositions, written by themselves, as the
president and professors shall direct, on the last Wednesday of
November, the second Wednesday of March, and the third Wednesday of
May. Tragedies, plays, and all irreligious expressions and sentiments
are sacredly prohibited.

"The Languages, the Arts, and Sciences are studied in the following
order: the Freshman Class study the Latin and Greek classics,
Arithmetic, English Grammar and Rhetoric. The Sophomore Class study
the Latin and Greek classics, Logic, Geography, Arithmetic, Geometry,
Trigonometry, Algebra, Conic Sections, Surveying, Belles-lettres and
Criticism. The Junior Class study the Latin and Greek classics,
Geometry, Natural and Moral Philosophy, and Astronomy. The Senior
Class read Metaphysics, Theology, and Natural and Political Law."
Chemistry was introduced at about this period. "The study of the
Hebrew and the other Oriental Languages, as also the French Language,
is recommended to the students. Every week some part of the classes
exhibits composition according to the direction of the authority. All
the classes are publicly examined at stated periods; those who are
found deficient lose their standing in the class. It is a fixed rule
that the idle and vicious shall not receive the honors of college.

"The punishments inflicted on offenders are admonition, suspension and
expulsion. The president attends morning and evening prayers with the
students in the chapel, and often delivers lectures to them on
ecclesiastical history, on the doctrines of the Christian religion, or
other important subjects. He hears the recitations of the Senior
class; his fund of general science renders this an interesting part of
collegiate life."

The librarian continues his statements as follows:

"While the library of the college was slowly increasing in numbers and
more slowly in value as measured by the wants of the students, there
were begun two other libraries, designed in the beginning as
supplements, but by their rapid increase and utility soon taking the
leading place. In 1783, was formed the society of under-graduates
known under the title of 'Social Friends' and the collection of a
library was begun. Three years later, by the secession of a part of
the members, the rival society of the 'United Fraternity' came into
existence. The aim of the societies was to furnish literary culture,
and their exercises and constitutions differed but little, while each
attempted to obtain more and better men, and collect a larger library,
than the other. It was provided in the constitution of the last formed
society, that each member should advance for the use of the library
twelve shillings lawful money.

"At a meeting during the next year the society voted to register its
books, which consisted of twenty-three volumes of magazines and
thirty-four other books, making with a few presented at the meeting a
library of sixty-three volumes. In 1790, the two societies subscribed
to what they termed 'articles of confederation,' in which it was
agreed that a case should be procured to contain their books, and that
each society should aid in the increase of the common library. For
this purpose each society was to advance from one to two dollars for
every member, the sum being largest for the lowest class and least for
the Senior class, and a committee was constituted with power to
settle all differences. But however strong the agreement between the
two parties it could not eliminate jealousy; neither were the
societies entirely free from internal dissensions. The records contain
accounts of 'conspiracies,' and attempts to destroy the societies,
accompanied by reports of committees, treating the subject with the
dignity of a danger to the State. One of these 'conspiracies' in 1793,
terminated in the destruction of nearly all the records of the 'Social
Friends' and almost caused the dissolution of the society. Much of the
strife between the societies was caused by the mode of securing
members, and though there were amendments intended to lessen this,
nothing like a settlement was made until 1815, when an order from the
officers of the college limited the membership of each society to one
half of the number in the different classes. It was probably this
question of membership that caused, in 1799, the division of the
'federal library'; the 'United Fraternity' that year demanding a
separation, and the 'Social Friends' replying that they cheerfully
concurred. With the strong rivalry existing, the libraries could but
increase more rapidly under separate management, especially as the
students for many years taxed themselves severely, and contributed
generously by subscriptions and donations to fill up their few
shelves. Nearly all the books were contributed by under-graduates, and
the value placed upon them forms a marked contrast with the present
use of library books. It was upon these libraries that the students
more generally depended, and while their additions were larger they
also had larger losses and suffered more from the wear of usage. They
obtained from time to time the books that were needed, the college
library such as were given, and that was doubtless true during all of
the time which was said of it fifty years later: 'The library contains
some rare and valuable works, but is deficient in new books.' The
society libraries from the beginning had regular and frequent hours
for drawing books, while the college library during a great part of
its history has been from various reasons hardly accessible, or open
only at long intervals. In 1793, the college began the yearly
assessment of eight shillings on each student, one fourth for the
salary of the librarian, and the remainder for the purchase of new
books.

"The first printed catalogue of any of the libraries was of that of
the college, and was merely a list printed in 1810. It mentioned 2,900
volumes, but as there were many duplicates the number of books of any
practical value was less than 2,000. The number of books in each of
the society libraries at this time may be estimated as slightly over
1,000, so that the number of volumes to which access could be had was
not much over 4,000." We quote an item worthy of notice from official
records on this subject:

"Annual Meeting of Trustees, September, A. D. 1783. This Board being
informed that Mr. Daniel Oliver, a student in the Junior class at this
College, has made a donation to Library of the following books [43
volumes; 33 different works], Voted, that the Vice-president be
requested to return him the thanks of this Board and request his
acceptance of the use of the college library free of charge during the
term he shall continue a student at this college."




CHAPTER XI.

LACK OF HARMONY BETWEEN PRESIDENT WHEELOCK AND OTHER
TRUSTEES.--REMOVAL OF THE PRESIDENT FROM OFFICE.--ESTIMATE OF HIS
CHARACTER.


The administration of President John Wheelock is remarkable for two
things; its great length, and its unhappy close.

The great "Dartmouth Controversy" is one of the most impressive
chapters in the annals of American colleges.

In discussing this subject it is necessary to consider some of the
influences which had aided in moulding President Wheelock's character.
His residence at Yale College was at an important period in the
history of that institution, commencing soon after the resignation of
President Clap, who had been driven from his position, virtually, for
opposing any interference in the affairs of the college, by the
Legislature. The friends of education were divided in sentiment, as to
the wisdom of his course, and the institution was in some sense under
a cloud till the accession of President Stiles--a friend of the
Wheelock family--who effected an arrangement by which the State was
admitted to a share in the management of the college. The following
letter from a prominent Trustee of Dartmouth to the president, written
just at this period, shows that the animated contest in Connecticut
was only the natural and logical precursor of one more animated and
much more important, in New Hampshire.

    "Charlestown, November 17, 1791.

"Hon. Sir: I have set my name to the petition, etc., although, I
confess not without some hesitation and reluctance. I like the plan
well in general,--but there is one exception. I cannot form any idea
of what is intended by the proposal, That the Council, or Senate, or
both, be admitted to some cern in the government of the university
[college].

"This appears to me to be a proposal of too much or nothing at all,
and of something not in the power of this Board to confer, who I think
cannot admit any foreign jurisdiction, any man, or number of men to
any share in government of the university, properly so termed,
otherwise than what the Constitution specifies.

"I have, however, subscribed under the influence of this
consideration: That in the event it may subject us to no other
inconvenience, but the imputation of inconsistence in conduct in
hereafter rejecting a compliance with our own proposal, if we shall
find that more is performed by others than was intended, or can be
admitted by us, though fairly enough proffered.

"I think some precautionary injunctions to the Agent in this matter
would be wise and prudent.

"In haste--

"I am, sir, with much esteem and sincere affection,

    "Your sincere friend and humble servant,
    "Bulkley Olcott."
    "President Wheelock."



Mr. Wheelock's experiences also as a legislator and military
commander, in early life, doubtless gave him a larger confidence in
his own abilities on the one hand, and on the other a more profound
conviction that everything in the State should, be subordinate to the
State.

The religious aspects of President Wheelock's character, are worthy of
special notice. He was the dutiful, in some sense the favorite son of
an honored father. The former president, although sound in the faith,
had more catholic views and broader sympathies than many of the
leading divines of his day. The son was no less liberal than the
father. This liberality was doubtless the real cause of difference
between the second president and his associates in office. His first
decided opponent was Nathaniel Niles, who entered the Board in 1793, a
man of rare ability, and in early life a pupil of Dr. Bellamy, whose
religious views on some points were materially different from those of
his contemporary and neighbor, the first president.

The first important point gained by Mr. Niles was the election of his
friend, Mr. Shurtleff, to the chair of Divinity, in 1804.

For ten years the breach was constantly widening between the president
and his opponents. We now find the following official records:

"At a meeting of the Trustees, November 11, 1814, the following
preamble and resolutions, introduced by Charles Marsh, Esq., were
adopted.

"Whereas, the duties of the president of this university have become
very multiplied and arduous; and, whereas, it is necessary that he
should continue to attend to the concerns of this institution, and the
various officers and departments thereof, and should have time to
prepare and lay before this Board the business to which its attention
should be directed; therefore, resolved, that, in order to relieve the
president from some portion of the burdens which unavoidably devolve
on him, he be excused in future from hearing the recitations of the
Senior Class, in Locke, Edwards, and Stewart.

"Resolved, that the Professors, Shurtleff and Moore, jointly supply
the pulpit, in such manner as may be agreed between them. That
Professor Shurtleff hear the recitation of the Senior class in Edwards
on the Will; that Professor Adams hear the recitation of the Senior
class in Locke on the Human Understanding, and that Professor Moore
hear the recitation of the Senior class in Stewart's Philosophy of the
Mind, and that he hear them in both volumes of that work."

This action of the Board was followed by the publication of the
"Sketches," and, in June, 1815, the presentation of the following
Petition to the New Hampshire Legislature:



"Honorable Legislators,--The citizens of New Hampshire enjoy security
and peace under your wise laws; prosperity in productive labors by
means which you have adopted; and, by your counsels, increasing
knowledge in the establishment of literature through the State. But,
for none of these, can so much be ascribed to your attention as for
Dartmouth College. By your patronage and munificence it was
flourishing in former years; and so it still would have continued had
the management of its concerns been adapted to answer the designs of
your wisdom, and the hopes of its most enlightened and virtuous
friends.

"To your Honorable body, whose guardian care encircles the
institutions of the State, it becomes incumbent on the citizens to
make known any change in their condition and relations interesting to
the public good. To you alone, whose power extends to correcting or
reforming their abuses, ought he to apply when they cease to promote
the end of their establishment, the social order and happiness.

"Gladly would the offerer of this humble address, avoiding to trouble
your counsels, have locked up his voice in perpetual silence, while
the evils are rolling on and accumulating, were he not otherwise
compelled by a sense of duty to your Legislature, and to the best
interests of mankind, in the present and future times.

"Will you permit him to suggest there is reason to fear that those who
hold in trust the concerns of this seminary have forsaken its original
principles and left the path of their predecessors. It is unnecessary
to relate how the evil commenced in its embryo state; by what means
and practices, they, thus deviating, have in recent years, with the
same object in view, increased their number to a majority controlling
the measures of the Board; but more important is it to lay before you
that there are serious grounds to excite apprehensions of the great
impropriety and dangerous tendency of their proceedings; reasons to
believe that they have applied property to purposes wholly alien from
the intentions of the donors, and under peculiar circumstances to
excite regret; that they have in the series of their movements, to
promote party views, transformed the moral and religions order of the
institution, by depriving many of their innocent enjoyment of rights
and privileges for which they had confided in their faith; that they
have broken down the barriers and violated the Charter, by prostrating
the rights with which it expressly invests the presidential office;
that, to subserve their purposes, they have adopted improper methods
in their appointments of executive officers, naturally tending to
embarrass and obstruct the harmonious government and instruction of
the seminary; that they have extended their powers, which the Charter
confines to the college, to form connection with an academy[33] in
exclusion of the other academies in the State, cementing an alliance
with its overseers, and furnishing aid from the college treasury for
its students; that they have perverted the power, which by the
incorporation they ought to exercise over a branch of Moor's Charity
School, and have obstructed the application of its fund according to
the nature of the establishment and the design of the donors; and that
their measures have been oppressive to your memorialist in the
discharge of his office.

      [33] Kimball Union Academy.

"Such are the impressions as now related, arising from the acts and
operations of those who have of late commanded the decisions of the
Board.

"Your memorialist does not pretend to exhibit their motives, whether
they have been actuated by erroneous conceptions, or mistaken zeal, or
some other cause, in attending to the concerns of the institution. But
with great deference he submits the question, unless men in trust
preserve inviolable faith, whether pledged by words, or action, or
usage, to individuals, unless they continuously keep within the limits
assigned to them by law; if they do not sacredly apply the fruits of
benevolence committed to their charge, to the destined purpose; if the
public affairs in their trust are not conducted with openness,
impartiality, and candor, instead of designed and secret management;
if they become pointedly hostile to those who discern their course,
and honestly oppose their measures which are esteemed destructive; if
they bear down their inoffensive servants, who are faithful to the
cause of truth, how can an establishment under these circumstances, be
profitable to mankind? How can there be a gleam of prospective joy to
any except to those who are converting its interest into their own
channel, to serve a favorite design? What motive, then, will remain to
benefactors to lay foundations, or to bestow their charities on such
an object?

"There is also ground for increasing, fearful apprehension, by adding
to the immediate, what may be the ultimate effect of the measures
which have been described. In a collective view they appear to the
best acquainted and discerning to be, in all their adaptations,
tending to one end, to complete the destruction of the original
principles of the college and school, and to establish a new modified
system, to strengthen the interests of a party or sect, which, by
extending its influence under the fairest professions, will eventually
affect the political independence of the people, and move the springs
of their government.

"To you, revered legislators! the writer submits the foregoing
important considerations. He beholds, in your Honorable body, the
sovereign of the State, holding, by the Constitution, and the very
nature of sovereignty in all countries, the sacred right, with your
duty and responsibility to God, to visit and oversee the literary
establishments, where the manners and feelings of the young are
formed, and grow up in the citizen in after life; to restrain from
injustice, and rectify abuses in their management, and, if necessary,
to reduce them to their primitive principles, or so modify their
powers as to make them subservient to the public welfare. To your
protection, and wise arrangements, he submits whatever he holds in
official rights by the Charter of the seminary; and to you his
invaluable rights as a subject and citizen.

"He entreats your honorable body to take into consideration the state
and concerns of the college and school, as laid before you.

"And as the Legislature have never before found occasion to provide,
by any tribunal, against the evils of the foregoing nature, and their
ultimate dangers, he prays that you would please, by a committee
invested with competent powers, or otherwise, to look into the affairs
and management of the institution, internal and external, already
referred to, and, if judged expedient in your wisdom, that you would
make such organic improvements and model reforms in its system and
movements, as, under Divine Providence, will guard against the
disorders and their apprehended consequences.

"He begs only to add the contemplated joys of the friends of man and
virtue, in the result of your great wisdom and goodness, which may
secure this seat of science, so that it may become an increasing
source of blessings to the State, and to mankind of the present and
succeeding ages, instead of a theatre for the purpose of a few,
terminating in public calamity.

"Whatever disposal your Honorable body may please to make of the
subject now presented, the subscriber will never cease to maintain the
most humble deference and dutiful respect.

    John Wheelock."



It would not be profitable, at the present time, to re-open the
discussion of the subject matter of the various charges contained in
the above document, which were so fully elaborated in the "Sketches,"
and so carefully considered in the subsequent "Vindication" by the
Trustees.

The prayer of the Memorial was granted by the Legislature, by the
appointment of a committee of investigation. The following letter is
worthy of careful attention in this connection:

    "Exeter, August 15, 1815.

"My dear Sir,--In common with many others I have felt considerable
anxiety for the issue of the matter so much in public discussion
relative to Dartmouth College. I do not feel either inclined or
competent to give any opinion as to the course which ought finally to
be adopted by the Board of Trustees for the benefit of that
institution. I am entirely willing to leave that to the determination
of those much better informed on the subject and better able to judge.
From certain intimations which I have lately had, I am led to believe
an intention is entertained by some members of the Board of ending all
difficulty with the president by removing him from office. I greatly
fear such a measure adopted under present circumstances, and at the
present time, would have a very unhappy effect on the public mind. An
inquiry is now pending, instituted after considerable discussion, by
the Legislature of this State, apparently for the purpose of granting
relief for the subject matter of complaint. The Trustees acquiesce in
this inquiry; whether they appear before the committee appointed to
make it formally as a body, or informally as individuals, the public
will not deem of much importance. The Legislature, I think, for
certain purposes, have a right to inquire into an alleged
mismanagement of such an institution, a visitorial power rests in the
State, and I do not deem it important for my present view to determine
in what department or how to be exercised. The Legislature may, on
proper occasion, call it into operation. I have never seen the
president's memorial to the Legislature, but am told it is an abstract
from the 'Pamphlet of Sketches.' From the statements in that I take
the burthen of his complaint to be, that the Trustees have not given
him a due and proper share of power and influence in the concerns of
the college, and that they have improperly used their own power and
influence in patronizing and propagating in the college particular
theological opinions. The alleged misapplication of funds [paid for
preaching] is stated as an instance of such misconduct. These
opinions, it would seem, are particularly disagreeable to the
president. The whole dispute is made to have a bearing on the
president personally. Should the Trustees, during the pendency of the
inquiry in a cause in which they are supposed to be a party, take the
judgment into their own hands, and summarily end the dispute by
destroying the other party, they will offend and irritate at least all
those who were in favor of making the inquiry. Such will not be
satisfied with the answer that the Trustees have the power and feel it
to be their duty to exercise it. It will be said that the reasons
which justify a removal (if there be any) have existed for a long
time. A removal after so long forbearance, at the present time, will
be attributed to recent irritations.

"That part of the president's complaint which relates to his religious
grievances, addresses itself pretty strongly to the prejudices and
feelings of all those opposed to the sect called Orthodox. This
comprises all the professed friends of liberal religion, most of the
Baptists and Methodist, and all the nothingarians. The Democrats will
be against you, of course. All these combined would compose in this
State a numerous and powerful body. Any measure adopted by the
Trustees with the appearance of anger, or haste, will be eagerly
seized on. If the statements of the president are as incorrect as I
have heard it confidently asserted, an exposure of that incorrectness
will put the public opinion right. It may require time, but the result
must be certain. If it can be shown that his complaints are nothing
but defamatory clamor, he will be reduced to that low condition that
it will be the interest of no sect or party to attempt to hold him up.
I see no danger in delay, but fear much in too great haste. Perhaps
there is no occasion at present to determine how long the Trustees
should delay adopting their final course. Circumstances may render
that expedient at a future time which is not now. I feel much
confidence that a very decisive course against the president by the
Trustees at the present time would create an unpleasant sensation in
the public mind, and would, I fear, be attended with unpleasant
consequences.

"I am sensible I have expressed my opinion very strongly on a subject
in which I have only a common interest. I frankly confess I have been
somewhat influenced by fears that some of the Trustees will find it
difficult to free themselves entirely from the effects of the severe
irritation they must have lately experienced.

    "I am, dear sir, with esteem,
    "Sincerely yours.
    "Jeremiah Mason."
    "C. Marsh, Esq."



President Wheelock was removed from office on the 26th of August,
1815, by the vote of a decided majority of the Board, upon grounds of
which the following is the substance:

"1st. He has had an agency in publishing and circulating a certain
anonymous pamphlet, entitled 'Sketches of the History of Dartmouth
College and Moor's Charity School,' and espoused the charges therein
contained before a committee of the Legislature. The Trustees consider
this publication a libel on the institution.

"2d. He claims a right to exercise the whole executive authority of
the college, which the Charter has expressly committed to the
Trustees, with the president, professors, and tutors by them
appointed. He also claims a right to control the Corporation in the
appointment of executive officers.

"3d. He has caused an impression to be made on the minds of students
under censure for transgression of the laws of the institution, that
if he could have had his will they would not have suffered disgrace or
punishment.

"4th. He has taken a youth who was not an Indian, but adopted by an
Indian tribe, and supported him in Moor's School, on the Scotch fund,
which is granted for the sole purpose of instructing and civilizing
Indians.

"5th. He has, without sufficient ground for such a course, reported
that the real cause of the dissatisfaction of the Trustees with him
was a diversity of religious opinions between him and them."

In taking leave of the second president, we have only to remark, as we
introduce his eulogist, Mr. Samuel Clesson Allen, that both parties to
the contest apparently overrated their grievances.

"President Wheelock was distinguished for the extent and variety of
his learning. With a lively curiosity he pushed his inquiries into
every department of knowledge, and made himself conversant with the
various branches of science. But of all the subjects which presented
themselves to his inquisitive mind those which relate to man in his
intellectual constitution and social relations engaged and fixed his
attention. His favorite branches were Intellectual Philosophy, Ethics,
and Politics. Possessing in an eminent degree the spirit of his
station, he fulfilled with singular felicity the offices of instructor
and governor in the college. Animated and ardent himself, he could
transfuse the same holy ardor into the minds of his pupils. What youth
ever visited him in his study, but returned to his pursuits with a
renovated spirit, and a loftier sentiment of glory?

"He had formed the noblest conceptions of the powers of the human
mind, and of its ultimate progress in knowledge and refinement. This
sentiment called forth the energies of his mind, and gave direction
and character to his inquiries. It pervaded all his instructions, and
imparted to science and to letters their just preëminence among the
objects of human pursuit.

"He never sought to preoccupy the minds of his pupils with his own
peculiar notions, or to impose upon them any favorite system of
opinions. He endeavored to make them proficients in science, and not
the proselytes of a sect.

"In government he commanded more by example than by authority, and the
admiration of his talents ensured a better obedience than the force of
laws. His elevation of mind placed him above personal prejudices and
resentments, and jealousies of wounded dignity. He practiced no
espionage upon his pupils, but reposed for the maintenance of order
on their sense of propriety, and his own powers of command. He
conciliated their attachment while he inspired their reverence; and he
secured their attention to the stated exercises and reconciled them to
the severest studies by the example he exhibited, and the enthusiasm
he inspired. He knew how to adapt his discipline to the various
dispositions and characters, and could discriminate between the
accidental impulse of a youthful emotion and deliberate acts of
intentional vice.

"He was an interesting and powerful speaker. His erect attitude and
dignified action inspired reverence, and commanded attention. But the
wonderful force of his eloquence arose from the strength and sublimity
of his conceptions. Such were his originality of thought, and rich
variety of expression, that he could present the most common subjects
in new and interesting lights. His public discourses evinced the
strength of the reasoning faculty, the powers of the imagination, and
the resources of genius.

"He would sometimes conduct the mind with painful subtility through
the multiplied steps of a long demonstration. At other times he would
glance upon the main topics of his argument, and seize on his
conclusion by a sort of intuitive penetration. He frequently
embellished his subject with the higher ornaments of style, and
diffused around the severer sciences the graces and elegancies of
taste. For force of expression he might be compared to Chatham, and in
splendid imagery he sometimes rivaled Burke. He would, at pleasure,
spread a sudden blaze around his subject or diffuse about it a milder
radiance.

"To the interpretation of the Scriptures he carried all the lights
which geography, history, and criticism could supply, and poured their
full effulgence upon the sacred page. His daily prayers always
presenting new views of the works and perfections of the Deity,
exhibited whatever was vast in conception, glowing in expression and
devout in feeling.

"He was probably formed not less for the higher offices of active life
than for the speculations of science. Distinguished for the boldness
of his enterprise and the decisive energy of his character, he set no
limits to what individual exertion and effort could accomplish. He
attempted great things with means which other men would have esteemed
wholly inadequate, and the vigor of his mind increased in proportion
to the difficulties he met in the execution of his enterprises. He was
disheartened by no difficulties, he was intimidated by no dangers, he
was shaken by no sufferings. The glory which he sought was not the
temporary applause of this party or that sect, but it was the glory
which results from unwearied efforts for the improvement and happiness
of man. He was not less distinguished by the object and character of
his enterprises than by the great qualities he exhibited in their
accomplishment. His was a high and holy ambition, which, while it
preserved its vigor, identified its objects with those of the purest
charity."

Dartmouth conferred the degree of LL. D. upon President Wheelock in
1789. He died at Hanover, April 4, 1817, his wife, Mrs. Maria (Suhm)
Wheelock, daughter of Governor Christian Suhm, of St. Thomas, W. I.,
surviving him.




CHAPTER XII.

ADMINISTRATION OF PRESIDENT BROWN.--CONTEST BETWEEN THE COLLEGE AND
THE STATE.--TRIUMPH OF THE COLLEGE.


Rev. Francis Brown of North Yarmouth, Maine, was elected the successor
of President Wheelock. His character will be the subject of a later
chapter. He was inaugurated in September, 1815, and entered at once
with vigor and earnestness upon the performance of his official
duties.

The Committee of the New Hampshire Legislature of 1815, Rev. Ephraim
P. Bradford, Nathaniel A. Haven, and Daniel A. White, appointed to
investigate the affairs of the college, reported in substance, that
there was no ground for interference by the State.

The deep interest in the college question produced a political
revolution in the State. In his message to the Legislature at the
opening of the session in June, 1816, Governor Plumer says:

"Permit me to invite your consideration to the state and condition of
Dartmouth College, the head of our learned institutions. As the State
has contributed liberally to the establishment of its funds, and as
our constituents have a deep interest in its prosperity, it has a
strong claim to our attention. The charter of that college was granted
December 13th, 1769, by John Wentworth, who was then Governor of New
Hampshire, under the authority of the British king. As it emanated
from royalty, it contained, as was natural it should, principles
congenial to monarchy; among others, it established Trustees, made
seven a quorum, and authorized a majority of those present to remove
any of its members which they might consider unfit or incapable, and
the survivors to perpetuate the Board by themselves, electing others
to supply vacancies. This last principle is hostile to the spirit and
genius of a free government. Sound policy therefore requires that the
mode of election should be changed, and that Trusties, in future,
should be elected by some other body of men.

"The college was founded for the public good, not for the benefit or
emolument of its Trustees; and the right to amend and improve acts of
incorporation of this nature has been exercised by all governments,
both monarchical and republican. In the Charter of Dartmouth College
it is expressly provided that the president, trustees, professors,
tutors and other officers, shall take the oath of allegiance to the
British king; but if the laws of the United States, as well as those
of New Hampshire, abolished by implication that part of the Charter,
much more might they have done it directly and by express words. These
facts show the authority of the Legislature to interfere upon this
subject."

Governor Plumer communicated this message to Jefferson, who replied in
his letter of July 21, 1816: "It is replete with sound principles, and
truly republican. Some articles, too, are worthy of notice. The idea
that institutions established for the use of the nation cannot be
touched nor modified, even to make them answer their end, because of
rights gratuitously supposed in those employed to manage them in trust
for the public, may, perhaps, be a salutary provision against the
abuses of a monarch, but it is most absurd against the nation itself.
Yet our lawyers and priests generally inculcate this doctrine, and
suppose that preceding generations held the earth more freely than we
do; had a right to impose laws on us, unalterable by ourselves; and
that we, in like manner, can make laws and impose burdens on future
generations, which they will have no right to alter; in fine, that the
earth belongs to the dead, and not to the living."

The following action shows the result:

"The undersigned, three of the members of the Board of Trustees of
Dartmouth College, having this morning seen a printed copy of a bill
before the Honorable House [of the New Hampshire Legislature], the
provisions of which, should they go into effect would set aside the
Charter of the college, and wholly change the administration of its
concerns, beg leave respectfully to remonstrate against its passage.
The provisions of the bill referred to change the name of the
corporation; enlarge the number of Trustees; alter the number to
constitute a quorum; render persons living out of the State, who are
now eligible, hereafter ineligible; vacate the seats of those members
who are not inhabitants of the State; deprive the Trustees of the
right of electing members to supply vacancies; and give to the new
Board of Trustees an arbitrary power of annulling everything
heretofore transacted by the Trustees; and this last without the
concurrence of the proposed Board of Overseers. The consent of the
present Board of Trustees is in no instance contemplated as necessary
to give validity to the new act of incorporation.

"In the opinion of the undersigned, these changes, modifications, and
alterations effectually destroy the present Charter of the college and
constitute a new one.

"Should the bill become a law, it will be obvious to our fellow
citizens that the Trustees of Dartmouth College will have been
deprived of their Charter rights without having been summoned or
notified of any such proceeding against them. It will be equally
obvious to our fellow citizens that the facts reported by the
committee of investigation [of the last Legislature] did not form the
ground and basis of the new act of incorporation; and that no evidence
of facts of any sort, relating to the official conduct of the
Trustees, other than the report of the committee of investigation, was
submitted to your Honorable Bodies.

"To deprive a Board of Trustees of their Charter rights, after they
have been accused of gross misconduct in office, without requiring any
proof whatever of such misconduct, appears to your remonstrants
unjust, and not conformable to the spirit of the free and happy
government under which we live. If the property has been misapplied,
if there has been any abuse of power upon the part of the Trustees,
they are fully sensible of their high responsibility; but they have
always believed, and still believe, that a sound construction of the
powers granted to the Legislature, gives them, in this case, only the
right to order, for good cause, a prosecution in the judicial courts.

"A different course effectually blends judicial and legislative
powers, and constitutes the Legislature a judicial tribunal.

"The undersigned also beg leave to remonstrate against the passage of
the bill, on the ground of inexpediency. A corporation is a creature
of the law, to which certain powers, rights, and privileges are
granted; and amongst others that of holding property. Destroy this
creature, this body politic, and all its property immediately reverts
to its former owners. This doctrine has long been recognized and
established in all governments of law. Any material alteration of the
corporation, without its consent, and certainly such essential
alterations as the bill under consideration is intended to make, will
be followed with the same effect. The funds belonging to the college,
although not great, are highly important to the institution; and a
considerable proportion of them were granted by, and lie in, the State
of Vermont. The undersigned most earnestly entreat the Honorable
Legislature not to put the funds of the college in jeopardy; not to
put at hazard substantial income, under expectations which may or may
not be realized."

After alluding to lack of precedent for the proposed action, and the
necessary increase of expenditures which would result from its
consummation, they proceed to say: "If the provisions of this bill
should take effect, we greatly fear that the concerns of the college
will be drawn into the vortex of political controversy. We refer
particularly to that section of the bill which gives the appointment
of Trustees and Overseers to the Governor and Council. The whole
history of the United States for the last twenty years teaches us a
lesson which ought not to be kept out of view. Our literary
institutions hitherto have been preserved from the influence of party.
The tendency of this bill, unless we greatly mistake, is to convert
the peaceful retreat of our college into a field for party warfare.

"Whilst the undersigned deem it their indispensable duty to
remonstrate in the most respectful terms against the passage of the
bill referred to, they have no objection, and they have no reason to
believe their fellow Trustees have any objection, to the passage of a
law connecting the government of the State with that of the college,
and creating every salutary check and restraint upon the official
conduct of the Trustees and their successors that can be reasonably
required, and with respectful deference they would propose the
following outlines of a plan for that purpose.

"The Councillors and Senators of New Hampshire together with the
Speaker of the House of Representatives for the time being, shall
constitute a Board of Overseers of Dartmouth College, any ten of whom
shall be a quorum for transacting business. The Overseers shall meet
annually at the college, on the day preceding Commencement. They shall
have an independent right to organize their own body, and to form
their own rules; but as soon as they shall have organized themselves
they shall give information thereof to the Trustees. Whenever any vote
shall have been passed by the Trustees it shall be communicated to the
Overseers, and shall not have effect until it shall have the
concurrence of the Overseers. Provided, nevertheless, that if at any
meeting a quorum of the Overseers shall not be formed, the Trustees
shall have full power to confer degrees, in the same manner as though
there were no Overseers; and also to appoint Trustees or other
officers (not a president or professor), and to enact such laws as the
interests of the institution shall indispensably require; but no law
passed by the Trustees shall in such case have force longer than until
the next annual meeting of the Boards, unless it shall then be
approved by the Overseers. Neither of the Boards shall adjourn, except
from day to day, without the consent of the other. It shall be the
duty of the president of the college, whenever in his opinion the
interests of the institution shall require it, or whenever requested
thereto by three Trustees, or three Overseers, to call special
meetings of both Boards, causing notice to be given in writing to each
Trustee and Overseer, of the time and place; but no meeting of one
Board shall ever be called except at the same time and place with the
other. It shall be the duty of the president of the college annually,
in the month of May, to transmit to his Excellency, the Governor, a
full and particular account of the state of the funds, the number of
students and their progress, and generally the state and condition of
the college.

"If the plan above suggested should meet the approbation of the
Honorable Legislature, and good men of all parties give it their
sanction, we may all anticipate, with high satisfaction, the future
prosperity of the college, and its incalculable usefulness to the
State; but if a union of the friends of literature and science, of all
parties and sects, cannot be attained; if the triumph of one party
over the other be absolutely indispensable; fearful apprehensions must
fill the mind of every considerate man, every dispassionate friend of
Dartmouth College.

    Thos. W. Thompson,
    Elijah Paine,
    Asa M'Farland.

    "June 19, 1816."



The effect of this proposed compromise was a modification of the bill
in some of its important features. Against the amended bill, which was
passed a few days afterward, there was a farther protest, from which
we make brief extracts.

"The undersigned would not trouble the Honorable Legislature with any
remarks in addition to those contained in their remonstrance of the
19th inst. did they not believe it was a duty not to be omitted."

Referring to the amended bill, they continue:

"They have not been able to obtain a sight of it, but have heard it
contains provisions for an increase of the Board of Trustees to the
number of twenty-one, a majority of whom to constitute a quorum, and
that the additional number are to be appointed by His Excellency the
Governor and the Honorable the Council. To many of the topics of
argument, suggested in their former remonstrance (which are equally
applicable against the passage of the bill in its present shape) they
respectfully ask leave to add, that the bill in its present shape
destroys the identity of the corporation, known in the law by the name
of the Trustees of Dartmouth College, without the consent of the
corporation, and consequently the corporation to be created by the
present bill must and will be deemed by courts of law altogether
diverse and distinct from the corporation to which all the grants of
property have hitherto been made; and therefore the new corporation
cannot hold the property granted to the corporation created by the
charter of 1769.

"By the Charter of Dartmouth College a contract was made by the then
supreme power of the State with the twelve persons therein named, by
which, when accepted by the persons therein named, certain rights and
privileges were vested in them and their successors, for the guarantee
of which the faith of government was pledged by necessary implication.
In the same instrument the faith of government was pledged that the
corporation should consist of twelve persons and no more. The change
in the government of the State, since taken place, does not in the
least possible degree impair the validity of this contract,--otherwise
nearly all the titles to real estate, held by our fellow citizens,
must be deemed invalid.

"The passage of the bill now before the Honorable House will, in the
deliberate opinion of the undersigned, violate the plighted faith of
the government. If the undersigned are correct in considering the
Charter of 1769 in the nature of a contract, and if the bill, in its
present shape, becomes a law, we think it necessarily follows that it
will also violate an important clause in the 10th section of the 1st
article in the Constitution of the United States, which provides, that
no State shall pass any law impairing the obligation of contracts.

"The Honorable Legislature will permit us to add, that as it is well
known that the Trustees have, as a Board, been divided on certain
important subjects, although the minority has been very small, should
the Legislature now provide for nine new Trustees, to be appointed by
His Excellency the Governor and the Honorable the Council, and that
without any facts being proved to the Legislature, or any Legislative
report having been made, showing that the state of things at the
college rendered the measure necessary, it must be seen by our fellow
citizens that the majority of the Trustees have been by the
Legislature, for some unacknowledged cause, condemned unheard.

    Thomas W. Thompson,
    Asa M'Farland.

    "June 24, 1816."



The recommendations of the Governor in substance, became a law; the
name of the college was changed to "University;" the number of the
Trustees was increased to twenty-one; a Board of Overseers was
created, to be appointed by the Governor and Council; the president
and professors of the university were required to take an oath to
support the Constitution of the United States, and of the State of New
Hampshire; and the act provided that "perfect freedom of religious
opinion should be enjoyed by all the students and officers of the
university." The committee to whom the message, etc., relating to this
subject, were referred, it should be remarked, did not undertake to
decide in favor of either party to the controversy, but alleged that
the troubles arose from certain defects in the Charter, and that they
would recur again in some form, unless those defects were remedied.

The debates upon the historical and constitutional questions involved
were able. The minority were ably led, both inside and outside the
Legislature, but parliamentary tactics availed them nothing. Many of
them joined in a written protest against the passage of the bill, the
substance of which has already appeared in the action of the Trustees.

Directly after the passage of this bill Mr. Marsh prepared an
elaborate argument, never published, setting forth the essence of the
leading points of the case, as viewed by the majority of the old
Trustees.

The following letter, addressed to Mr. Timothy Bigelow, Boston, is
worthy of notice in this connection:

    "Concord, July 27, 1816.

"Dear Sir: Dr. McFarland will do himself the pleasure to hand you
this. In him you will recognize an old acquaintance. We wish to get
the opinions of as many legal friends as we can upon the question of
legitimate power in the New Hampshire Legislature, to pass the act
relating to Dartmouth College, and with regard to the course the old
Trustees ought to pursue. It is an interest, we think, common to all
well wishers to New England.

"The old Trustees, I am confident, are willing to take just that
course that their wisest and best friends recommend.

"Very cordially yours,

    Thomas W. Thompson."

August 28, 1816, a majority of the old Trustees formally refused to
accept the provisions of the act.

A meeting of the Trustees of the university, under the act of June 27,
1816, was called, but through the illness of a single member, failed
for want of a quorum. The judges of the Superior Court, on December 5,
1816, in answer to the Governor and Council, gave their opinion that
the executive department had no authority to fill the vacancies which
had occurred. To remedy this, the Legislature, on December 18, 1816,
passed an additional act providing for filling the vacancies, the
calling of meetings and fixing a quorum; and on December 26, 1816,
passed another act imposing the penalty of five hundred dollars upon
any person who should assume any office in the university except by
virtue of the preceding acts.

In view of this action President Brown writes to Mr. Timothy Farrar,
of Portsmouth, January 3, 1817:

"Now, what shall we do? One of these four courses must be taken. We
must either keep possession and go on to teach as usual, without any
regard to the law, or, withdrawing from the college edifice and all
the college property, continue to instruct as the officers of
Dartmouth College; or, relinquishing this name for the present,
collect as many students as will join us, and instruct them as private
but associated individuals; or else we must give all up and disperse.
Will you give us your opinion, what may be duty or what expedient, as
soon as convenient? Particularly, will you give us your opinion
whether, supposing this oppressive act to be judged constitutional, we
should be liable to the fine, if we instruct as the officers of
Dartmouth College, relinquishing, however, the college buildings, the
library, apparatus, etc."

The Faculty of the college issued the following:

"ADDRESS OF THE EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF DARTMOUTH COLLEGE TO THE PUBLIC.

"As the undersigned, after the most serious and mature consideration,
have determined to retain the offices which they received by the
appointment of the Trustees of Dartmouth College, and not voluntarily
to surrender, at present, any property committed to them, nor to
relinquish any privileges pertaining to their offices, they believe it
to be a duty, which they owe to the public no less than to themselves,
to make an explicit declaration of the principles by which they are
governed.

"They begin by stating the two following positions, as maxims of
political morality, which they deem incontrovertible:

"1. It is wrong, under any form of government, for a citizen or
subject to refuse compliance with the will of the sovereign power,
when that will is fully expressed, except in cases where the rights of
conscience are invaded, or where oppression is practiced to such an
extreme degree that the great ends of civil government are defeated or
highly endangered.

"2. Under a free government, where the sovereignty is exercised by
several distinct branches, whose respective powers are created and
defined by written constitutions, cases may arise in which it will be
the duty of the citizen to delay conforming to the ordinances of one
branch until the other branches shall have had opportunity to act. If,
for example, the legislative branch should transcend its legitimate
power, and assume to perform certain acts which the Constitution had
assigned to the province of the judicial branch, a citizen,
injuriously affected by those acts, might be bound, not indeed
forcibly to resist them, but, in the manner pointed out by law, to
make an appeal to the judiciary and to await its decision.

"The undersigned deem it unnecessary, in this place, to detail the
provisions of the acts of the Honorable Legislature, passed in June
and December, A. D. 1816, relating to this institution. Those acts are
before the public and are generally understood.

"The Board of Trustees, as constituted by the Charter of 1769, at
their annual meeting in August last, took into consideration the act
of June, and adopted a resolution, 'not to accept its provisions.' In
the preamble to this resolution, we find a paragraph in the words
following: 'They (the Trustees) find the law fully settled and
recognized in almost every case which has arisen, wherein a
corporation or any member or officer is a party, that no man or body
of men is bound to accept, or act under, any grant or gift of
corporate powers and privileges; and that no existing corporation is
bound to accept, but may decline or refuse to accept any act or grant
conferring additional powers or privileges, or making any restriction
or limitation of those they already possess; and in case a grant is
made to individuals or to a corporation without application, it is to
be regarded not as an act obligatory or binding upon them, but as an
offer or proposition to confer such powers and privileges, or the
expression of a desire to have them accept such restrictions, which
they are at liberty to accept or reject.'

"If the doctrine contained in this paragraph be correct, and of its
correctness the undersigned, after ascertaining the opinion of eminent
jurists in most of the New England States, entertain no doubt, the act
of June, and of course the acts of December, have become inoperative,
in consequence of the nonacceptance of them by the Charter Trustees,
and the provisions of these acts are not binding upon the corporation
or its officers. We take the liberty to add, that, in our opinion, the
reasons assigned by the Trustees in the preamble before mentioned for
not accepting the act of June, are very important and amply
sufficient. Indeed, it has ever appeared to us, that the changes
proposed to be introduced into the charter by the acts in question,
would have proved highly inauspicious to the welfare of this
institution, and ultimately injurious to the interests of literature
throughout our country.

"The Trustees appointed agreeably to the provisions of the act of June
have, however, thought proper to organize, without the concurrence of
the Charter Trustees, and to perform numerous decisive acts.

"At a meeting in Concord on the fourth instant, they brought several
specifications of charges against the undersigned; and at an adjourned
meeting, holden on the twenty-second instant, they proceeded to
displace, discharge, and remove them from their respective offices in
Dartmouth University. A similar procedure was adopted against four of
the Trustees acting under the Charter.

"Unless we greatly mistake, in the view already expressed of the act
of June, the votes of the university Trustees, removing us from
office, are wholly unauthorized and destitute of any legal effect; and
we are still, as we have uniformly claimed to be, officers of
Dartmouth College under the charter of 1769.

"The Charter Trustees having resolved to assert their corporate
rights, and having, for this purpose, recently commenced a suit
against their late Secretary and Treasurer, in the issue of which it
is expected the question between them and their competitors will be
finally settled, the undersigned, being united with them in opinion,
in principle, and in feeling, cannot consent to abandon them, or to
perform any act which may prejudice their claims, while this suit is
pending. They must therefore proceed, as officers of Dartmouth
College, to discharge their prescribed duties. They are sensible of
their obligation to render submission to the laws, and their first
inquiry, in the case before them, has been, What is law? The result is
a full conviction in their own minds, that the course they have
concluded to adopt is strictly legal, and that no other course would
be consistent with their duty. If they err, their error will shortly
be corrected by the decision of our highest judicial tribunals; and
with this decision they will readily comply. In the meantime, while
the appeal is made to the laws of their country, and to the
constitutions of this State and of the United States, which are the
supreme law, they trust that none of their fellow-citizens will have
the unkindness to charge them with a want of respect to the government
under which they live. As soon as the will of the government shall be
fairly expressed, they will render to it a prompt obedience.

"The undersigned are placed in a situation singularly difficult and
highly responsible. To them it seems to be allotted in Divine
Providence, to perform a part which, in its consequences, may deeply
affect the interests not only of this institution, but of all similar
institutions in this country. And although they are fully conscious of
their own inability to perform this part in a manner worthy of its
importance, yet they are firmly resolved, relying on divine
assistance, not to shrink from any duty, or any danger, which it may
involve.

"The penal act of December they cannot but regard as unnecessarily
severe; nor do they see what purpose it was calculated to answer,
except to influence them, by the prospect of embarrassing suits, to an
abandonment of their trust. They are aware that men may be found
disposed to multiply prosecutions against them, and to despoil them of
the little property they possess; but they believe themselves called
in Providence not to shun this hazard, as they cannot reconcile it
with their obligation to the institution under their care, to
relinquish the places they occupy, until it shall be ascertained that
they cannot rightfully retain them.

"As the university Trustees have expressed a great regard for the
laws, the undersigned have a right to expect that neither they, or any
agents appointed by them, will resort to illegal measures to seize on
the college buildings and property. Should such measures unhappily be
adopted, the undersigned will make no forcible resistance, it not
being a part of their policy to repel violence by violence. They will
quietly withdraw where they cannot peaceably retain possession, and,
with the best accommodations they can procure, will continue to
instruct the classes committed to them, until the prevalence of other
counsels shall procure a repeal of the injurious acts, or until the
decision of the law shall convince them of their error, or restore
them to their rights.

    "Francis Brown,
    "Ebenezer Adams,
    "Roswell Shurtleff.

    "February 28, 1817."



The above gentlemen constituted the permanent Faculty at this period.
In view of all the circumstances they determined to surrender the
college buildings and library to their opponents, and the Trustees
determined to test their rights before the courts, the action being
brought against the former Treasurer, who adhered to the "University"
party.

"The action: 'The Trustees of Dartmouth College _v._ William H.
Woodward,' was commenced in the Court of Common Pleas, Grafton County,
State of New Hampshire, February Term, 1817. The declaration was
trover for the books of record, original charter, common seal, and
other corporate property of the college. The conversion was alleged
to have been made on the 7th day of October, 1816. The proper pleas
were filed, and by consent the cause was carried directly to the
Superior Court of New Hampshire, by appeal, and entered at the May
Term, 1817. The general issue was pleaded by the defendant, and joined
by the plaintiffs. The facts in the case were then agreed upon by the
parties, and drawn up in the form of a special verdict, reciting the
Charter of the college and the acts of the Legislature of the State,
passed June and December, 1816, by which the said corporation of
Dartmouth College was enlarged and improved, and the said Charter
amended.

"The question made in the case was, whether those acts of the
Legislature were valid and binding upon the corporation, without their
acceptance or assent, and not repugnant to the Constitution of the
United States. If so, the verdict found for the defendants; otherwise
it found for the plaintiffs.

"The cause was continued to the September Term of the court in
Rockingham County, where it was argued; and at the November term of
the same year, in Grafton County, the opinion of the court was
delivered by Chief Justice Richardson, sustaining the validity and
constitutionality of the acts of the Legislature; and judgment was
accordingly entered for the defendant on the special verdict.

"Thereupon a writ of error was sued out by the original plaintiffs, to
remove the cause to the Supreme Court of the United States, where it
was entered at the term of the court holden at Washington on the first
Monday of February, 1818.

"The cause came on for argument on the 10th day of March 1818, before
all the judges. It was argued by Mr. Webster and Mr. Hopkinson, for
the plaintiffs in error, and by Mr. Holmes and the Attorney-general
(Wirt), for the defendant in error.

"At the term of the court holden in February, 1819, the opinion of the
judges was delivered by Chief Justice Marshall, declaring the acts of
the Legislature unconstitutional and invalid, and reversing the
judgment of the State court. The court, with the exception of Mr.
Justice Duvall, were unanimous."

The arguments in the New Hampshire court by Messrs. Mason, Smith, and
Webster for the college, and Messrs. Sullivan and Bartlett for Mr.
Woodward; the decision of that court, and the cause in the Supreme
Court of the United States, are an important part of our country's
judicial history. The result was logically based upon prior decisions
of the Supreme Court. We invite special attention to one point in Mr.
Webster's argument. If, in the lapse of time, under the strong light
of careful research or elaborate criticism, all the other brilliant
colors of this remarkable fabric shall fade or vanish, this central
figure will remain forever, to illustrate the relations of the college
to the State.

"The State of Vermont is a principal donor to Dartmouth College. The
lands given lie in that State. This appears in the special verdict. Is
Vermont to be considered as having intended a gift to the State of New
Hampshire in this case, as, it has been said, is to be the reasonable
construction of all donations to the college? The Legislature of New
Hampshire affects to represent the public, and therefore claims a
right to control all property destined to public use. What hinders
Vermont from considering herself equally the representative of the
public, and from resuming her grants, at her own pleasure? Her right
to do so is less doubtful than the power of New Hampshire to pass the
laws in question."

Thus closed one of the most important contests in the history of
American jurisprudence.

Law, politics, literature, and religion combined to make it a subject
of national concern. The decision gave to a large class of chartered
institutions a security never enjoyed before. The lapse of more than
half a century enables us to consider the question calmly and
candidly, uninfluenced by interest, prejudice, or passion.

The case was attended with serious embarrassments. Neither counsel nor
court had thorough knowledge of the history of the school and the
college, and the relations of each to the other. Had they possessed
this knowledge, the line of argument in some respects would have been
very different, although perhaps with the same general results. More
than this, there were no precedents. Indeed, at that early day
questions of constitutional law had occupied very little of the
attention of the American courts.

There would have been embarrassment had the British Parliament, before
our Revolution, assumed the right to alter materially the Charter of
the college. Changes in chartered institutions in America, especially,
by that body, although within the scope of its power, were usually met
with the sternest protests. After the Revolution, there were wide
differences of opinion as to who had power over charters granted
antecedent to that event. In the case of Dartmouth's Charter any one
of several opinions might have found plausible support. To determine
whether it was a fit matter for State or national legislation, or
judicial control, we must revert to the history of the Charter. There
we find that it was the unvarying purpose of the founder, adhered to
through a long period of severe and persistent effort, to obtain a
Charter which would enable him to locate his school or schools in any
of the American colonies. He was determined to be as free as possible
from local obligations and local control. There can be no doubt that
in securing the Charter of the college he believed that he had
accomplished a similar purpose. The Charter appointed as a majority of
the first Board of Trustees residents in Connecticut,--making it for
the time being, by design of the founder, for good and sufficient
reasons, in a sense, a Connecticut institution,--with a provision that
after the lapse of a brief period a majority of the Board should be
residents in New Hampshire. In writing upon this subject to a business
correspondent, in June, 1777, President Wheelock says, referring to a
third party: "Let him see how amply this incorporation is endowed, and
how independent it is made of this government or any other
incorporation," and adds that "a matter of controversy" relating to
the township granted by the king to the college nearly at the same
time with the Charter, "can be decided by no judicatory but supreme,
or one equal to that which incorporated it, _i. e._, the Continental
Congress."

The views of no one person will be received by all, as conclusive on
a subject of so much importance. But certainly, Eleazar Wheelock had a
right to construe the provisions of an instrument which in almost
every line bore his impress, never possessed by any other individual.

Had John Wheelock presented his grievances to the National
Legislature,--only in a limited sense, it is true, if at all, the
successor of that king, whose grant of Landaff, in addition to the
College Charter, made him, in a sense, according to Coke, the founder
of the college,--he might, in all probability, have obtained what he
desired in a peaceful manner, although an important judicial decision
might never have occupied its present place in American law.




CHAPTER XIII.

CHARACTER OF PRESIDENT BROWN.--TRIBUTES BY PROFESSOR HADDOCK AND RUFUS
CHOATE.


In Sprague's "Annals of the American Pulpit," we find, in substance,
the following notice of President Brown:

Francis Brown was the son of Benjamin and Prudence (Kelley) Brown, and
was born at Chester, Rockingham County, N. H., January 11, 1784. His
father was a merchant, and had a highly respectable standing in
society. His mother was a person of superior intellect and heart, and,
though she died when he had only reached his tenth year, she had
impressed upon him some of the most striking of her own
characteristics; particularly her uncommon love of order and
propriety, even in the most minute concerns, and her uncompromising
adherence to her own convictions of truth and right. In his early
boyhood he evinced the utmost eagerness in the pursuit of knowledge,
and never suffered any opportunity for intellectual improvement to
escape him. At the age of fourteen, he ventured to ask his father to
furnish him with the means of a collegiate education; but, in
consideration of his somewhat straitened circumstances, he felt
constrained to deny the request. By a subsequent marriage, however,
his circumstances were improved; and the new mother of young Brown,
with most commendable generosity, assumed the pecuniary responsibility
of his going to college. He always cherished the most grateful
recollection of her kindness; and, but a few days before his death, he
said to her with the deepest filial sensibility, "My dear mother,
whatever good I have done in the world, and whatever honor I have
received, I owe it all to you."

In his sixteenth year he became a member of Atkinson Academy, then
under the care of the Hon. John Vose, and among the most respectable
institutions of the kind in New England. His instructor has rendered
the following testimony concerning him at that period: "Though he made
no pretensions to piety during his residence at the academy, he was
exceedingly amiable in his affections and moral in his deportment. It
is very rare we find an individual in whom so many excellencies
centre. To a sweet disposition was united a strong mind; to an
accuracy which examined the minutiæ of everything a depth of
investigation which penetrated the most profound. I recollect that
when I wrote recommending him to college, I informed Dr. Wheelock I
had sent him an Addison."

Of the formation of his religious character little more is known than
that it was of silent, yet steady growth. It was not till the year
that he became a tutor in college that he made a public profession of
his faith, by connecting himself with the church in his native place.

In the spring of 1802 he joined the Freshman class of Dartmouth
College, and, during the whole period of his collegiate course, was a
model of persevering diligence, of gentle and winning manners, and
pure and elevated morality. From college he carried with him the
respect and love of both teachers and students. Having spent the year
succeeding his graduation as a private tutor in the family of the
venerable Judge Paine, of Williamstown, Vt., he was appointed to a
tutorship in the college at which he had graduated. This office he
accepted, and for three years discharged its duties with great ability
and fidelity, while, at the same time, he was pursuing theological
studies with reference to his future profession.

Having received license to preach from the Grafton Association, he
resigned his tutorship at the Commencement in 1809, with a view to
give himself solely to the work of the ministry. After declining
several flattering applications for his services, he accepted an
invitation from the Congregational Church in North Yarmouth, Me., to
become their pastor; and he was accordingly ordained there on his
birthday, January 11, 1810. Within a few months from this time, he was
chosen Professor of Languages at Dartmouth College; but this
appointment he was pleased, greatly to the joy of his parishioners, to
decline. For the succeeding five years he labored with great zeal and
success among his people, while his influence was sensibly felt in
sustaining and advancing the interests of learning and religion
throughout the State. He was the intimate friend of the lamented
President Appleton; and no one, perhaps, coöperated with the president
more vigrously than he, in increasing the resources and extending the
influence of Bowdoin College.

He was inaugurated President of Dartmouth College, on the 27th of
September, 1815.

During the period when the college controversy was at its height, and
it seemed difficult to predict its issue, Mr. Brown was invited to the
presidency of Hamilton College,--a respectable and flourishing
institution in the State of New York. He did not, however, feel at
liberty to accept the invitation, considering himself so identified
with the college with which he was then connected that he must share
either its sinking or rising fortunes.

President Brown's labors were too severe for his constitution. He was
not only almost constantly engaged during the week in the instruction
and general supervision of the college, but most of his Sabbaths were
spent in preaching to destitute congregations in the neighborhood;
and, during his vacations, he was generally traveling with a view to
increase the college funds. Soon after the Commencement in 1818, he
began to show some symptoms of pulmonary disease, and these symptoms
continued, and assumed a more aggravated form, under the best medical
prescriptions. His last effort in the pulpit was at Thetford, Vt.,
October 6, 1818. In the hope of recovering from his disease, he
traveled into the western part of New York, but no substantial relief
was obtained. In the fall of 1819, with a view to try the effect of a
milder climate, he journeyed as far south as South Carolina and
Georgia, where he spent the following winter and spring. He returned
in the month of June, and, though he was greeted by his friends and
pupils with the most affectionate welcome, they all saw, from his
pallid countenance and emaciated form, that he had only come home to
die. As he was unable to appear in public, he invited the Senior
class, who were about to leave college at the commencement of their
last vacation, to visit him in his chamber; and there he addressed to
them, with the solemnity of a spirit just ready to take its flight,
the most pertinent and affectionate farewell counsels, which they
received with every expression of gratitude, veneration, and love. In
his last days and hours he evinced the most humble, trusting,
child-like spirit, willing to live as long as God was pleased to
detain him, but evidently considering it far better to depart and be
with Christ. His last words were, "Glorious Redeemer, take my spirit."
He died July 27, 1820.

His wife Elisabeth, daughter of the Rev. Tristram Gilman, a lady whose
fine intellectual, moral, and Christian qualities adorned every
station in which she was placed, survived him many years, and died on
the 5th of September, 1851. They had three children, one of whom,
Samuel Gilman [now President Brown], is a professor in Dartmouth
College.

The degree of Doctor of Divinity was conferred upon President Brown by
both Hamilton and Williams Colleges, in 1819.

The following is a list of President Brown's published works: "An
Address on Music," delivered before the Handel Society of Dartmouth
College, 1809. "The Faithful Steward:" A Sermon delivered at the
ordination of Allen Greeley, 1810. "A Sermon delivered before the
Maine Missionary Society, 1814." "Calvin and Calvinism;" defended
against certain injurious representations contained in a pamphlet
entitled "A Sketch of the Life and Doctrine of the Celebrated John
Calvin;" of which Rev. Martin Ruter claims to be the author, 1815. "A
Reply to the Rev. Martin Ruter's Letter relating to Calvin and
Calvinism, 1815." "A Sermon delivered at Concord before the Convention
of Congregational and Presbyterian Ministers of New Hampshire, 1818."

The following is from Prof. Charles B. Haddock, D.D.: "My acquaintance
with the President was, for the most part, that of a pupil with his
teacher; an undergraduate with the head of the college. And yet it was
somewhat more than this; for it was my happiness, during my Senior
year, to have lodgings in the same house with him, and to eat at the
same table, in the family of one of the professors, and as one of a
small circle, all connected with college, and a good deal remarkable
for the freedom and vivacity of their conversation. After graduating,
I saw him only occasionally, until the last few months of his life,
which he passed here, near the close of my first year's residence at
the college as a teacher,--months in which the greatness of his
character was still more signally manifest than in any other
circumstances in which I had seen him.

"In recording my youthful impressions of so uncommon a personage, I
may, therefore, hope to be thought to speak not altogether without
knowledge, though it should be with enthusiasm.

"Dr. Brown came to preside over the college at the age of less than
thirty-two, and in circumstances to attract unusual attention to his
administration. It was during a violent contest of opposing parties
for the control of its affairs, and immediately after the removal of
his predecessor from office. His qualifications and his official acts
were, of course, exposed to severe scrutiny, and could command the
respect of the community at large only by approving themselves to the
candid judgment even of the adverse party. And I suppose it would be
admitted, even in New Hampshire, that no man ever commended himself to
general favor, I may say to general admiration, by a wiser, more
prudent, or more honorable bearing, amid the greatest and most trying
difficulties. Indeed, such was his conduct of affairs, and such the
nobleness of his whole character, as displayed in his intercourse with
the government of the State, with a rival institution under the public
authority, and with all classes of men, that not a few who began with
zeal for the college over which he presided, came at last to act even
more from zeal for the MAN who presided over it.

"The mind of Dr. Brown was of the very highest order,--profound,
comprehensive, and discriminating. Its action was deliberate,
circumspect, and sure. He made no mistakes; he left nothing in doubt
where certainty was possible; he never conjectured where there were
means of knowledge; he had no obscure glimpses among his ideas of
truth and duty. Always sound and always luminous, his opinions were
never uttered without being understood, and never understood without
being regarded. There was a dignity and weight in his judgments which
seem to me not unlike what constitutes the patriarchal authority of
Washington and Marshall.

"If not already a man of learning, in the larger sense of that term,
it was only because the duties of the pastoral relation had so long
attracted his attention to the objects of more particular interest in
his profession. Had his life been spared, however, he would have been
learned in the highest and rarest sense. His habits of study were
liberal, patient, and eminently philosophical; and within the sphere
which his inquiries covered, his knowledge was accurate and choice,
and his taste faultless. The entire form of his literary character was
beautiful--strong without being dogmatic; delicate without being
fastidious.

"His heart was large. Great objects alone could fill it; and it was
full of great objects. There was no littleness of thought, or purpose,
or ambition, in him--nothing little. The range of his literary
sympathies was as wide as the world of mind; his benevolence as
universal as the wants of man.

"His person was commanding. Gentle in his manners, affable, courteous,
he yet, unconsciously, partly by the natural dignity of his figure,
and still more by the greatness visibly impressed on his features,
exacted from us all a deference, a veneration even, that seemed as
natural as it was inevitable. His very presence was a restraint upon
everything like levity or frivolity, and diffused a thoughtful and
composed, if not always grave, air about him, which, never ceasing to
be cheerful and bright, never failed to dignify the objects of pursuit
and elevate the intercourse of life. A gentleman in the primitive
sense of the word, he was, without seeking to be thought so, always
felt to be of a superior order of men.

"On the whole, it has been my fortune to know no man whose entire
character has appeared to me so near perfection, none, whom it would
so satisfy me in all things to resemble.

"How much we lost in him it is now impossible to estimate, and it
would, perhaps, be useless to know. His early death extinguished great
hopes. But his memory is a treasure, which even death cannot take from
us."

Hon. Rufus Choate writes thus: "It happened that my whole time at
college coincided with the period of President Brown's administration.
He was inducted into office in the autumn of 1815, my Freshman year,
and he died in the summer of 1820. It is not the want, therefore, but
the throng, of recollections of him that creates any difficulty in
complying with your request. He was still young at the time of his
inauguration--not more than thirty-one--and he had passed those few
years, after having been for three of them a tutor in Dartmouth
College, in the care of a parish in North Yarmouth, in Maine; but he
had already, in an extraordinary degree, dignity of person and
sentiment; rare beauty,--almost youthful beauty, of countenance; a
sweet, deep, commanding tone of voice; a grave but graceful and
attractive demeanor--all the traits and all the qualities, completely
ripe, which make up and express weight of character; and all the
address and firmness and knowledge of youth, men, and affairs which
constitute what we call administrative talent. For that form of
talent, and for the greatness which belongs to character, he was
doubtless remarkable. He must have been distinguished for this among
the eminent. From his first appearance before the students on the day
of his inauguration, when he delivered a brief and grave address in
Latin, prepared we were told, the evening before, until they followed
the bier, mourning, to his untimely grave, he governed them perfectly
and always, through their love and veneration; the love and veneration
of the 'willing soul.' Other arts of government were, indeed, just
then, scarcely practicable. The college was in a crisis which relaxed
discipline, and would have placed a weak instructor, or an instructor
unbeloved, or loved with no more than ordinary regard, in the power of
classes which would have abused it. It was a crisis which demanded a
great man for President, and it found such an one in him. In 1816, the
Legislature of New Hampshire passed the acts which changed the Charter
of the institution, abolished the old corporation of Trustees, created
a new one, extinguished the legal identity of the college, and
reconstructed it or set up another under a different and more
ambitious name and a different government. The old Trustees, with
President Brown at their head, denied the validity of these acts, and
resisted their administration. A dominant political party had passed
or adopted them; and thereupon a controversy arose between the college
and a majority of the State; conducted in part in the courts of law of
New Hampshire, and of the Union; in part by the press; sometimes by
the students of the old institution and the new in personal collision,
or the menace of personal collision, within the very gardens of the
academy; which was not terminated until the Supreme Court of the
United States adjudged the acts unconstitutional and void. This
decision was pronounced in 1819; and then, and not till then, had
President Brown peace,--a brief peace made happy by letters, by
religion, by the consciousness of a great duty performed for law, for
literature, and for the Constitution,--happy even in prospect of
premature death. This contest tried him and the college with extreme
and various severity. To induce students to remain in a school
disturbed and menaced; to engage and inform public sentiment, the true
patron and effective founder, by showing forth that the principles of
a sound political morality, as well as of law, prescribed the action
of the old Trustees; to confer with the counsel of the college, two of
whom--Mr. Mason and Mr. Webster--have often declared to me their
admiration of the intellectual force and practical good sense which he
brought to those conferences,--this all, while it withdrew him
somewhat from the proper studies and proper cares of his office,
created a necessity for the display of the very rarest qualities of
temper, discretion, tact, and command, and he met it with consummate
ability and fortune. One of his addresses to the students in the
chapel at the darkest moment of the struggle, presenting the condition
and prospects of the college, and the embarrassments of all kinds
which surrounded its instructors, and appealing to the manliness and
affection and good principles of the students to help 'by whatsoever
things were honest, lovely, or of good report,' occurs to recollection
as of extraordinary persuasiveness and influence.

"There can be no doubt that he had very eminent intellectual ability,
true love of the beautiful in all things, and a taste trained to
discover, enjoy, and judge it, and that his acquirements were
competent and increasing. It was the 'keenness' of his mind of which
Mr. Mason always spoke to me as remarkable in any man of any
profession. He met him only in consultation as a client; but others,
students, all nearer his age, and admitted to his fuller intimacy,
must have been struck rather with the sobriety and soundness of his
thoughts, the solidity and large grasp of his understanding, and the
harmonized culture of all its parts. He wrote a pure and clear English
style, and he judged of elegant literature with a catholic and
appreciative but chastised taste. The recollections of a student of
the learning of a beloved and venerated president of a college, whom
he sees only as a boy sees a man, and his testimony concerning it,
will have little value; but I know that he was esteemed an excellent
Greek and Latin scholar, and our recitations of Horace, which the
poverty of the college and the small number of its teachers induced
him to superintend, though we were Sophomores only, were the most
agreeable and instructive exercises of the whole college classical
course.

"Of studies more professional he seemed master. Locke, Stewart, with
whose liberality and tolerance and hopeful and rational philanthropy
he sympathized warmly, Butler, Edwards, and the writers on natural law
and moral philosophy, he expounded with the ease and freedom of one
habitually trained and wholly equal to these larger meditations.

"His term of office was short and troubled; but the historian of the
college will record of his administration a two-fold honor; first,
that it was marked by a noble vindication of its chartered rights; and
second, that it was marked also by a real advancement of its learning;
by collections of ampler libraries, and by displays of a riper
scholarship."




CHAPTER XIV.

PROGRESS FROM 1820 TO 1828.--ADMINISTRATIONS OF PRESIDENT DANA AND
PRESIDENT TYLER.


It was not an easy matter, especially in the impoverished condition of
the college, to find a worthy successor of President Brown.

During the period of President Brown's illness, and at different
periods after his death, Professor Ebenezer Adams, a gentleman of
decided and energetic character, and (in years) the senior professor
in the college, was acting president.

Rev. Daniel Dana of Newburyport, Massachusetts, was elected the fourth
president of the college in August, 1820.

The substance of the next few pages is from the "Life of President
Dana," published in 1866.

The following is one of many letters addressed to him, urging his
acceptance of the presidency:

    "Dartmouth College, Sept. 7, 1820.

"Rev. and dear Sir:--Not having heard from any of our friends what is
the prospect in regard to your acceptance of the appointment made by
our Trustees, I cannot help troubling you with a line.

"I need not tell you that our solicitude would rise to extreme
distress were we seriously apprehensive that you might decide in the
negative. Oh, sir, remember the desolations of Zion here, and have
compassion. The friends of the college look to you, and to you only,
to repair the waste places. When you know that the voice of the
Trustees conspires with that of the clergy and of the public at large,
and when this same voice is echoed from the tomb of our late beloved
and much lamented President Brown, can you hesitate? That good man, in
his last days, with almost the confidence and ardor of prophecy,
declared his belief in the future prosperity and usefulness of
Dartmouth College. You have, I hope, been informed of the strong
manner in which he, last autumn, expressed himself in relation to a
successor; and of the same decided and unwavering opinion which came
from his mouth a few days before his death. 'I have,' said he, 'but
one candidate, and that is Dr. Dana. Whom do they talk of for a
successor? My opinion is exactly the same as when I conversed with you
last fall.'

"I do pray, my dear sir, that Divine Providence may not permit you to
fail of coming.

"I should be grieved if, on making the trial, you should not find
yourself pleasantly situated here. I verily believe that you would
find a disposition on the part of the people of the village, including
all the college Faculty, to render your situation comfortable and
pleasant.

"We shall watch every mail and ask every friend, till we learn the
decision, or rather what we may expect the decision to be.

    With great respect,
    "Your obedient servant,

    "R. D. M."[34]

      [34] Professor R. D. Mussey.



What is here stated as to President Brown, was also true of President
Appleton of Bowdoin College. Each had desired that Dr. Dana should be
his successor. No stronger proof could be given of the confidence felt
in him, than these concurrent last wishes of two such men. Each had
brought to the office he held not merely intellectual preëminence, but
a dignity and elevation of character, and a singleness of purpose,
rarely equaled; and to each the future welfare of the institution over
which he presided was an object of the deepest solicitude.

Dr. Dana's letter of acceptance is as follows:



    "To the Rev. and Honorable Board of Trustees of Dartmouth College,

"Gentlemen:--I have received, with deep sensibility, not unmingled
with surprise, the notice of the appointment with which you have
honored me, to the presidency of the institution under your care.

"The consideration of a subject of such magnitude has been attended
with no small degree of perplexity and distress.

"The character and objects of Dartmouth College; its intimate
connection with the great interests of the Church and of human
society; the important services it has long rendered to both; its
recent arduous struggle for existence, with the attending
embarrassments, and auspicious issue; the claims it possesses on the
community, and especially on its own sons; the unanimity of your
suffrages in the present case; these with other affecting
circumstances have been carefully considered, and I trust duly
appreciated.

"Considerations of a different kind have likewise presented. My long
and intimate connection with a most beloved and affectionate people--a
connection rendered interesting not only by its duties and delights
but by its very solicitudes and afflictions--a diffidence of my powers
to meet the expectations of the Trustees, and the demands of the
college; the exchange, at my age, of a sphere whose duties, though
arduous and exhausting, are yet familiar, for another in which new
duties, new responsibilities, new anxieties arise; in which likewise
success is uncertain, and failure would be distressing--these
considerations, with a variety of others scarcely possible to be
detailed have at times come over me with an almost appalling
influence.

"In these circumstances I have not dared trust my feelings, nor even
my judgment, with the decision of the case.

"One resource remained,--to seek advice through the regular
ecclesiastical channel--and this with a full determination to consider
the judgment of the presbytery as the most intelligible expression
which I could hope to obtain of the mind and will of Heaven,
respecting my duty; to this measure my church and people gave their
consent.

"The presbytery having determined, by nearly a unanimous vote, in
favor of the dissolution of my pastoral relation, and my acceptance of
the appointment, my duty is of course decided. I now, therefore,
declare my compliance with your invitation.

"I devote the residue of my life to the interests of the institution
committed to your care.

"This I do with deep solicitude, yet not without an animating hope
that He whose prerogative and glory it is to operate important effects
by feeble instruments, may be pleased, even through me, to give a
blessing to a seminary which has so signally enjoyed His protecting
and fostering care.

"Providence permitting, I shall be at Hanover on the fourth Wednesday
of the present month, with a view to attend the solemnities of
inauguration. It will then be necessary, considering the advanced
season, and other circumstances, for me to return without delay, that
I may arrange my affairs and remove my family.

"Gentlemen, my resolution on this great subject has been taken in the
full confidence of experiencing, in all future time, what I shall so
much need, your liberal candor, and your cordial, energetic support.
Suffer me, in addition, to request, in my behalf, your devout
supplications to Him who is the Father of Lights and the munificent
bestower of every blessing.

"I am, gentlemen, with every sentiment of esteem and respect,

    "Your devoted friend and servant,
    "Daniel Dana.

    "Newburyport, Oct. 3, 1820."



"Allusion is made in his farewell sermon at Newburyport, to his
'recently impaired health.' This was premonitory. Scarcely had he
removed his family to Hanover, and entered on his new duties, before
the crisis came to which, doubtless, the wasting cares and anxieties
of preceding years and the recent severe pressure upon his
sensibilities, had been silently but inevitably tending. His health
gave way, and great depression of spirits accompanied his bodily
languor. He took more than one long journey in the vain effort to
recruit his energies. He writes to a friend of being 'in a state of
great and very uncommon debility, undoubtedly to be attributed to the
protracted operation of distressing causes, both on mind and frame.'
He also states, that, whilst absent from Hanover in accordance with
the advice of his physician, he still hoped to be able, after his
strength was recruited, to accomplish something in the matter of
soliciting aid to the funds of the college; a work which, however
uncongenial to his tastes, he found would necessarily be devolved on
its president.

"The winter months passed by, and there was still little or no
improvement in his health. When it became known that he was agitating
the question of resigning his office, many urgent requests were made
to him not to decide hastily. He delayed only till April, and then
called a meeting of the Trustees, to be held early in May, for the
purpose of receiving and acting upon his resignation of his office. He
wished it to be considered as 'absolute and final.' The notification
to a member of the Board with whom he was specially intimate, was
accompanied by a letter in which he says:

"'You will naturally conclude that the resolution which I have taken
has cost me many a struggle, and much severe distress. This is the
fact. The last seven months have been with me a scene of suffering
indeed. I have fondly hoped that repeated journeyings would give me
relief. But their effect has been only partial and temporary. Such is
my prostration at this moment, that the duties of my office, and not
less its cares and its responsibilities, seem a burden quite beyond my
power of bearing. Had it pleased God to make me an instrument of
important good to the college, I should have esteemed myself
privileged indeed; but this privilege, though denied to me, awaits, I
confidently hope, some more favored instrument of the Divine
benevolence. I earnestly pray, that, in what pertains to this great
concern, the Trustees may be favored with much heavenly wisdom and
direction.'

"He now took a long journey to Ohio, visiting at Athens the brother
who had been the companion of his early years. Under these favorable
influences, his health began more decidedly to improve. At their
meeting, July 4, the Trustees of the college, by unanimous resolution,
requested him to withdraw his resignation; but he declined to do so,
though 'gratefully acknowledging the kindness expressed in their
communication.'

"Many years after these events, the Rev. Dr. Lord, so long and so
honorably the president of Dartmouth College, thus referred to Dr.
Dana's connection with the institution:

"'He was chosen president for his well-known excellence as a scholar
and theologian, and his extraordinary ministerial qualifications. He
was honored the country over, in these respects. It was not doubted
that he would be equally honorable as president of the college, should
his health endure.

"'That he would have been, had he been able to retain his place,
everybody well understood, as well from his auspicious beginning, as
his distinguished qualities. He made a deep impression upon the
college during the short period of his actual service.

"'But his sensitive nature had received a great shock in the breaking
up of his many and most endearing relations at Newburyport and the
country around. He began here with health seriously impaired, and in
great depression of spirit. The change of scene, of society, labor,
and responsibility, was too much for his disordered frame. He sought
relief by travel. But he gained little or nothing, and was driven to
the conclusion that his life could probably be saved only by
resignation. He could not consent to make such an office as he held a
sinecure, or to see the college labor through its severe adversities
without greater vigor of administration than his infirmities admitted.
With great conscientiousness and magnanimity, he chose to put himself
at a seeming disadvantage, rather than to risk the interests of the
college upon what he judged to be the doubtful chances of his
recovery.

"'He left with the profound respect and sincere regret of the Trustees
and Faculty. Their confidence in him was unshaken; and they never
doubted, that, had he been more favorable to himself, and borne his
new burdens with less solicitude, till he could regain his health, he
would have been as distinguished here as elsewhere, and raised the
college to a corresponding usefulness and dignity.

"'Most men judge superficially and unwisely in such cases. So far as I
know, the most competent judges of Dr. Dana's relations to Dartmouth
see nothing that does not redound to his honor. It is understood that
he accepted the presidency with great reluctance, on account of his
other responsibilities and attachments, and with distrust of his
physical ability to perform its duties; that, while he performed them,
it was with characteristic ability and effect; and that, when his best
efforts to regain his health failed, and he saw reason to fear, that,
even if his life should not be a sacrifice, his increasing infirmities
would be to the disadvantage of a struggling institution, he
generously, and entirely of his own accord, resigned. To my
apprehension, all this is significant of great moral strength under
the pressure of bodily disease, and a memorable instance of that
Christian heroism for which he has always been remarkable. "_Maluit
esse quam videri bonus._"'"

The subsequent labors of President Dana in the ministry, and the high
esteem of all who best knew him till his death, August 26, 1859, are
matters of permanent record. His first wife, Mrs. Elizabeth (Coombs)
Dana, and the second, Mrs. Sarah (Emery) Dana, had died previous to
his residence at Hanover.

President Dana's brief but earnest labors for the college having
closed in 1821, the fifth president was Rev. Bennet Tyler, who was
called from a pastorate in Southbury, Conn.

We quote in substance some passages relating to this subject from his
"Memoir," by his son-in-law, Rev. Nahum Gale, D.D.

"Early in 1822, Mr. Tyler was appointed president of Dartmouth
College. It was to him a mystery why he should be selected for that
station. Located in a retired country parish, he had been devoted to
the duties of the ministry, and had paid little attention to science
or literature. He was strongly attached to his people and his home,
for there had arisen, as 'olive plants,' around his table, three sons
and four daughters.

"But he was recommended to the Trustees of Dartmouth by Dr. Porter, of
Andover, and others, in whose judgment he had great confidence; his
brethren around him in the ministry, and the consociation with which
he was connected, believed it to be his duty to accept the
appointment. Accordingly, he broke away from an endeared people, was
inaugurated at Dartmouth in March, and entered upon the duties of his
office the following June. In the autumn of 1822, the newly-elected
president was honored by the degree of D.D., from Middlebury College.
Of his connection with Dartmouth College, Dr. Tyler has left the
following record:

"'I was among strangers, and engaged in duties to which I was
unaccustomed. But I found myself surrounded by able professors, who
treated me with great kindness, and rendered me all the assistance in
their power. My situation was much more pleasant than I anticipated;
and through the assistance of a gracious Providence, I was enabled to
discharge the duties which devolved upon me with acceptance. I have
never had any reason to doubt that I was in the path of duty when I
accepted the appointment. My labor in the service of the college, I
humbly trust, was not altogether in vain. I had the satisfaction to
know that I left it in a more prosperous condition than I found it. It
was no part of my duty, as president of the college, to preach on the
Sabbath; but the health of the professor of Divinity failing soon
after my inauguration, I found it necessary to supply his place; and
during the whole period of my presidency I preached a considerable
part of the time. In the year 1826, there was a very interesting
revival of religion, both among the students and the inhabitants of
the village, which will be remembered by not a few, while "immortality
endures."

"'I was connected with the college six years; and, although I never
felt so much at home as in the duties of the ministry, still I had no
serious thoughts of relinquishing my station, till, very unexpectedly,
I received a call from the Second Church in Portland. When I received
this call, I felt a new desire for the duties and joys of the pastoral
life, and believing I could resign my office without putting in
jeopardy the interests of the college, I concluded to do so. I parted
with the Trustees, Faculty, and students, with feelings of great
cordiality, and I had reason to believe that the feelings were
reciprocated.'

"The following letter from the venerable Professor Shurtleff,
addressed to Rev. John E. Tyler, will give the impressions of one
associated with Dr. Tyler during his presidency at Hanover.

    "Hanover, N. H., September 22, 1858.

"Reverend and very dear Friend: Permit me thus to address you; for I
can truly say that I regarded you with much interest and affection
during the whole time of your residence here, and I may also add that
your venerated parents had no friends in Hanover more sincere and
ardent than Mrs. Shurtleff and myself.

"When your dear father was appointed president of Dartmouth College,
he had been little heard of in New Hampshire. His first appearance,
however, was very prepossessing, and his preaching was much admired.
His popularity was so general in this region, that a gentleman of a
neighboring town inquired, 'Why, if he is such a man as they say, was
he not heard of before?' To which I replied, if you will allow me to
quote my own words, that 'the Lord had kept him concealed in an
obscure parish for a blessing to our college.' The impression which
his first appearance made was not lowered by further acquaintance. I
do not recollect hearing a complaint of him from any member of the
college. All his intercourse with them was tempered with the utmost
kindness, while he was punctual and faithful in every official duty. I
think he originated the project of raising, by subscription, a fund of
ten thousand dollars for the aid of indigent students seeking an
education for the ministry.

"This object he not only conceived, but completed by his own personal
efforts. For this, as well as for other services, he should be
gratefully remembered by the college, by the church, and by the
public.

"But the religious influence of Dr. Tyler, while president of
Dartmouth, will never be forgotten. In the summer of 1825, the
professor of Divinity was arrested by a severe and protracted
affection of the lungs. The president at once took the services of the
sanctuary; and the following spring term was rendered memorable by a
revival of religion, which issued in adding to the Lord many students
and inhabitants of the village.

"During his residence here we had a class of students in their
professional studies, who wished to enter the ministry earlier than
they could by entering a public seminary. We met with them once in a
week, heard their dissertations on subjects that had been assigned,
and each of us spoke on the performances, and on the subjects. The
young gentlemen were all licensed to preach after about two years, and
became useful ministers of the gospel. By these exercises, as well as
by long intimacy, I was convinced that Dr. Tyler had peculiarly clear
and discriminating views of the doctrines of the gospel, and an
uncommon facility in explaining and defending them; and I have often
remarked in years past, that with the exception of my friend, Dr.
Woods, of Andover, I would sooner recommend him to young men as a
teacher of Theology than any other clergyman in the circle of my
acquaintance.

"With many pleasing reminiscences, I remain your friend and brother in
the gospel,

    Roswell Shurtleff."

Dr. Asa D. Smith writes thus:

    "New York, December 14, 1858.
    "Rev. J. E. Tyler,--

"My dear Sir: You ask for my recollections of your honored father, as
president of my Alma Mater. I regret that I can furnish but little in
that relation. He remained at the head of the institution some two
years only after I was matriculated.

"The two lower classes had, of course, much less intercourse with him
than those more advanced. You could doubtless obtain more ample
information from those who were Seniors under him, and who had more
largely the benefit of his instruction. Such impressions as I have,
however, I am happy to give.

"It was when a member of Kimball Union Academy, in preparation for
college, if I mistake not, that I first set eyes on his commanding
form, and listened to the impressive tones of his voice. That academy,
as you know, is about a dozen miles from Hanover. Not long before the
graduation of one of its classes, he visited the place, and preached
on the Sabbath. It is not impossible that his visit had some reference
to the fact that there were among us so many candidates for college
life. It was, at all events, well for Dartmouth that he came. Judging
from the influence on my mind, I cannot doubt that not a few were the
more inclined, for what they saw of him, to connect themselves with
the institution over which he presided.

"It was the year before I entered college, I think, that is, in
1825-26, that Dartmouth was blessed with one of the most remarkable
revivals of religion it has ever enjoyed. Transformations of character
were wrought then which have borne the test of decades of years. Some
of the finest minds in college were brought under the power of the
gospel--minds that have since shone as bright lights in the world.

"When I entered the college, I found him dignified, yet affable and
fatherly in his bearing. His preaching then, as we often heard him in
the village church, was marked by the same simplicity, clearness, and
logical force, the same scripturalness, fullness of doctrine, and
evangelical earnestness, that characterized his subsequent
ministrations. He preached not to the fancy, but to the conscience and
the heart. He confined not himself to hortatory appeals, nor did he,
in any wise, skim over the surface of things; but, as both my notes
and recollections of his college sermons assure me, he was apt to
handle, and that vigorously, the high topics of theology. He gave us
not milk alone, but strong meat. Yet have I seldom known a man so
remarkable for making an abstruse subject plain to every hearer."



Rev. George Punchard, of Boston, and Rev. Nathaniel Folsom, D.D.,
professor in Meadville College, Pa., have furnished their
recollections respecting the revival in Dartmouth College, in the year
1826, to which allusion is made by Dr. Smith.

The former says:

    "Boston, February 16, 1859.

    "Rev. John E. Tyler,--

"My dear Sir: Your venerable father was president of Dartmouth College
during my whole collegiate course--from 1822 to 1826. My earliest
recollections of him are those only which a thoughtless boy of sixteen
would be likely to have of a grave and reverend divine, and are of
little value.

"It was not until near the close of my college life that I began
really to know him. At that time the college was visited by a revival
of religion of uncommon power, and my reverend president suddenly
awoke (at least to my view) in an entirely new character.

"He came to the students with a power and unction which were quite
irresistible, and manifested a depth of religious feeling for us which
made us at once love him and admire him. He seemed to have found his
appropriate sphere of labor; to have got into an atmosphere which
filled his soul and body with life and energy; to have work to do
which was congenial, which he loved, and which he knew how to do as
few men did. He was at once a son of thunder and a son of consolation.
His discourses, which had always been able and instructive, and
characterized by simplicity of arrangement and neatness and purity of
style, had now the additional attraction of an animated and energetic
delivery.

"And yet, perhaps, the conference room and the prayer-meeting were the
places in which, at that time, Dr. Tyler specially excelled. He was
naturally rather heavy and lethargic in his manner of speaking, and it
required a good deal to excite and warm him thoroughly. But the scenes
and duties incident to a powerful revival of religion, in which a
hundred or more young men were more or less interested, supplied the
necessary stimulus, and the strong man was fully waked up, and in his
extemporaneous addresses particularly, poured out streams of Christian
eloquence which he seldom equaled in his more carefully prepared
public discourses, and which few men whom I have ever heard, could
excel or equal.

"His labors, however, were not confined to the pulpit and the
conference meeting. He cheerfully and heartily did the work of a
pastor among the students, going from room to room, instructing and
exhorting his beloved pupils, and praying with them. He was among us,
not as the grave and dignified head of the college, but rather as a
loving, anxious father, seeking to instruct and save his children; or,
as an elder brother, tenderly solicitous for our spiritual welfare. He
was gentle among us, even as a nurse cherisheth her children. And God,
I verily believe, gave him spiritual children from among our number,
as the reward of his fidelity; children who never ceased to love him
while he lived, and who will cherish his memory with gratitude to
their dying hours."

Professor Folsom says:

"Dartmouth College was fortunate in getting Mr. Tyler to stand in the
line of its excellent presidents. Each of them was different from the
rest in special qualifications, in work performed, in kind and force
of influence exerted; but each did what made his administration an
important period in the history of the college, and extended its fame
and usefulness. Dr. Tyler was inferior to none of them in the depth
and extent to which he affected the character of the students for
good, and through them, wherever the Divine Providence called them to
live and labor, promoted the welfare of the country; the enlightenment
and moral activity, and power, and happiness of the people.

"His splendid physique, in which he surpassed everybody in the region;
his noble stature and well-proportioned form; his head finely poised,
and around it a halo of parental benignity, its perpetual and unfading
crown; these struck every one at first sight, and prepossessed all in
his favor. I know of none with whom to compare him in these respects
except Ezekiel Webster. In his whole spirit and mien, in look and word
and action, he was a father, and his whole administration was parental
in the best sense of the word. This benignity, as we learn from his
'Memoir,' marked his subsequent career as president of the East
Windsor Theological School. His biographer, taking notice of the fact
that 'the perversities of human nature make their appearance in such
institutions as well as elsewhere,' observes that 'the strong
affections of the father in him occasionally swayed the firmness of
the tutor and governor, and rendered him indulgent and yielding in
cases where there was call for the peremptory and authoritative.' In
the first two years of our college life, from the fall of 1824 to the
spring of 1826, two or three instances of wrongdoing passed unnoticed
which perhaps deserved such a mode of treatment. There were, moreover,
it is to be confessed, irregularities and bad practices among students
in all the classes at that period, but they were exceptional, so far
as my knowledge of them extended, and would have required a system of
espionage to detect them, or informers from the guilty ones
themselves. Dartmouth however, at its worst, in that period, was not
one whit behind any other college in New England, in its general tone
of morals, in observance of law, in habits of study and in scholarly
attainments. There were not a few whose sense of honor was very high,
and as they were popular and influential, they in some degree
necessarily gave tone to others. Nay, surrounded by such an atmosphere
of benignity--of which every student was more or less conscious,
feeling it not only in the presence of the president, but also more or
less in our connection with every other officer of the college without
exception--I think there was far less tendency to excess, far less of
the irritation of inclination against prohibition of law; and
assuredly there was never apparent a disposition to rebel from hope of
impunity through the recognized forbearance of our teachers.

"In the spring of the year 1828, a higher influence was brought to
bear, reinforcing and extending the moral element throughout the
college; recovering not a few from irregularities of conduct and waste
of talent; awakening the religious nature; giving birth to new
motives, and leading many to noble and useful lives. From that period
until our class graduated in 1828, I cannot recall an act deserving
special even animadversion, nor remember an instance of a student
obnoxious to discipline for indolent of other censurable habits. But I
remember several young men of exemplary deportment and distinguished
ability, among them Salmon P. Chase, who though not publicly regarded
as 'subjects of the work,' were greatly affected, their future being
largely determined by it. They all subsequently exhibited deep moral
and religious purpose, and were foremost in philanthropic action.
Without the preaching of Dr. Tyler as its great instrument, and
without such a man presiding over it, and guiding it, there is no
reason to suppose that the revival would have taken place, or would
have been so extensive and powerful.

"It is by looking at Dr. Tyler from every point of view that we alone
can form a just estimate of his qualities. His greatest power was
that of preacher, and he was most at home in this office. He did not
seek it, but it providentially came to him in the illness of Professor
Shurtleff, the professor of Theology, and he retired from it when in
the year 1827, Professor George Howe succeeded Professor Shurtleff. He
had risen in it to the very height of the duty he attempted to
discharge, and was majestic in it. His mode of delivery and gesture
were beyond criticism, and at times sublime. I never heard a student
speak of him in this capacity without the highest praise; and his
power ended not simply in producing admiration, but in influencing his
hearers to duty. The great object aimed at in his preaching was to
induce his hearers to be willing, unconditionally, to do and submit to
the revealed Divine will. He who succeeds in persuading his fellow-men
to faithfully and perseveringly try to do this, does the highest
Christian work, and most for the benefit of man. No one who has sat in
the presidential chair of Dartmouth, or of any other college, during
an equal length of time, has done more in this direction than Bennet
Tyler."

The librarian says:

"In 1819, Isaiah Thomas of Worcester, Massachusetts, presented the
college library 470 volumes, which were perhaps an equivalent for the
books recently lost, as Professor Haddock makes the statement that
there were probably no more books in 1820 than in 1815. In 1820 the
Trustees appropriated $400. The three libraries at this time must have
numbered not far from 8,000 volumes. In 1826, the 'Social Friends'
obtained a Charter, and one was granted to the United Fraternity'
during the following year. These Charters gave the societies the right
to hold property, and transact business, and made necessary the
consent of a majority of the existing members in order to dispose of
the libraries. The society libraries had been increasing more rapidly
than the college library, and at this time they had reached it in size
as well as exceeded it in practical value and in circulation. It is
quite noticeable that these three libraries for the twenty-five years
following were kept so nearly equal, by additions and losses, that at
no time the number of books actually upon their shelves differed by
more than a few hundred.

"The work and influence of the societies was neither small nor to be
lightly estimated, and in that work the libraries had no small share.
Professor Crosby, in speaking of the college life of the class of
1827, says: 'The college library was small, and had been so collected
that it contained few books which either the instructors or students
wished to read. The chief dependence of the latter was upon the
society libraries, in which they took much pride, and to the increase
of which they contributed with so great liberality in proportion to
their means. During the first years of our course, the library of the
"United Fraternity" occupied a place in the north entry of the
college, corresponding to that of the "Social Friends" library in the
south entry. The libraries were open only on Wednesdays and Saturdays
from 1 to 2 P. M., for the delivery and return of books, and the
students at these times gathered around the barred entrances to be
waited on in turn by the librarians and their assistants. The rooms
were so small that only three or four others were admitted at a time
within the bar for the examination of the books upon the shelves. The
opening of the philological room and of a reading-room about the same
time by the members of the "Fraternity" led to the great enlargement
of the library rooms, and great increase of library advantages, which
took place in the latter part of our course. The ample rooms were now
opened daily, instead of twice a week, for the delivery and return of
books.'

"The college library is spoken of as, at that time, being open once in
two weeks, and occupying a narrow room on the second floor of the
college."

The marked advance in the course of study and general advantages of
college life, during this period, are too well known to many living
readers to require especial notice in this connection. The leading
facts will be developed upon succeeding pages.

The following paragraphs from a member of Dr. Tyler's family are
worthy of perusal.

"My first recollections of importance regarding Dartmouth College were
my father's great concern for its financial interests. There was great
need of money at this time for new buildings and scientific apparatus,
and no one was found willing to assume the responsibility of
soliciting funds except President Tyler, who in his vacations
undertook the matter, and was eminently successful in the work. When
he first started upon his mission he called upon the late Hon. Isaac
Hill, at that time editor of the New Hampshire 'Patriot,' which paper
had been, as some thought, opposed to the interests of the college.
This gentleman had attended a Commencement at Dartmouth, and had an
interview with the new president, and being pleased, had spoken highly
of the college and its president in his paper. This emboldened
President Tyler to ask Mr. Hill to head the list of subscribers to the
college, and to his surprise he did so, pledging himself for one
hundred dollars. Mr. Hill's signature was worth many thousands of
dollars to the college.

"During one of his winter vacations, President Tyler started with his
own horse and sleigh on his mission, going through the State of
Vermont into New York. He returned after six weeks' earnest and
arduous labor, having been very successful in his mission.

"Dr. Tyler's invaluable services to the church were continued, in
various spheres, till his death May 14, 1858, his wife, Mrs. Esther
(Stone) Tyler, surviving him only one week."




CHAPTER XV.

INAUGURATION OF PRESIDENT LORD.


Rev. Nathan Lord, D.D., of Amherst, New Hampshire, was elected the
sixth president of the college. We insert entire his inaugural
address, delivered October 29, 1828.

"The revival of learning, like that of religion, originally effected
through the instrumentality of the press, though long hindered by the
successive political convulsions and changes of the world, is now
evidently in the course of rapid advancement, and is producing a deep
and wide impression upon the mass of civilized society. It is
pervading all classes, and affecting all interests. Its influence
penetrates every public and private institution, and is exciting the
best energies of the human mind, both to the invention of new methods
of intellectual cultivation and the application of knowledge to the
practical purposes of life. Fostered by the spirit of freedom, which
goes before to disenthral the mind from that state of servitude in
which its powers had been made to minister to ignorant and wayward
ambition, or still more cramping and perverting superstition, it
promises to gain an universal ascendancy, and to render all that
influence which had been arrayed against it, henceforth subservient
only to its triumphs.

"But it is characteristic of the human mind, when set at liberty from
ancient prejudices, and permitted to range in search of expected good,
to become extreme in its calculations and projects of improvement, and
to distract itself amidst the variety of its experiments. And more
especially when its enterprises are favored by the encouragement of
wealth, and sustained by the indiscriminate approval of the multitude.
It is then, that overlooking the maxims of sound philosophy, and
disregarding the safe lessons of experience, it is beguiled into the
adoption of untried theories, and wastes its strength in the
prosecution of plans, which are found at length to accord neither with
the constitution of our nature nor with the approved usages of
society. I will not say, that this is a great evil in comparison with
that state of mental vassalage and inaction in which nothing is
attempted, nor even conceived, for the true interests of mankind. For,
the mind unfettered, will ordinarily be corrected of its mistakes and
brought back from its wanderings, when truth is the object of its
aspirations, and happiness is the prize only of successful effort. But
we may learn from this infirmity of our nature, to be cautious in our
estimates of the good before us, and to use that moderation in our
endeavors which will leave us nothing to regret, when their end shall
have been attained.

"It will scarcely be doubted that the impulse which society has
received, particularly since the commencement of the passing century,
and which has evidently been connected with the growth of freedom in
this country, has been attended with many of these excesses, and not
the least probably in the department of education. Numerous
adventurers have set forth upon this field, with different pretensions
indeed, and unequal advantages, but all large in their expectations,
and confident of success. They have seemed to themselves almost to
realize the ideal good, to annihilate the space between barbarism and
refinement, to find in relation to intellectual attainment what
experimental philosophy had sought in vain, the mysterious agent which
should transmute the baser metals into gold.

"Without denying at all the actual advance of learning, or disparaging
the improvements which are taking place in the arrangements and
administration both of public and private seminaries, we cannot be so
fond (_absit invidia verbo_) as to accredit all the inventions of this
restless age. We cannot suppose that paths so various, which have been
struck out in the heat of competition, and systems based on principles
and conducted by methods so frequently differing from each other, will
all conduce to the purposes for which they are intended, except as
they may excite more general attention to the interests of education,
and furnish materials of which wisdom and experience shall at length
avail themselves, to perfect truer and more practicable systems,
suited to the intellectual and moral nature of man, and to the various
relations and interests of life. In this view, it is evident that the
conduct of public literary institutions, at the present time, is
attended with no trivial embarrassments. That expansion of the public
mind and progress of society, which necessarily take place in a
country favored with advantages of elementary instruction and general
information, will always be creating just demands upon the higher
seats of learning, which will task all their energies, and bring into
requisition all their resources. The mass of the community, becoming
more enlightened, will call for proportionally higher qualifications
in those who are sent out to preside over the public interests, and
their progress in influence will produce a yet more powerful reaction.
But to meet these demands amidst the conflicting sectional interests
and fluctuations of public feeling, which are usually attendant upon a
state of freedom, to discriminate rightly between the diverse systems
of instruction and discipline, which are set forth with such frequency
and such earnestness of commendation; to keep so near the public
sentiment as not to lose the confidence of the community, and yet not
to follow it so implicitly as to sacrifice the more desirable good of
self-approbation; this is a labor which can be estimated by those only
who have had the trial of sustaining it. Institutions that have become
venerable by age, powerful in resources and patronage, may go forward
to introduce, not only accredited improvements but doubtful changes;
and may bring the systems, which either the wise have devised, or the
popular voice has required, to the test of actual experiment. But
feebler institutions cannot leave the ground of general principles,
which, however it may be safer and ultimately more subservient to
their true interests, cannot always be easily ascertained, and
frequently fails of being approved amidst the varying circumstances,
relations, and interests of society.

"The principle which has generally obtained in regard to the colleges
of this country, of making them merely introductory to a professional
education, is one too important in its connections and results to be
hastily relinquished. The correspondence which usually exists between
the genius of civil governments, and the arrangement of literary
institutions, has been very happily exemplified in our system of
schools, rising in regular gradation from the primary to the
professional, and wisely accommodated to the public convenience and
necessity. This system, whatever defects may have existed in some of
its practical operations, has been found, on the whole, admirably
suited to the condition of society. Its parts having kept their fair
proportions, each one performing its peculiar office, and all acting
and reacting upon each other, it is out of question that the results
of the whole, in the general diffusion of knowledge and elevation of
the public character, have been salutary to a degree unprecedented in
the history of the world; and its general adoption, with modifications
according to the different circumstances of society, may be
contemplated as one of the surest pledges of our national prosperity.
Apart from the multiplied facilities of instruction, which upon this
system are afforded at the cheapest rate to all who would enjoy the
benefits of education, that spirit of fair and honorable competition,
which is necessarily excited between so many kindred institutions,
would seem to insure improvements proportioned to the means which are
afforded them, and prove a check upon those abuses which have usually
attended establishments of more extended influence and less
responsibility.

"But it would seem important to the continued success of this system,
that its several parts should still be kept distinct and subordinate.
I will not say that they may not subsist harmoniously, and be
conducted usefully upon the same ground. I will not say that an
university, sectional or national, that shall, in its separate
colleges and halls, prepare our youth for the various departments of
life, may not consist with the spirit of our civil governments, and be
guarded against the evils which have generally attended establishments
so complicate, and of such numerous resort. However this may be
judged, it will be found, I apprehend, the wisdom of our scattered
institutions, to preserve their individuality, and remain true, as to
their general regulations, to the purpose of their foundation. With
respect, particularly, to the arrangements of a college, it would seem
not less true than in regard to the efforts of an individual mind, or
the operations of a machine, that however numerous and various these
arrangements may be in detail, the most beneficial results cannot be
expected without unity of design. Between that kind of cultivation and
discipline necessary as a foundation for professional eminence, and
that which is required for success in mercantile, mechanical, or
agricultural occupation, there is a very natural and obvious
distinction. And not only is it desirable that they who will be
successful mainly as they shall be conversant with books, who require
to be learned men, and they whose concern lies principally in the
active business of life, in skill or labor, should have in some
respects a different course of study, but be subjected to the
influence of different minds, and examples, and rules, and scenes, and
associations, corresponding to the different relations which they will
sustain. 'Non omnia possumus omnes,' is a proverb applicable both to
teachers and to pupils, and it would forbid the supposition, that
minds which act upon others for widely different purposes, should do
it always with the best effect, or that they who are so acted upon,
should not sometimes suffer injury from the inadequate or ill
appropriated influence that is exerted over them.

"But the evils of commingling within the walls of college, and
subjecting to the same general influence, persons or classes,
requiring a different preparatory training, would not, probably, be
greater than those which would result from an attempt to carry
collegial instruction above the simple groundwork of the professions,
and to accommodate the course of study and discipline to the future
intended course of life. To whatever extent improvement should be
carried in the preparatory schools, of whatever qualifications young
men should be possessed, at the usual time of admission to college,
their term of residence here cannot reasonably be thought too long,
nor their facilities too ample, for general elementary cultivation. It
were not the worst of the evil of providing for professional education
at college, that the time which should be devoted to mental
preparation would be lost, and young men would go forth into life
unfurnished; but many minds uncertain and vacillating soon wearied
with the dry elements of one department, would presently attempt
another and a third, and disgusted, at length, with all, would resign
themselves to a stupefying indolence, or a consuming licentiousness.
The examples of other times, when the learning of universities all had
respect to the future political and ecclesiastical relations of the
student, and these institutions became little better than panders to
allied despotism and superstition, may teach us to cultivate our youth
in the elements of general knowledge, and impart vigor and force and
freeness to their minds, in the course of sound fundamental study,
before they are permitted to engage in any merely professional
acquisitions; to practice them well on the broad threshold of science,
before they are exposed to be blasted or bewildered by the premature
unfolding of its mysteries. They will then go forward, prepared, not
merely to acquire the technicalities of a profession, but to
investigate its essential principles; to avoid those _ignes fatui_,
which so often, with the appearance of truth, mislead and destroy, and
draw out from the depths, the living form of truth itself; and thus
contribute to the destined emancipation of the world from ignorance,
and prejudice, and misrule, and the worse influence of false
philosophy. I would not be extreme; but when we consider the
controlling influence of mind of those who are accredited as the
teachers and guides of other men, and how important that this should
be an influence of reason, of knowledge, and of truth, and how slowly
and carefully its foundation requires to be laid in the youthful mind,
we may well dread to embarrass the process, either by any accidental
impressions and associations, or by prematurely trusting to its
completion. Nor should an exception be claimed even in favor of the
Christian ministry. However desirable that they who contemplate this
office should be early qualified for the service of God, and of their
fellow men, yet they may not safely trespass upon college hours, by
anticipating those higher studies, which await them on other grounds.

"I shall be obliged to trespass further upon the time of this
assembly, while I glance at a few particulars connected with the
attainment of the single end of a collegial education. It has been
alleged, that the preparatory schools have frequently failed in
qualifying the mind for successful application to the exercises of
college. And it has been answered, that college has sent out into the
schools inadequate instructors. The evil which is admitted is probably
on both sides, and an obvious remedy will be found, in stating and
rigidly exacting such terms of matriculation as shall at once bring
into requisition the most thorough preparatory instruction, and
provide that such instruction may always be obtained.

"It is evident that, other things being equal, those who, by reason of
superior early advantages, are prepared to enter upon the prescribed
exercises of college with more readiness and effect than others, will
ordinarily prosecute and finish their course with proportionably
higher reputation. Indeed, to the want of a thorough initiation into
the rudiments of learning may be traced much of that indolence and
fickleness and easy yielding to temptation, by which the mind,
untaught in the labor of successful occupation, and discouraged by the
failure of its imprudent efforts, is presently paralyzed, and lost to
every honorable and useful purpose. If then it may be provided that
early instruction shall be more adequate, and the mind of the student
shall be prepared to enter with readiness and effect upon the studies
of college, we shall inspire him with that confidence in his own
ability and endeavors which is one of the strongest inducements to
exertion, and shall insure a degree of improvement limited only by his
capacity and application. It may be true, that some of our colleges,
by reason of the temptations of poverty, and the zeal of competition,
accommodating themselves to the convenience of youth, have not
increased in their demands in proportion to the advances which have
been already made in elementary instruction. Such have doubtless
mistaken their true interests. It is believed, that those institutions
which shall lead in exacting the most extensive and thorough
preparation, will have a distinction and a patronage proportioned to
the benefits which they shall thus render to society.

"It is of equal importance, that our colleges should be furnished with
the materials of study. It was a significant maxim, I think of
Juvenal, that it is a great part of learning to know where learning
may be found. For, after ascertaining the place of treasure, it is
usual to feel the kindling desire of acquisition, and the mind at once
receives a corresponding impulse to exertion. The man who has wasted
his best days in mental inaction, may feel himself so humbled amidst
the productions of genius and learning, which have not instructed him,
and instruments, of which he knows not the use, and specimens and
models whose properties and beauties he cannot distinguish, that he
will wish rather to retreat and forget his poverty, in the
gratifications of inferior appetite. But, on these same scenes, the
fires of youthful unprostituted ambition glow with a new intensity,
and the mind, here waking to the consciousness of its own energies,
aspires to the elevation and dignity for which it is designed. The
well stored library and philosophical room and cabinet, create an
atmosphere, in which it acts with an unwonted freedom and force, and
strengthens itself for the high and laborious service to which it is
devoted.

"But, apart from the influence of such scenes and their associations,
there are more palpable reasons, which especially at this day, call
for a great increase of books and apparatus in our literary
institutions.

"The time has been, when a few worn out text books, descending from
one generation of students to another, were thought sufficient for the
purposes of a liberal education. But, in that wider range of
investigation, to which the mind is now directed, in all departments
of study, every source of information requires to be laid open. It is
not the lesson from a single author, that is alone sufficient to be
committed, but the _subject_, of which possibly a score have treated,
that requires to be examined and understood. And neither can the
teacher nor the student feel himself adequate to the services before
him while any valuable authority, on the broad field of his inquiries,
is not accessible, or any means of illustration are unattempted. But
these facilities are clearly beyond the resources of individuals, and
however voluntary associations of students may, to some extent,
compensate for private inability, there is a point beyond which public
sentiment declares this to be a burden; and it demands that the
institutions themselves, which proffer the benefits of education,
should supply the means by which this end is to be attained. The
question between different places of education, is coming to be
decided, more frequently, by reference to the comparative advantages
which they afford in this respect; and, however it may be necessary
that a college should hold out some show of other accommodation, yet
neither the convenience of its situation, nor the splendor of its
edifices, nor the number and variety of its departments and
instructors, will be held in estimation, without corresponding
advantages for an extended course of study.

"In regard to a course of study, it were almost adventurous for one
without the advantages of experience on this subject, to remark beyond
what is already obvious, that it should be simply accommodated to the
most perfect discipline and instruction of the mind. And yet, perhaps,
it were more presumptuous to suppose, that improvement in this respect
has already reached its limits. The changes which have taken place,
and are still occurring in the methods of instruction, at the
preparatory schools, may be hoped so far to hasten the development and
strengthening of the intellectual powers as that the student may come,
at an earlier period of his college course, to that class of studies
which call more immediately for the use of reason, and give it
direction in its inquiries after truth. The impulse which the mind
receives from an acquaintance with its own powers, and their
application to some branches of intellectual philosophy, is a matter
of general experience. Every one recollects the pleasure of his first
acquisitions in this department of study, and the ardor with which he
thenceforth aspired to higher attainments. He breathed a free air, he
went forward with a new confidence, and his application to all the
duties before him became more easy and more successful. If, then, we
might, almost on the threshold of a public education, habituate the
mind to itself, and aid it in some of the more simple essays of its
own powers, it would seem, that we should prepare it for the readier
perception of classic beauties, and for mastering more effectually the
elements of mathematical, political, and moral science. Study in
every department ceases to be a mechanical process, when the mind is
thus accustomed, and then we have assurance that study will be a
pleasure, and that what becomes a pleasure will be gain and glory.

"If it were asked, whether any branch of college study might be
spared, few, probably, would be ready to affirm. However, in the zeal
of innovation, the utility of classical learning has been decried, it
is not probable that the name of scholar will ever be awarded to one
who has not loved to spend his days and nights upon the pages of
antiquity, nor drunk deep from these original sources of taste, and
genius, and philosophy. We believe it has rarely, if ever happened,
that one has attained to a symmetry and finished excellency of
character, in the varieties of any one department of learning, who has
not, at least in the early stages of education, received inspiration
from the oratory and poetry of other times, when language was an index
to the passions and emotions of the soul, and conveyed, not the names
only, but the properties of things, the qualities of mind. The very
vigor of thought and power of eloquence with which many, with a
parricidal spirit, have assailed the literature of antiquity, were
borrowed from its stores; and should their schemes of reform prevail
we might fear that other generations, inheriting only their
prejudices, without their refinement, would degenerate into
comparative barbarism, and with that of learning, that the light also
of religion would be extinguished. It is the _worst_ of this spirit
that it would seal up the treasures of heavenly wisdom, and take away
the armor in which we trust for assailing the enemies of God. And
however it may be with other interests, we will hope that in this
respect, as well as ordinarily in all others, the pulpit will prove a
defence of the true interests of man. But, it may be questioned
whether, if the field of labor were narrowed, and instead of gleaning
as is usually done, from many writers, the student should be more
thorough in his application to a few of the most approved, the end of
this branch of study would not be as fully answered, and opportunity
be afforded for greater acquisitions in the literature of modern
times. It has been said, particularly in regard to our own language
and country, that the style of writing, of conversation, and of
public speaking, among educated men, generally fails of that accuracy,
propriety, and refinement which might reasonably be expected from
their course of preparatory and professional study. The college is
undoubtedly the place where the evil, if it be admitted to exist,
should be corrected. And its correction would be found in the greater
progress of the student, beyond the task of composition, to the
examination of the most approved vernacular writings. It is not so
much by his own imperfect attempts as by familiarity with the nature
and finished productions of other minds, that he may expect to
facilitate his conceptions, to extend the circle of his thoughts, to
correct his judgment and his taste, and thus increase the readiness,
propriety, and effect of his future efforts. A course of thorough
reading and comparison of accredited authors, in connection with
occasional researches into the history of English literature and
essays at higher criticism, will probably do more towards the
accomplishment of polite scholarship than all the principles of
grammar and rhetoric, however perfectly understood, without
opportunity for such an application.

"The actual instruction of college, and its general economy and
administration, are subjects, doubtless, of yet higher consideration.
But, in view of the recent measures of the Trustees of this
institution, to advance its interests in these particulars, remarks in
this place, and on this occasion, might be judged unseasonable. I
shall be permitted, however, just to allude to these measures, as an
evidence of the deep solicitude with which the institution is
cherished by its constituted guardians, and as a pledge, that in all
things which relate to its modes of government, discipline, and
instruction, they will not be backward to provide that it shall answer
the great purposes of its foundation. And in view of the success which
already appears to have attended the application of these measures,
through the zeal of the Faculty of the college, and the commendable
spirit of the students, the hope may well be encouraged, that this
venerable seat of learning, which has been the care of Almighty God,
will not fail of His blessing, nor want the confidence, affection, and
patronage of an intelligent community.

"But, what is more necessary than any other means and advantages, and
without which the growth of any literary institution were to be
deprecated as one of the greatest of evils, is the pervading influence
of moral and religious principle. The moral dangers of a college life
have probably been sometimes enhanced in the representation. When the
arrangement of duties is such as to require of the student as much use
of time, and a habit of application as constant and persevering, as
are ordinarily expected in the employments of active life, he would
seem, so far, in respect to his principles and his habits, to have an
advantage over others, inasmuch as intellectual labor is, in itself,
better suited to refine and elevate the affections, and removes one
farther from the scenes and objects of temptation. If we add to this,
that the student is usually under a more uniform superintendence, and
comes more frequently and habitually under the influence of moral
precept and religious observances, and that the fact of his supposed
dangers makes him more a subject of parental solicitude and counsel
and prayer, his advantage is still proportionably increased. And in
respect to those institutions where these benefits are in the highest
degree enjoined, it is believed that the amount of injury to the youth
who frequent them is less than that which is suffered by any equal
number, in any other sphere of occupation.

"It must, nevertheless, be admitted, that there are dangers to the
student in some respects peculiar, affecting deeply the principles of
action, and which require a greater care to be prevented, because of
the influence which he is destined to exert in future life. The very
cultivation of mind has frequently a tendency to impair the moral
sensibilities, to induce that pride of conscious ability and variety
of attainments, which, as they are most of all affections offensive to
God, so they become, surely, though insensibly, most pernicious in
their influence upon the individuals themselves who cherish them, and
contribute to poison those streams which ought only to carry abroad
health and blessing to the world. That spirit of emulation, also,
which is naturally excited among so many aspirants for an honorable
distinction, too often leads, on the one hand, in those who excel, to
an overweening selfishness and an insatiable ambition, which, in the
course of life, sacrifice all principle and the highest interests of
society to private gratification; and, on the other, in those whose
hopes are disappointed, to a destroying negligence and sensuality. Nor
is it to be denied, that the unsanctified literature of antiquity, and
many of the productions of our own times, which have the greatest
power of attraction over the minds of youth, cannot be assiduously
cultivated without danger of corrupting the moral sentiments, and
ministering strength to the wrong affections of the mind. Against
these evils, and others, more immediately pernicious, which are
incident to numerous associations of youth, a moral influence, pure,
constraining and habitual, requires to be exerted. It is now more than
ever demanded, and the fact is most creditable to the spirit of the
times, that a literary institution should be a safe resort, and no
other advantages will, in the common estimation, compensate for defect
and failure in this particular. The relations which every individual
student sustains to God and to eternity, call imperiously and aloud,
that the great principles of moral obligation, the everlasting
distinctions between right and wrong, the methods of the Divine
administration, and the solemnities of eternal retribution, should be
kept before him, in all their significancy, and enforced by the
constraining motives of the gospel of Jesus Christ, without which all
secondary authority and influence will be comparatively vain. The
relations also of the whole body of students to their country and the
world demand, and the admonition is sounded out from every corner of
our land, from the city, and the field, and even from the desert, that
here should be laid the foundation of those virtuous habits, of that
reverence for God, and practical regard for His ordinances, without
which the influence of our educated men will gradually undermine the
fair fabric of our national freedom, and the ruins of our country will
be heaped up for an everlasting memorial, that neither liberty, nor
learning, nor wealth, nor arts, nor arms, can stay the decline of that
people among whom the redeeming spirit of Christianity has no
permanent abode. I know, indeed, that college is no place for infusing
or fostering sectarian prejudices, nor for preferring the weapons of
sectarian warfare. No spirit of party should walk abroad on this
common ground. No distinctive privileges of a denomination should here
be ever claimed or allowed. But, as none are exempted from their
obligations to God, and none are safe without His blessing, it is most
evident that this should be the first and last of our labor with those
who are themselves immortal, and whose influence is so connected with
the highest interests of their fellow men, to encourage a spirit of
inwrought piety, and instill the lessons of practical obedience. That
is the noblest of all efforts which has respect to the preparation of
mind for the service of its Creator among its kindred intelligences,
and for the joys of an immortal life. And that will be a glorious
consummation (may it be ours to hasten it) when the destined alliance
between religion and learning shall be perfected, and their united
influence shall be employed, and shall prevail, to raise a world from
ignorance and sin and wretchedness, to the dignity and the privilege
of the sons of God. And let us hope, both in regard to this college,
whose interests we now cherish, and all other kindred institutions,
that amidst the changes of society by which they are occasionally
affected, and the adversities by which they are depressed, we shall
see the vindication of that rule of Providence by which good is always
educed from evil. Let us believe that those prejudices and mistakes
and errors and abuses, which are wont, in undisturbed prosperity, to
become inveterate, shall be done away; that those improvements which
may be expected to flow from the influence of free governments and a
free Christianity shall prevail, and shall contribute to make the
reign of liberty and knowledge and truth not only universal in extent,
but perpetual in duration."




CHAPTER XVI.

THE POLICY OF THE COLLEGE, ITS PROGRESS, AND ENLARGEMENT UNDER
PRESIDENT LORD'S ADMINISTRATION, FROM 1828 TO 1863.


President Lord's official course was marked by a judicious
conservatism.

In nothing was this more conspicuous than in his treatment of the
matter of "college honors." Near the close of his administration, the
occasion requiring, he published a statement, in which we find the
following language:

"It will be recollected that about a quarter of a century ago there
arose a simultaneous questioning among the students at most of the New
England colleges, in regard to college appointments in general. It was
a spontaneous movement of the young men, consequent upon an unusual
religious awakening among them, and seemed a common reaction of
conscience against a common injurious custom. The students of this
college were excited more than others. At least, they were more
demonstrative. By memorial, they unanimously requested the Trustees to
abolish the existing system.

"The Trustees gave great attention to the request. Having ascertained
that the Faculty would readily try the experiment of a change,
although but two of them were convinced of its utility, they set aside
the existing system of exhibitions, prizes, assignments, etc., and
ordained the present system, which fully and consistently excludes the
principle of the old. This action of the Trustees was thorough,
consistent, and decisive, and was far in advance of what had taken
place in any other institution. It gave great content to the students.
It was followed by many tokens of public approbation. The Faculty at
once found their administration relieved, simplified, and greatly
facilitated in general. The college rapidly attained to a degree of
patronage and prosperity unprecedented in its history.

"After a few years, a severe outside pressure produced a degree of
anxiety in regard to the prudence, if not the principle, of the
change. Some distinguished alumni of the college, and other gentlemen,
remonstrated against it as an innovation not soundly moral and
conservative, but radical and disorganizing. They feared that the
college would lose its tone and dignity among learned institutions.
The Trustees, though not convinced, were stirred, and again asked the
judgment of the Faculty.

"The Faculty replied, that, although they had not, as a body,
recommended the adoption of the new system, they had given it, as duty
required, a fair experiment, and were constrained to say, that it had
turned out better than their expectations. Notwithstanding some
inconvenience, it had obviated serious evils, had secured
unquestionable benefits, and had given a decided impulse to the
college. They were not prepared to advise its discontinuance.
Whereupon the Trustees resolved to adhere.

"Yet, after another short term of years, changes having occurred both
in the Trustees and Faculty, and the outside pressure still
continuing, the subject again came under the discussion of the Board.
In that instance it was formally proposed by a majority of the
Faculty. Some new members had been added to that body, who had had no
experience, as college officers, of the old system. Others had left
it, and some had seen reasons to change their opinions. A large
majority requested that the old _régime_, or something analogous to
it, should be restored.

"The minority confidently protested. They had had experience on both
sides, and were satisfied that the new system had greatly the
advantage of the old, both in respect to principle and practical
results.

"The Trustees gave the subject their attentive consideration,
canvassed conflicting reasons, and still adhered. They enjoined it
upon the Faculty to abide by the new system, and to keep its principle
inviolate in the college discipline.

"Since that time the question has been at rest. Whatever differences
of opinion may have existed in the Board or in the Faculty, they have
not interfered with the regular and faithful administration of affairs
upon the prescribed basis. The college has not suffered. It has not
ceased to flourish, in respect to sound instruction, easy and
effective discipline, a righteous order, thorough scholarship, a
liberal patronage, and an honorable position. It is believed to be not
behind any of its sister colleges in the proper characteristics of a
learned institution, even though measured not by its best, but its
average scholarship, as determined by lot, in the exercises of the
Commencement. Its order has become so well settled and understood in
this respect, that any reversal of it, principle apart, might be
attended with inconveniences and hazards more than sufficient to
counterbalance any supposed possible or probable advantages.

"But it is eminently due to the learned Memorialists [Alumni], and to
other friends and patrons of the college, to explain more fully the
theory on which the Trustees have acted, and which applies equally to
the questions now in hand. Wherefore your Committee go on to observe,
as first principles:

"1. That a college is a public institution, designed and incorporated
to qualify young men for leaders of the Church and the State.

"2. That the requisite qualifications for such leadership are
knowledge, wisdom, and virtue. Accidental accomplishments are
important in giving prominence and effect to more substantial
qualities; but these are fundamental and indispensable. Without them
the public interests, so far as connected with college, have no
security.

"3. That these qualifications are valueless in separation from each
other; and are then likely to be injurious in proportion to the degree
of culture. Knowledge without wisdom is insane and mischievous; and
both without virtue serve but to give greater energy and efficiency to
those naturally destructive elements which are common both to
individuals and society. Virtue alone, if it could be supposed to
exist without knowledge and wisdom, would be but an idea, or an
emotion, and practically futile.

"4. That the organization and discipline of a college constitute what
we denominate its order; and the highest responsibility rests on its
appointed guardians, to perfect and preserve this necessary order
agreeably to the highest standards that are known among men.

"5. That the ultimate standard, binding on all Christian educators, is
the Scripture; and their ultimate responsibility is to God. Great
latitude is given them by the State; and they are not held accountable
to the civil authorities, in the widest exercise of their discretion,
while they infringe not upon the civil statutes. The State leaves them
to their own opinions and policy, within the terms of their chartered
privileges and the laws in general. The Church has no control over
them whatever but in respect to patronage, when they are constituted
as mere civil corporations; and it may not interfere with them but as
individual men; nor then, if they happen to sustain no individual and
personal relations to it. But the State and the Church are equally
ordained of God; and all educators are responsible to Him that the
comprehensive order of their institutions shall be in agreement with
the principles of His Word, and thereby subservient to the public
good.

"6. That the order of a college is, first, mechanical, in respect to
its forms, arrangements, and observances; and, secondly, moral, in
respect to principle.

"7. That college mechanism in general should have respect to the most
perfect development of the powers of students, and be carried on with
great exactness and fidelity; that any want of symmetry, proportion,
finish, balance, and executive ability, or frequent experimenting and
change to meet internal difficulties, or the humors and caprices of
society, must tend to failure and dishonor. But that no mechanism,
however organically perfect or judiciously administered, that does not
embody a righteous moral principle, or that cannot be operated in
consistency with it, can be otherwise than injurious in its ultimate
results.

"Whereupon your Committee propose, that a system of scholarships and
prizes, as such systems have usually obtained, cannot be introduced
into college mechanism, or be carried on, consistently with righteous
principle, and favorably to virtue in young men, or to true knowledge
and wisdom, so far as these presuppose virtue, and depend upon it."

In regard to the views here set forth, it is proper to remark, that
reasoning which had much force, a score of years since, would possibly
have less at the present time.

In regard to this period the librarian says:

"In 1830, the three libraries must have numbered in volumes between
12,000 and 13,000, with slight difference in numbers, the college
library being the largest, and the United Fraternity's the smallest.
The first library catalogue of the latter society was printed previous
to 1840, and contained the titles of 4,900 volumes.

"In 1840, the libraries obtained better accommodations by the erection
of Reed Hall, which was so far completed that the books were shelved
just before the Commencement. They were given the second floor of the
building, an amount of space which then seemed to give ample room for
additions, as the three libraries together numbered only 15,000
volumes. The college library occupied the east half of the floor,
while the west side was divided between the two society libraries. The
books were first shelved against the wall, then alcoves and cases were
added as long as space remained, while for several years previous to
the present time the least valuable books have been removed to make
space for additions.

"In the college library, borrowers have generally been excluded from
the rooms in which books are kept, while the reverse has been true in
the society libraries.

"In June, 1841, the professors of the college with the assistance of
some of the gentlemen of the vicinity formed a society since known as
the 'Northern Academy.' This society, which was afterwards chartered
and has been continued in different forms until the present time,
early began the formation of a library. While many old books have been
collected, its principal value lies in pamphlets and files of
newspapers, some of which covering a number of years extend back
beyond the Revolution. This collection, now swelled to several
thousand, has always been in connection with the college library,
although for several years a want of shelf room and a greater want of
funds to place it in usable condition, have made it of little
practical value. In 1850, the three libraries having changed little
comparatively, numbered 19,000 volumes. The 'Northern Academy,'
exclusive of the unbound, had over 1,000 volumes, thus making fully
20,000 volumes accessible. A distinction must be made between the
figures given under the different dates (which indicate the number
that were actually in the libraries), and the number according to
catalogues. The latter were made by adding to former lists the books
received during different years, when in fact the additions during
some of these years did not more than make good the losses. It
frequently happened that ten percent of the catalogued number could
not be accounted for. While the society libraries have continued with
nearly the same annual additions--an average actual yearly increase of
over a hundred volumes,--the great growth of the college library has
taken place since 1850. Since that year have been received the
donations of books for the different departments of instruction and
the funds upon which the constant growth of the library depends. Of
these funds the first had its origin in 1846, when Edmund Parker of
Nashua, Isaac Parker of Boston, and Joel Parker of Keene, gave $1,000.
This was subsequently increased by the latter to $7,000, and in his
will (which founded the Law School), provisions were made, that will,
when available, place this fund at $20,000. In 1852, Dr. George C.
Shattuck, whose name is associated with the Observatory, gave $1,000
for the department of Mathematics as applied to Mechanics and
Astronomy. To this during the same year he added $200 for Natural
Philosophy and Astronomy, and $800 for the Latin language and
Literature. At the same time Dr. Roswell Shurtleff, Emeritus
Professor, gave $1,000 for better providing with books the departments
of Intellectual and Moral Philosophy and Political Economy. These
three donations were intended principally for the use of instructors,
and were accompanied with restrictions from general circulation. In
1859, by the will of Dr. Henry Bond of Philadelphia, several hundred
volumes were received, and provisions were made for a library fund
which when available will be about $11,000. The late Hon. Samuel
Appleton established in 1845, a fund which was increased in 1854, and
is known as the Appleton Fund. The income of this has been partially
applied to the purchase of books relating to Natural Philosophy."

"The Press" in Hanover is worthy of notice in this connection. We
quote from a published address by Professor Sanborn:

"No man lives in Hanover to-day, who can tell when any newspaper was
first printed in the town, or when it ceased to be printed. Even the
papers themselves have perished. Here and there, a stray number, or
possibly a bound volume, may be found among the useless lumber of an
attic. There was a press in Hanover, before the close of the last
century. It is reported that a newspaper was published there prior to
the year 1799. I have been unable to find a copy of it. In 1799, Mr.
Webster delivered a Fourth-of-July oration before the citizens of
Hanover, which was published in that town. A eulogy, by the same
orator, on a deceased classmate, was also published the next year.
Moses Davis, a citizen of the place, began the publication of the
'Dartmouth Gazette,' August 27, 1799. How long he continued to edit
and publish the paper, I cannot certainly ascertain. A paper bearing
that name was published for at least twenty years. I have a number of
the 'Dartmouth Gazette' dated June 23, 1819, being No. XLIII., vol.
19. The whole number to this date of the paper, in this form, is 1025.
It was then printed and published by Charles Spear. It would seem,
therefore, that the paper which originated with Moses Davis, lived for
more than twenty years. It was a valuable paper, containing a careful
summary of foreign news, sometimes long orations of English statesmen,
and an accurate record of local events. The original pieces were quite
numerous, written by occasional contributors, many of them students of
the college. The editorials were brief; in fact, a majority of the
early numbers contain no words which appear as editorial. The
political articles were decidedly favorable to the Federal party, but
moderate in tone. During the first three years of the existence of
this paper, Daniel Webster, then a student, was a frequent
contributor; he wrote both prose and poetry, more frequently the
latter. The topics were trite, but the thoughts were always serious
and elevated. In the issue of December 9, 1799, Mr. Webster published
a poem on winter; he was then a Junior in college. The European wars
commanded his attention and saddened his reflections.

"Mr. Webster continued to write for the paper after leaving college.
In his published correspondence, there is a letter from the editor
importuning him to write the 'Newsboy's Message' for January, 1803. He
says: 'I want a genuinely Federal address, and you are the very person
to write it. And this solicitation, sir, is not from me alone--some of
our most respectable characters join in the request.'

"The 'Dartmouth Gazette' was the champion of the college during the
entire period of its controversy with the State. Many of the ablest
articles written in defence of the college, appeared in its columns. I
regret that I cannot give the entire history of this useful paper; it
did a good work in its day, and we may now say literally, 'peace to
its ashes.'

"During a portion of the existence of the 'Dartmouth Gazette,' while
it was edited by Charles Spear, another paper was printed by Moses
Davis, called 'The Literary Tablet,' purporting to be edited by
Nicholas Orlando. Whether this is a _nomme de plume_ or a real name, I
cannot determine. Three volumes are known to have been published. It
lived for three years at least. The third volume dates from August,
1805, to August, 1806. It was a folio of four pages, three columns to
a page, of about fourteen inches by twelve in size. It was printed
every other Wednesday for the editor.

"A new paper appeared in Hanover, June, 1820. The prospectus was as
follows:

"'A new weekly paper in Hanover, N. H., to be entitled the "Dartmouth
Herald." The "Dartmouth Gazette" having been discontinued, the
subscribers, at the solicitation of a number of literary gentlemen,
propose to publish a paper under the above title. Besides
advertisements, the "Herald" will embrace accounts of our National and
State Legislatures, and the most interesting articles of news, foreign
and domestic; notices of improvements in the arts and sciences,
especially agriculture and the mechanical arts most practiced in our
own country; and essays, original and selected, upon the mechanical
and liberal Arts, Literature, Politics, Morals and Religion.

"'The original articles will be furnished by a society of gentlemen;
and it is confidently expected will not be unworthy of the interesting
subjects, to which a considerable space will be allotted in this
paper.

    "'Bannister & Thurston.
    "'Hanover, April 7, 1820.'

"It was a small folio of four pages, twenty by twelve inches in size.
It was well filled with news and original contributions. Its life was
brief. Unfortunately, no record was made either on the printed page or
the faithful memory, of the date of its decease, so far as I can
learn.

"For several years no periodical was published in Hanover. 'The
Magnet,' an octavo of sixteen pages, edited by students and published
by Thomas Mann, appeared in 1835. The first number bears date October
21, 1835. There seems to have been a rival paper contemporary with
this, called 'The Independent Chronicle.' In the November number of
the 'Magnet,' we find this allusion to it: 'The second number of the
"Independent Chronicle" is below criticism.' In the December number,
the 'Magnet' chronicles the demise of its despised rival, with evident
satisfaction. In 1837, another student's periodical appeared, called
'The Scrap Book.' I am unable to write its history; it was probably of
brief duration. In 1839, the students of Dartmouth College originated
a literary periodical called 'The Dartmouth.' It was published, I
think, for five years. The editors were chosen from the undergraduates
by the Senior class. Among the editors of 1840-41, were J. E. Hood and
James O. Adams, both of whom have since gained honorable distinction
in a wider field of editorial labor. A few months ago, I received as a
present from B. P. Shillaber, the witty and genial author of the 'Life
and Sayings of Mrs. Partington,' and other humorous works, a volume of
'The Dartmouth,' which he received from Mr. Hood. It was handsomely
bound, and labelled 'Brains' on the back. Mr. Shillaber says of it in
a letter, dated July 4, 1872, 'I find, that the volume comprises but a
half year ending with Hood's editorship and graduation. It
nevertheless will prove interesting; and it gives me pleasure to
present it, with a delightful memory of Dartmouth to commend the
trifle. I thought it might gratify you personally, as several of your
effusions are contained in it. Poor Hood has crossed the dark stream:
he died in Colorado last winter. He held you in enduring regard. The
title is a boyish suggestion; but there is more evidence of "_brains_"
in it than is to be found in many far more pretentious publications.'

"These remarks will apply with equal justice to the entire ten volumes
of 'The Dartmouth.' It was highly creditable to the students who
originated and sustained it. 'The Dartmouth' was printed by Mr. E. A.
Allen, who during the continuance of this periodical made several
other ventures in the newspaper line. Sometime during the year 1840 or
1841, he started a paper called 'The Experiment,' which was edited by
James O. Adams, then a student in college. This paper was subsequently
issued in quarto form and called 'The Amulet.'

"In 1841, a periodical called the 'Iris and Record' was issued in
Hanover. It was published monthly, in numbers of thirty-two royal
octavo pages, making two volumes each year. It was edited by 'an
association of gentlemen,' and filled with well selected and original
literary articles. It must have had a considerable circulation, if we
may credit the assertion of the editor of No. II., vol. 3, who says:
'We doubt not there are hundreds of persons, whose names are on our
subscription list, who might every month contribute a short article
upon some interesting subject.' The 'Iris' was also printed by E. A.
Allen.

"During the same year an anti-slavery paper was published in Hanover,
called 'The People's Advocate,' by St. Clair and Briggs. In July,
1843, J. E. Hood became its editor, and continued to publish it for
more than a year, when it was removed to Concord. 'The Advocate' was a
spirited paper; and the editor, then a youth, showed himself an able,
fearless, and uncompromising foe of slavery, at a time when it
required great moral courage and liberal sacrifices of time, talent,
and labor, to advocate the principles of the Free Soil Party. In
February, 1844, Mr. Hood established a paper in Hanover, called the
'Family Visitor,' in which he advocated the various reforms of the
day; and published a variety of original and selected articles in
prose and poetry, for the profit and amusement of his patrons. On
looking over some of the back numbers, I find the contents as lively,
piquant, and interesting, as the best journals of to-day. Mr. Hood was
born an editor, and to the day of his death he performed well his
part; and when his Master bade him 'go up higher,' he left few peers
behind him in his chosen vocation."

Rev. H. A. Hazen, a reliable authority on any historical point, states
that there was a printing-press at Dresden, (which included the
"College District," in Hanover, and a part of Lebanon), as early as
1777. Mr. Abel Curtis' Grammar was printed there by J. P. and A.
Spooner, in 1779. Other works, still extant, were printed by them at
about the same period.[35]

      [35] "The Dartmouth" having been revived in 1867, is now issued
           as a Weekly Magazine.

In tracing the progress of the college during President Lord's
administration, we cannot more fitly conclude, than by adopting the
language of Mr. William H. Duncan, who in a valuable tribute to his
worth and his memory, says:

"It was the proud boast of Augustus, that he found Rome of brick and
left it of marble. Might not President Lord, at the time of his
resignation, have said without a shadow of boasting, I found the
college, what its great counsel called it in that most touching and
pathetic close of his great argument in the College Case before the
Supreme Court at Washington: I found it truly 'a small college'; it
was in an humble condition; its classes were small; its finances
embarrassed; its buildings in a dilapidated and ruinous condition. I
left it one of the leading institutions of the land!"

Fuller details on these points will be gathered from subsequent
chapters.




CHAPTER XVII.

CHARACTER OF PRESIDENT LORD.


The period of President Tyler's resignation was a most critical one in
the history of the college.

Its eminent founder passed away in the midst of the Revolutionary
struggle, leaving the frail bark, in which were centered fond and
long-cherished hopes, tossing upon uncertain and dangerous waters. A
fearful storm was raging when his immediate successor put off the
robes of office, and a little later went "to give account of his
stewardship." Thirteen years had scarcely been sufficient fully to
restore to a healthy condition the discipline of the college, which
had been materially weakened by the lack of harmony between the second
president and his associates in office.

Material aid was needed also to provide better accommodations for the
students.

In common with other colleges, Dartmouth needed most of all, in those
trying times, a president "rooted and grounded" in the truth.

The multiplication of colleges rendered it especially desirable, at
this period, that this college should have a man at its head well
fitted and furnished for his work. In the little more than half a
century of its existence, the number of New England colleges, founded
upon the same religious faith, had increased from three to eight,
rendering the best leadership necessary to meet the competition.

A more judicious selection could not have been made for the sixth
president of the college.

Rev. Nathan Lord, the son of John and Mehitable (Perkins) Lord, was
born at Berwick, Maine, November 28, 1792, and belonged to a highly
respectable family. At the early age of sixteen, he graduated at
Bowdoin College, in the class of 1809. Very rarely has a student at
college the opportunity to sit under the instruction of two such men
as Joseph McKeen and Jesse Appleton, each of whom filled the
president's chair two years, while young Lord was a student.

After valuable experience as a teacher in the Exeter Academy, he
pursued a theological course at the Andover Seminary, graduating in
1815. He had been twelve years pastor of the Congregational Church at
Amherst when called to the presidency of Dartmouth, having been for
some time a Trustee. In the intellectual strength and literary
attainments of its people, this had been for a long period one of the
leading towns in southern New Hampshire. Being the county seat, it was
visited periodically by gentlemen eminent in the law, with whom
professional men resident in the place would most naturally have
frequent intercourse. At a period when the whole community was
profoundly agitated, by the most earnest and important theological
controversy in the history of New England, we can readily understand
that the youthful preacher would have abundant opportunity to measure
swords with skilled warriors, in the field of religious debate. That
he wielded his weapons, in the discussions of that period, with a
force indicating that he was a man of no ordinary mould, is a matter
of history. When he entered upon his great work at Dartmouth, those
who, as its guardians, had called him to it, cherished confident hope
of his success. Seldom has there been so full a realization of such
hope in the history of American colleges.

President Lord brought to the accomplishment of his task a fine
physique; a countenance serene, yet impressive; a voice rare both for
its richness and its power; a pleasing, almost magnetic, dignity of
mien; a mind most capacious and discriminating by nature, richly
stored by severe application, and thoroughly disciplined by varied
professional labor; and a heart always tender, yet always true to the
profoundest convictions of duty. A deep, rich, and thorough religious
experience well fitted the graceful and earnest man to be a graceful
and earnest Christian teacher. The question of fitness for the
position as an executive was soon settled beyond the possibility of a
doubt. It required but a brief acquaintance with President Lord to
teach any one, that he fully believed in the most literal acceptation
of the doctrine, that "the powers that be are ordained of God."

A recognition of this fundamental law guided and governed him daily
and hourly through all his public life. When early in his
administration, he discovered marked symptoms of a spirit of
insubordination in the college, he gave all concerned to understand
most fully, that it would be his duty to maintain the supremacy of the
law. There was never any deviation from this loyalty to duty in
administering the discipline of the college. No undue regard for his
own dignity, or comfort, or safety, deterred him from visiting, at any
hour of day or night, the scene of disorder. When he had been more
than forty years an officer of the college he reaffirmed his adherence
to this principle, in a most emphatic manner, when those to whom he
did not deem himself responsible sought to point out to him the path
of duty.

As a teacher it was President Lord's province, chiefly to unfold the
various relations and obligations of man to his Maker. In the
performance of this duty he gave remarkable prominence to the Divine
Revelation. Jealous for the honor of his great Master and Teacher, he
was very suspicious, possibly too suspicious, of any intermixture of
"man's wisdom." This habit may have induced occasionally, measurable
disparagement of worthy and eminent men. But the genial manner and
chastened tone invariably extracted the point from the severest word,
and left upon the pupil's mind a profound conviction that his teacher
had been "taught of God." It may well be doubted whether, of the large
numbers who graduated during President Lord's administration, any who
were brought in close contact with him, and listened with a "willing
mind" to his instructions, failed to receive measurably, yet
consciously, the impress of their honored teacher.

The following extracts from the official records of the Trustees, are
deemed worthy of insertion in this connection in order to a full
understanding of the circumstances attending President Lord's
resignation.

"Annual Meeting, July 1863. Mr. Tuck offered the following, to wit:
'The undersigned has had his attention called to the accompanying
resolutions passed by the Merrimack County Conference of
Congregational Churches, held on the 23d and 24th of June last; and he
submits the same to the Trustees, with a motion that a Committee be
appointed to report what action thereon ought to be taken.

"'1. "Resolved. That the people of New Hampshire have the strongest
desire for the prosperity of Dartmouth College, and that they rejoice
in the wide influence this noble institution has exerted in the cause
of education and religion.

"'2. "Resolved. That we cherish a sincere regard for its venerable
president; for the rare qualifications he possesses for the high
office he has so long and ably filled; but that we deeply regret that
its welfare is greatly imperiled by the existence of a popular
prejudice against it, arising from the publication and use of some of
his peculiar views touching public affairs, tending to embarrass our
government in its present fearful struggle, and to encourage and
strengthen the resistance of its enemies in arms.

"'3. "Resolved. That in our opinion it is the duty of the Trustees of
the College to seriously inquire whether its interests do not demand a
change in the presidency; and to act according to their judgment in
the premises."'

"Whereupon, Messrs. Tuck, Bouton, and Eastman were appointed a
Committee, to report on the subject aforesaid."

"The Committee to whom was referred the resolutions of the Merrimack
County Conference, respecting Dartmouth College, made the following
Report:

"'The Committee have taken into most respectful consideration the
action of the Conference and the sentiment pervading the churches of
which the resolutions of the Conference are the expression. We do not
forget, but thankfully avow the debt of gratitude which has rested on
the college, throughout its history, to the churches of New England,
and to the pious teachings and generous patronage of those included
within their embrace. We are fully aware of the obligations of science
and literature, in all past time, to the clerical profession; that the
countenance and support of the clergy and the churches have ever been
the chief reliance of this college, and that we can hope for little
prosperity or usefulness to the institution in future, without
meriting the confidence bestowed upon it in the past. We deplore the
present condition of the college in respect to the sentiments
entertained towards it, as expressed in said resolutions, and we
proffer our readiness to do any act which our intimate knowledge of
its affairs and circumstances enable us to judge practicable and
beneficial. Neither the Trustees nor the Faculty coincide with the
president of the college in the views which he has published, touching
slavery and the war; and it has been their hope that the college would
not be adjudged a partisan institution, by reason of such
publications. It has been our purpose that no act of ours should
contribute to such an impression upon the public mind, inviting the
public as we do, to contribute to its support, and to partake of its
privileges.

"'It would be impracticable if it were wise to embody in this report
all the reasons which induce us to propose no action by which the
removal of the president from the head of the institution should be
undertaken by the Trustees; and we bespeak with confidence the
favorable judgment that we act discreetly, from the members of the
Conference who have expressed in their resolutions their generous
appreciation of the eminent ability and qualifications of the
president for the position which he occupies.

"'Yet the Committee do not fail to see that the present crisis in the
country is no ordinary conflict between opposing parties, but is a
struggle between the government on one side, and its enemies on the
other, and that in it are involved vital issues, not only respecting
science and learning, virtue and religion, but also respecting all the
social and civil blessings growing out of free institutions.

"'The Committee recommend that the resolutions of the Merrimack County
Conference, this report and the accompanying resolutions, be published
in pamphlet forms, and that the Treasurer be directed to cause the
same to be circulated among the members of said Conference, and other
persons, according to his discretion.

    Amos Tuck.
    N. Bouton."

"'RESOLUTIONS.

"'The Trustees of Dartmouth College, impressed with the magnitude of
the crisis now existing in public affairs, and with the vital
consequences which the issue of current events will bring to the
nation and the world; and, considering that it is the duty of literary
institutions and the men who control them to stand in no doubtful
position when the Government of the country struggles for existence;
inscribe upon their records, and promulgate the following Resolutions:

"'First. We recognize and acknowledge with grateful pride, the heroic
sacrifices and valiant deeds of many of the sons of Dartmouth, in
their endeavors to defend and sustain the Government against the
present wicked and remorseless rebellion; and we announce to the
living now on the battlefields, to the sick and the maimed in the
hospitals and among their friends, and to the relatives of such of
them as have fallen in defense of their country, that Dartmouth
College rejoices to do them honor, and will inscribe their names and
their brave deeds upon her enduring records.

"'Second. We commend the cause of our beloved country to all the
Alumni of this Institution; and we invoke from them, and pledge our
own most efficient and cordial support, and that of Dartmouth College,
to the Government, which is the only power by which the rebellion can
be subdued. We hail with joy and with grateful acknowledgments to the
God of our fathers, the cheering hope that the dark cloud which has
heretofore obscured the vision and depressed the hearts of patriots
and statesmen, in all attempts to scan the future, may in time
disappear entirely from our horizon; and that American slavery, with
all its sin and shame, and the alienations, jealousies, and
hostilities between the people of different sections, of which it has
been the fruitful source, may find its merited doom in the consequence
of the war which it has evoked.

"'Third. The Trustees bespeak for the College in the future the same
cordial support and patronage of the Clergy and Churches of New
England, as well as other friends of sound learning, which they have
given to it in time past, reminding them of the obligations which the
cause of education, science, and religion seem to lay upon them, to
stand by this venerable Institution, in evil report and in good
report, in view of its past history and great service to the Church
and the State, entertaining an abiding faith that it will triumph over
all obstacles, and go down to posterity with its powers of usefulness
unimpaired.'

"It was moved by Dr. Barstow that the foregoing Report and Resolutions
be accepted and adopted.

"On the question of adopting the report, two voted in the negative and
five in the affirmative. On the adoption of the preamble and second
resolution, two voted in the negative and five in the affirmative, for
the first and third resolutions the vote was unanimous, so the report
and resolutions were adopted.

"The president asked leave to withdraw for a short time, and Dr.
Barstow was requested to take the chair.

"The President on resuming the chair read to the Trustees the
following paper, to wit:



    "'Dartmouth College, July 24, 1863.

    "'To the Trustees of Dartmouth College:

"'In making this communication to the Hon. and Rev. Board of Trustees
I take the liberty respectfully to protest against their right to
impose any religious, ethical, or political test upon any member of
their own body or any member of the College Faculty, beyond what is
recognized by the Charter of the institution, or express statutes or
stipulations conformed to that instrument, however urged or suggested,
directly or indirectly, by individuals or public bodies assuming to be
as visitors of the college, or advisers of the Trustees.

"'The action of the Trustees, on certain resolutions of the Merrimack
County Conference of Churches, virtually imposes such a test, inasmuch
as it implicitly represents and censures me as having become injurious
to the college, not on account of any official malfeasance or
delinquency, for, on the contrary, its commendations of my personal
and official character and conduct during my long term of service, far
exceed my merits; but, for my opinions and publications on questions
of Biblical ethics and interpretations, which are supposed by the
Trustees to bear unfavorably upon one branch of the policy pursued by
the present administration of the government of the country.

"'For my opinions and expressions of opinion on such subject, I hold
myself responsible only to God, and the constitutional tribunals of my
country; inasmuch as they are not touched by the Charter of the
college, or any express statutes or stipulations. And, while my
unswerving loyalty to the government of my fathers, proved and tested
by more than seventy years of devotion to its true and fundamental
principles, cannot be permanently discredited by excited passions of
the hour, I do not feel obliged when its exercise is called in
question, to surrender my moral and constitutional right and Christian
liberty, in this respect, nor to submit to any censure, nor consent to
any conditions such as are implied in the aforesaid action of the
Board; which action is made more impressive upon me, in view of the
private communications of some of its members.

"'But not choosing to place myself in any unkind relations to a body
having the responsible guardianship of the college, a body from which
I have received so many tokens of confidence and regard, and believing
it to be inconsistent with Christian charity and propriety to carry on
my administration, while holding and expressing opinions injurious, as
they imagine, to the interests of the college, and offensive to that
party in the country which they [the majority] professedly represent,
I hereby resign my office as president.

"'I also resign my office as Trustee. In taking leave of the college
with which I have been connected, as Trustee or President, more than
forty years, very happily to myself, and, as the Trustees have often
given me to understand, not without benefit to the college, I beg
leave to assure them that I shall ever entertain a grateful sense of
the favorable consideration shown to me by themselves and their
predecessors in office; and that I shall never cease to desire the
peace and prosperity of the college, and that it may be kept true to
the principles of its foundation.

    I am very respectfully,
    "'Your ob't serv't,
    "'N. Lord.'"

"'Adjourned Meeting, September 21, 1863. Resolved, 'that in accepting
the resignation of President Lord, we place on record a grateful sense
of his services during the long period of his administration; and his
kind and courteous treatment of the Board in all their intercourse.'"

Dr. Lord continued to reside at Hanover, cordially co-operating with
his successor in office, till his death, September 9, 1870. His wife,
Mrs. Elisabeth King (Leland) Lord, died a few months previous to her
husband.




CHAPTER XVIII.

ADMINISTRATION OF PRESIDENT SMITH.


Rev. Asa D. Smith, D.D., of New York city, of the class of 1830, was
elected the seventh president of the college. His thorough
understanding of the field upon which he was to enter is indicated by
the following extracts from his inaugural address:

"There are four chief organic forces, by which, under the providence
of God, humanity has its normal development. These, generalizing
broadly, are the family, the school, the State, and the Church.
Wherever you find, even in its lowest measure, a true civilization,
these exist; and as it rises they rise, sustaining to it the relation
both of cause and effect. Concerning, as they do, one and the same
complex nature, they have, in different degrees and combinations, the
same underlying elements of power. In the family, we have, in its
rudimental form, both teaching and government. It is a patriarchate--a
little commonwealth; and to its head--a priest as well as a
patriarch--that Scripture should ever be relevant, 'the church that is
in thy house.' In the school, the simplest offshoot, perhaps, from a
congeries of families, we have, or ought to have, the parental
element; we have magistracy also, and a certain statehood; we have, or
should have, worship. The state, properly apprehended, is not only
governmental but didactic--it is a teaching power; and though not, at
this age of the world, theocratic, it should be, in a large view,
religious. In the church, having specially and predominantly the
last-named characteristic,--being of divine appointment, and as
ministering to our imperative needs, the foster-mother of
devotion,--we have, also, as essential to its purpose, both rule and
instruction. And in the influence they wield, these great moulding
agencies are perpetually interpenetrating and modifying each other.

"It is of the second of these, the school, that we are now called to
speak. The service we essay is connected with an educational
institution, using the term in the specific sense; a fact, it may be
said at the outset, which of itself dignifies the occasion. Not to
insist on those affinities and mutual influences just adverted to, and
of which there will be further occasion to speak, there is a view of
education, a large and comprehensive one, which gives to it the very
grandest elevation. It is the end, next to that which the good old
Catechism makes chief, and subordinate to that, of all the divine
provisions and arrangements. God is the great Educator of the
universe. More glorious in his didactic offices is He than even in
creation; nay, creation was for these. Earth is our training
place--time is our curriculum; eternity will but furnish to the true
pupil the higher forms of his limitless advancement. We have our
lessons in all providence, in all beings and things, God teaching us
in and through all. No mean vocation, then, is that of the earthly
educator; no unimportant theme that now in hand. Yet even of the
school in the more technical sense of the term, we cannot speak at
large, except as in touching on any one department we more or less
affect every other. Our thought may be fitly limited to that class of
institutions which these ancient halls of learning and these
inauguration solemnities naturally bring before us. The college is my
subject, considered in its proper functions and characteristics.

"I use the term college in the American sense. This, not for the poor
purpose of ministering to national vanity, but because we must needs
take things as they are; and for the further reason that there is much
to commend in the shape the institution here assumes. It has hardly
its prototype either in the Fatherland or on the Continent. It has but
a partial resemblance either to the German Gymnasia or to the English
preparatory schools, as of Eton and Rugby. As preliminary to
professional study, it is in some respects far in advance of these. It
differs materially, at once from the German and English University,
and from the college as embraced in the latter. University education
in Europe was once somewhat rigidly divided into two portions; the one
designed to form the mind for whatever sphere of life; the other, the
_Brodstudium_, as the Germans significantly term it, a course of
training for some particular profession. Long ago, however, this
division became mainly obsolete. 'On the continent,' said an eminent
English scholar, some years since, 'the preparatory education has been
dropped; among ourselves, the professional.' He speaks, of course,
comparatively. So far as England is concerned, the same testimony is
borne by a well-informed recent observer. This ancient and wise
division is by us still maintained; with this peculiarity, that the
'preparatory' education, so-called,--by which is meant the highest
form of it,--is the sole work of the colleges. Professional culture is
remitted to other and often separate schools. The undergraduate course
is for general training; it lays the foundation for whatever
superstructure. It has no particular reference to any one pursuit;
but, like the first part of the old University course, aims to fit the
whole man for a man's work in any specific line either of study or of
action.

"In this conception of the college, there are, it is believed,
important advantages. It is better for preparatory education; it is
better for professional. It felicitously discriminates. It keeps
things in their place. It defines and duly magnifies each of the two
great departments of the educational process. It is likelier to dig
deep, and build on broad and solid rock; it tends to symmetry and
finish in the superincumbent fabric.

"The college should be marked by a completeness. Rejecting the
fragmentary and the unfinished, the well constituted mind ever craves
this. Modern thought, especially, is passing from an excessive
nominalism to a more realistic habit; by many a broad induction, from
mere details to a rounded whole: And nowhere more persistently than in
relation to institutions. The college should be complete as to its
objective scheme. There may be onesidedness here. There may be, for
example, an excessive or ill-directed pressing of utilities, as in the
speculations of Mr. Herbert Spencer; or there may be an undue
exaltation of what he calls 'the decorative element.' The theoretic
maybe too exclusively pursued; or there may be a practicalness which
has too little of theory, like a cone required to stand firm on its
apex. There should be completeness, also, as touching the subjective
aim. It should embrace, in a word, the whole man, and that not in his
Edenic aspects alone, but as a fallen being. You may not overlook even
the physical; the casket not merely, holding all the mental and moral
treasures--the frame-work rather, to which by subtile ties the
invisible machinery is linked, and which upholds it as it works. The
world has yet to learn fully how dependent is the inner upon the outer
man, and how greatly the highest achievements of scholarship are
facilitated by proper hygienic conditions. As you pass to the
intellectual, it matters little what classification you adopt, whether
with the author of the '_Novum Organum_,' in his 'Advancement of
Learning,' you resolve all the powers into those of memory,
imagination, and reason, or whether the minuter divisions of a more
recent philosophy are preferred; only be sure that not a single
faculty is overlooked or disparaged. Be it presentative, conservative,
reproductive, representative, elaborative, regulative, or whatever the
fine Hamiltonian analysis may suggest, give it its proper place and
its proper scope.

"The college should be distinctly and eminently Christian. Not in the
narrow, sectarian sense--that be far from us--but in the broadest
evangelical view. Our course of thought culminates here; and here does
all else that has been affirmed find its proper centre and unity.
Christianity is the great unity. In it, as was intimated at the
outset, are all the chief elements of organic influence. It is itself
the very acme of completeness, and it tends to all symmetry and
finish. It is at once conservative and progressive, balancing
perfectly the impelling and restraining forces; by a felicitous
adjustment of the centripetal and centrifugal, ensuring to human
nature its proper orbit. It is the golden girdle wherewith every
institution like this should bind her garments of strength and beauty
about her.

"Were it needful to argue this point, we might put it on the most
absolute grounds. All things are Christ's; all dominions, dignities,
potences; it is especially meet that we say, to-day, all institutions.
It is the grossest wrong practically to hold otherwise. It is loss,
too, and nowhere more palpably than in the educational sphere. It is
no cant saying to affirm, and that in a more than merely spiritual
sense, that in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.' At his throne the lines of all science terminate; above
all, the science that has man for its subject. Of all history, for
example, rightly read, how is He the burden and the glory! Otherwise
taken, it is a more than Cretan labyrinth. The Christian spirit,
besides, raising the soul to the loftiest planes of thought, giving it
the highest communions, bringing before it the grandest objects, and
securing to all its machinery the most harmonious action, is eminently
conducive to intellectual achievement. We have already said something
like this as touching moral culture; but that, be it ever remembered,
takes its proper form and direction only as it is vitally linked with
Christianity. What God has joined together let not man put asunder.
Let the studies which we call moral, have all a Christian baptism;
and, with all our getting, let us not stop short of the cardinal
points of our most holy faith. Let the Will be still investigated, not
as a brute force, or in a merely intellectual light, but in those high
spiritual aspects in which our great New England metaphysician
delighted to present it. Let Butler, with his curious trestle-work of
analogy, bridge, to the forming mind, the chasm between natural and
revealed religion. Let the Christian Evidences be fully unfolded. We
can hardly dispense with them in an age, when by means of 'Westminster
Reviews,' and other subtle organs of infidelity, the old mode of
assault being abandoned, a sapping and mining process is continually
going forward. Let Ethical Science,--embracing in its wide sweep the
Economy of Private Life, the Philosophy of Government, and Law, which
'hath its seat in the bosom of God,'--be all bathed in the light of
Calvary. That light is its life. 'Let us with caution indulge the
supposition,' said the Father of our country, 'that morality can be
maintained without religion.' Let the Bible be included among our
text-books as the sun is included in the solar system; and let all the
rest revolve in planetary subjection about it. Let it be studied, not
in a professional, much less in a partisan way; but with the
conviction that it is indispensable to the broadest culture; that
without theology we have but a straitened anthropology; that we see
not nature aright, but as we look up through it to Nature's God. Be
ours, in its largest significance, the sentiment so devoutly uttered
by the old Hebrew bard: 'In Thy light shall we see light.' And let the
discipline of college, so intimately connected with its prosperity, be
fashioned on the model of the Gospel. Let it copy, in its way and
measure, the wondrous harmonies of the redemptive scheme, in which
'mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed
each other.' So shall it bless our halls with some faint reflection of
the Divine fatherhood, and give to our society some happy resemblance
to a Christian family."

A prominent feature of President Smith's administration was a greater
utilization of the libraries, and the opening of a reading-room. The
librarian says:

"The late Professor Alphæus Crosby contributed considerably to the
increase of the classical books, and Hon. Nathan Crosby has recently
furnished the means for commencing a collection of the works of
Dartmouth alumni. It is intended to gather all books and pamphlets
which have been written by graduates. The collection will also include
matter relating to them and to the work of the college.

"In reviewing the history of the library their number is so great that
it is impossible to mention even a small part of the benefactors;
their best record is in the well filled shelves and the large amount
of reading done in connection with the studies of the college course.

"One of the departments of the library consists of the books given by
the late General Sylvanus Thayer, founder of the school of
engineering, numbering 2,000 volumes.

"Early in its history the members of the Chandler Scientific
Department founded the 'Philotechnic Society,' the library of which,
together with some books belonging to the department, contains 1,700
volumes.

"The three society libraries continued under separate management until
1874, although the societies, as far as literary work is concerned,
had for some time given way to the secret societies, and the interest
in them was so slight that only with great difficulty could a quorum
be obtained for ordinary business. During that year an arrangement was
made by which the three society libraries were placed under the same
management as the library of the college, the latter receiving the
society taxes which were slightly reduced, assuming all expenses
including the support of the reading-room, and providing for the
increase of the library by books to be annually selected by the Senior
class. Under this arrangement the different libraries have been
brought together and considered as departments of one, the hours for
drawing and consulting books have been increased from three hours per
week in the society libraries and six in the college, to twenty-one
hours per week, and in many respects the facilities for use have been
greatly increased. Since 1870, the yearly additions for all the
libraries have averaged 700 volumes, and they at present contain
exclusive of pamphlets about 45,000 volumes, besides nearly 5,000
books which are either duplicates or worthless. These figures are
independent of the Astronomical library located at the Observatory,
the library of the 'Society of Inquiry,' and of the libraries of the
Medical and Agricultural departments, which will probably be connected
with the main library. The library as it is now constituted is well
adapted to the work of the college, and is especially so in some of
the departments of instruction, in connection with which a large
amount of reading is done. There are in use at present three printed
catalogues: one of the college library, printed in 1868; one of the
'Social Friends' library, dated 1859; and one of the 'United
Fraternity' library, issued in 1861. These are supplemented by a card
catalogue arranged under title, author, and subject."

The "Centennial" celebration of the founding of the college, at the
Commencement of 1869, was a season of rare interest and profit to the
very large number of alumni and friends of the college assembled from
nearly every quarter of the globe.

The following is the substance of the address of Chief Justice Chase,
who presided on the occasion, as given by Mr. William H. Duncan:

"He began by alluding to the fact that the college received its
charter from 'our right trusty and well beloved John Wentworth,
Governor of the Province of New Hampshire,' and said that the
venerable name was 'borne, to-day, by an honored citizen of
Illinois,[36] who, like his ancestor, towered head and shoulders above
his fellow men. He also happily referred to the descendants of the
other founders of the college. 'When the college was organized the
third George was heir to the British throne. Under the great Empress
Catherine, Russia was prosecuting that career of aggrandizement then
begun which is even now menacing British empire in the East. Under the
fifteenth Louis, in France, that wonderful literary movement was in
progress, which prepared a sympathetic enthusiasm for liberty in
America, at length overthrowing, for a time, monarchy in France. China
and Japan were wholly outside the modern community of nations. A
hundred years have passed, and what a new order has arisen! Great
Britain has lost an empire, has gained other empires in Asia and
Australia, and extends her dominion around the globe. France, so great
in arts and arms, has seen an empire rise and fall and another empire
arise, in which a wise and skillful ruler is seeking to reconcile
personal supremacy with democratic ideas. Russia, our old friend,
seems to withdraw, for the present, at least, her eager gaze from
Constantinople and seeks to establish herself on the Pacific Ocean and
in Central Asia. China sends one of our own citizens, Mr. Burlingame,
on an embassy throughout the world to establish peaceful, commercial,
and industrial relations with all the civilized nations. Japan, too,
awakes to the necessity of a more liberal policy, and looks toward a
partnership in modern civilization. Who, seeing this, and reflecting
on the manifold agencies at work in the old world and the prodigious
movements in the new, which I cannot even glance at, can help
exclaiming, in the language of the first telegraphic message which was
sent to America, 'What hath God wrought?' How great a part has this
college, antedating the Republic, played in all the enterprises of
America! It has been well said of it that three quarters of the globe
know the graduates of Dartmouth. Every State in the Union, certainly,
is familiar with their names and their works, and the influence which
they exert is the influence of this college. What an insignificant
beginning was that which has been described, to-day;--what splendid
progress! How great the present, and who can predict the future?
Ninety-eight classes of young men have already gone forth from this
institution. Who can measure the religious, the moral, the
intellectual, the political influence, which they have exerted? Great
names like Webster and Choate rise at once to memory, but I refer more
particularly to the mighty influence exerted by the vast numbers,
unrecognized upon the theatre of national reputation, which the
college has sent into all the spheres of activity and duty. When I
think of the vast momentum for good which has originated here, and is
now in unchecked progress, and must extend beyond all the limits of
conception, I cannot help feeling that it is a great and precious
privilege to be in some way identified as a member of this college. It
does not diminish my satisfaction that other graduates of other
American colleges can say the same thing. It rather increases the
satisfaction. Glad and thankful that my name is in the list of those
who have been educated here, and have endeavored to do something for
their country and their kind, I rejoice that, under our beneficent
institutions, legions of Americans have the same or greater cause for
gladness.'

      [36] Hon. John Wentworth, LL. D.

"After some remarks to the graduating class, the Chief Justice said:
'And let me add, my brethren of the alumni, a practical word to you.
We celebrate to-day the founding of our college. We come hither to
testify our veneration and our affection for our benign Alma Mater. We
can hardly think she is a hundred years old, she looks so fresh and so
fair. We are sure that many, many blessed days are before her, but a
mother's days are made happy and delightful by the love and
faithfulness of her children. Much has been done for this institution,
recently, much which makes our hearts glad. The names of the
benefactors of the institution, mentioned here to-day, dwell freshly
in the hearts of every graduate, and will live forever; but let us
remember, that while much has been done, much also remains to be done.
I do not appeal to you for charity. I wish that every graduate may
feel that the college is, in a most true and noble sense, his mother,
and to remind you of your filial obligations.'"

Addresses having been made by Hon. Ira Perley, LL. D., Hon. Daniel
Clark, and Richard B. Kimball, Esq., Mr. Duncan says:

"Judge Chase called upon Judge Barrett, Vice President of the
Association of the Alumni, to read a poem, which had been furnished
for the occasion by George Kent, Esq., of the Class of 1814. He had
read but a few stanzas when the rumbling of distant thunder was heard.
Then came a few scattering drops of water pattering upon the roof of
the tent, but soon the winds blew, and the rain descended and fell
upon the roof, as if the very windows of heaven had been opened. There
followed such a scene as no tongue, nor pen, nor pencil can
describe,--it baffles all description. Judge Barrett, with the true
pluck of an Ethan Allen, stood by his colors, and the more the wind
blew and the storm raged, the louder he read his poetry. But he was
obliged at length to cease, and with his slouched hat and dripping
garments left the stage.

"But he was not alone in his misery. The manly and stately form of the
Chief Justice, the president of the college, reverend doctors of
divinity, were all in the same condition--they all stood drenched and
dripping, like fountains, in the rain. Even General Sherman had to
succumb, once in his life, and seek the protection of an umbrella.
Some huddled under umbrellas, some held benches over their heads, and
some crept beneath the platform.

"The storm passed over, and Judge Barrett came forward and finished
reading the poem.

"Hon. James W. Patterson, of the Class of 1848, was then called upon,
and spoke with force and eloquence, receiving the greatest compliment
that could be paid him,--the undivided attention of the audience."

Addresses were also made by Dr. Jabez B. Upham, Samuel H. Taylor, LL.
D., Rev. Samuel C. Bartlett, D.D., and others.

We quote some of the closing passages of the "Historical Address" by
President Brown, of Hamilton College.

"There is not much time to speak of the general policy of the
college through these hundred years of its life, but I may say in
brief, that it has been sound and earnest, conservative and
aggressive at the same time. As the motto on its seal,--_vox clamantis
in deserto_,--indicated and expressed the religious purpose of its
founders, so this purpose has never been lost sight of. Through
lustrum after lustrum, and generation after generation, while classes
have succeeded classes, while one corps of instructors have passed
away and others have taken their places, this high purpose of
presenting and enforcing the vital and essential truths of the
Christian religion, has never been forgotten or neglected. The power
of Christianity in modifying, inspiring, and directing the energies of
modern civilization,--its art, its literature, its commerce, its laws,
its government, has been profoundly felt. Nor has it for a moment been
forgotten that education, to be truly and in the largest degree
beneficent, must also be religious,--must affect that which is deepest
in man,--must lead him, if it can, to the contemplation of truths most
personal, central, and essential, must open to him some of those
depths where the soul swings almost helplessly in the midst of
experiences and powers unfathomable and infinite,--where the intellect
falters and hesitates and finds no solution of its perplexities till
it yields to faith. Within later years there have been those who have
advocated the doctrine that education should be entirely
secular,--that the college should have nothing to do with religious
counsels or advice. Now while I do not think that this would be easy,
as our colleges are organized, without leaving or even inciting the
mind to dangerous skepticism, nor possible but by omitting the most
powerful means of moral and intellectual discipline, nor without
depriving the soul of that food which it specially craves, and
destitute of which it will grow lean, hungry, and unsatisfied,--as a
matter of history, no such theory of education has found favorable
response among the guardians of Dartmouth. At the same time while the
general religious character of the college has been well ascertained
and widely recognized, while the great truths of our common
Christianity have been fully and frankly and earnestly brought to the
notice of intelligent and inquiring minds, it has not been with a
narrow, illiberal, and proselyting spirit, not so as rudely to violate
traditionary beliefs, not so as to wound and repel any sincere and
truth loving mind. And this is the consistent and sound position for
the college to hold.

"With respect to its curriculum of studies the position of the college
has been equally wise. She has endeavored to make her course as broad,
generous, and thorough as possible; equal to the best in the land; so
that her students could feel that no privilege has been denied them
which any means at her disposal could provide. She has endeavored
wisely to apportion the elements of instruction and discipline. She
has provided as liberally as possible, by libraries, apparatus,
laboratories, and cabinets for increase in positive knowledge. She has
equally insisted on those exact studies which compel subtleness and
precision of thought, which habituate the mind to long trains of
controlled reasoning, which discipline alike the attention and the
will, the conservative and the elaborative powers. She has given full
honor to the masterpieces of human language and human thought, through
which, while we come to a more complete knowledge of peoples and
nations, of poetry and eloquence, we feel more profoundly the life of
history, and comprehend the changes of custom and thought, while the
finer and more subtle powers of fancy and imagination stir within the
sensitive mind, and gradually by constant and imperceptible
inspiration lift the soul to regions of larger beauty and freedom.

"So may she ever hold on her way, undeluded by specious promises of
easier methods, inuring her students to toil as the price of success;
not rigid and motionless, but plastic and adapting herself to the
necessities of different minds; yet never confounding things that
differ, nor vainly hoping on a narrow basis of culture to rear the
superstructure of the broadest attainment and character, but ever
determined to make her instructions the most truly liberal and noble.

"With no purpose of personal advantage, but with the deepest filial
love and gratitude have we assembled this day. Of all professions and
callings, from many States, from public business and from engrossing
private pursuits,--you, my young friend who have just come, with
hesitation and ingenuous fear, to add your name if you may, to the
honored rolls of the college, and you Sir,[37] whose memory runs back
to the beginning of the century, the oldest or nearly the oldest
living alumnus of the college, the contemporary of Chapman and Harvey,
and Fletcher, and Parris, and Weston, and Webster,--you who came from
beyond the 'Father of Waters,' and you who have retreated for a moment
from the shore of the dark Atlantic--you Sir,[38] our brother by
hearty and affectionate adoption, who led our armies in that memorable
march from the mountain to the sea, which shall be remembered as long
as the march of the Ten Thousand, and repeated in story and song as
long as history and romance shall be written, and you, Sir, who hold
the even scales of justice in that august tribunal, from which
Marshall proclaimed the law which insured to us our ancient name and
rights and privileges, unchanged, untarnished, unharmed,--all of us,
my brothers, with one purpose have come up to lay our trophies at the
feet of our common mother, to deck her with fresh garlands, to rejoice
in her prosperity, and to promise her our perpetual homage and love.
Let no word of ours ever give her pain or sorrow. Loyal to our heart
of hearts, may we minister so far as we can, to her wants, may we be
jealous of her honor, and solicitous for her prosperity. May no
ruthless hand ever hereafter be lifted against her. May no unholy
jealousies rend the fair fabric of her seamless garment. May no narrow
or unworthy spirit mar the harmony of her wise counsels. May she stand
to the end as she ever has stood, for the Church and State, a glory
and a defense. And above all and in order to all, may the spirit of
God in full measure rest upon her; 'the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.'"

      [37] Job Lyman, Esq., of the class of 1804.

      [38] General Sherman received the highest honorary degree of the
           college in 1866.

President Smith, whose character was a rare union of energy and
gentleness, was preëminently a man of affairs.

The results of his untiring efforts to promote the welfare of the
college, in various directions, will be more fully developed upon
subsequent pages. Having performed valuable service for thirteen
years, he resigned his office, on account of failing health, March 1,
1877, and died on the sixteenth of August following, his wife, Mrs.
Sarah Ann (Adams) Smith, surviving him.




CHAPTER XIX.

INAUGURATION OF PRESIDENT BARTLETT.


Rev. Samuel C. Bartlett, D.D., of the Chicago Theological Seminary,
was elected the eighth president of the college. We insert entire his
inaugural address, delivered at the Commencement, June, 1877:

"Certain occasions seem to prescribe their own themes of discourse,
and certain themes are endowed with perpetual life. There are problems
with which each coming generation and each last man grapples as
freshly as the first.

"How shall the ripest growth of the ages be imparted to one young
soul? Twice, at least, in a lifetime, is this great question wont to
rise solemnly before each thoughtful man--when he looks forward in
youthful hope, and when he looks back in parental solicitude. It is a
question of many forms and multiplying answers. Shall there be a long,
fundamental training, wide and general? or, shall it be closely
professional? Shall it be predominantly classic, or scientific, or
esthetic, or empiric? Many, or much? For accomplishment, or for
accomplishing? Shall it fit for the tour of Europe, or for the journey
of life? Masculine and feminine, or vaguely human? Shall it rattle
with the drum-beat, bound with gymnastics, court fame by excursive
"nines" not known on Helicon, and challenge British Oxford, alas? with
its boat crew? Shall the American College student follow his option,
or his curriculum? And shall the college itself be a school for
schoolmasters, a collection of debating clubs, a reading-room with
library attached, an intellectual quarantine for the plague of riches?
or, a place of close and protracted drill, of definite methods, of
prescribed intellectual work? Shall it fulfill the statement of the
Concord sage,--'You send your son to the schoolmasters, and the
schoolboys educate him?' or, shall a strong faculty make and mark the
whole tone of the institution?

"In these and other forms is the same fundamental question still
thrust sharply before us. I do not propose to move directly on such a
line of bristling bayonets, but to make my way by a flank movement
across this "wilderness" of conflict. It will go far towards
determining the methods of a liberal education, if we first ascertain,
as I propose to do, The Chief Elements of a Manly Culture.

"Obviously the primal condition of all else must be found in a
self-prompted activity or wakefulness of intellect. The time when the
drifting faculties begin to feel the helm of will, when the youth
passes from being merely receptive to become aggressive, marks the
advent of the true human era. As in the history of our planet the
first remove from the _tohu va-vohu_ was when the Spirit of God
brooded on the deep, and, obedient to the command, light shot out from
darkness, so in man the microcosm, the brooding spirit and commanding
purpose mark the first step from chaos toward cosmos. The mechanical
intellect becomes dynamical, and the automatic man becomes autonomic.
It may be with a lower or a higher motion. The mind gropes round
restlessly by a yearning instinct; it may be driven by the strong
impulse of native genius; or, it may rise to the condition of being
the facile servant of the forceful will. When the boy at Pisa
curiously watches the oil lamp swinging by its long chain in the
cathedral, a pendulum begins to vibrate in his brain, and falling
bodies to count off their intervals; and when afterward he
deliberately fits two lenses in a leaden tube, the moon's mountains,
Jupiter's satellites, and Saturn's rings are all waiting to catch his
eye. A thoughtful meditation on the spasms of a dead frog's leg in
Bologna becomes galvanic. The gas breaking on the surface of a brewery
vat, well watched by Priestley, bursts forth into pneumatic chemistry.
A spider's web in the Duke of Devonshire's garden expands in the mind
of my lord's gardener, Brown, into a suspension bridge. A sledge
hammer, well swung in Cromarty, opened those New Walks in an Old
Field. The diffraction of light revealed itself to Young in the hues
of a soap-bubble. As the genie of the oriental tale unfolded his huge
height from the bottle stamped with Solomon's seal, so the career of
Davy first evolved itself out of old vials and gallipots. When the boy
Bowditch was found in all his leisure moments snatching up his slate
and pencil, when Cobbett grappled resolutely with the grammar, when
Cuvier dissected the cuttlefish found upon the shore, or Scott was
seen sitting on a ladder, hour after hour, poring over books, they
will be further heard from.

"If such instances illustrate the propulsive force of native genius,
they also indicate what training must do when the impulsive genius is
not there. No idler plea was ever entered for an idler than when he
says,--'I have no bent for this, no interest in that, and no genius
for the other.' The animal has his _habitat_, and stays fast. A
complete man is intellectually and physically a cosmopolite. Till he
has gained the power to throw his will-force wherever the work summons
him, most of all to the weak points of his condition, till he has
learned to be his own task-master and overseer, he is but a 'slave of
the ring.'

"In most lines the highest gift is the gift of toil. Indeed, men of
genius have often been the most terrible of toilers, and in the
regions of highest art. How have the great masters of music first
welded the keys of the organ and harpsichord to their fingers' ends
and their souls' nerves before they poured forth the Creation or the
Messiah, the symphonies and sonatas! Think of Meyerbeer and his
fifteen hours of daily work; of Mozart's incessant study of the
masters, and his own eight hundred compositions in his short life; of
Mendelssohn's nine years elaboration of Elijah. Or in the sister art,
how we track laborious, continuous study in the Peruginesque, the
Florentine, and the Roman styles successively of Raphael, and in the
incredible activity that crowded a life of thirty-seven years with
such a vast number of portraits and Madonnas, of altar-pieces and
frescoes, mythological, historical, and Biblical. And that still
grander contemporary genius, how he wrought by night with the candle
in his pasteboard cap, how he had dissected and studied the human
frame like an anatomist or surgeon before he chiseled the David and
Moses, or painted the Sistine chapel, and how the plannings of his
busy brain were always in advance of the powers of a hand that, till
the age of eighty-eight, was incessantly at work.

"The servant is not above his master. The lower intellect can buy at
no cheaper price than the higher, and the hour of full intellectual
emancipation comes only when the student has learned to serve--to turn
the whole freshness and sharpness of his intellect on any needful
theme of the hour; it may be the scale of a fossil fish, or the annual
movement of a glacier, the disclosures of the spectrum, or the secrets
of the arrow-headed tongue. All great explorers have been largely
their own teachers, and each young scholar has made the best use of
all helps and helpers when he has learned to teach himself. His
emancipation, once fairly purchased, confers on him potentially the
freedom of the empire of thought; and, as evermore, the freeman toils
harder than the slave. The strong stimulus of such a self-moved
activity, thoroughly aroused, becomes in Choate or Gladstone the
fountain of perpetual youth, and forms the solid basis of the titanic
scholarship of Germany. It stood embodied in the life and motto of the
aged, matchless artist Angelo,--'_Ancora imparo_,' I am learning
still.

"But impulse and activity may move blindly. Another cardinal quality
of such a culture, therefore, must be precision--the close, clean
working of the faculties. A memory trained to clear recollection, what
a saving of reiterated labor and of annoying helplessness. A
discrimination sharpened to the nicest discernment of things that
differ, though always a shining mark for the arrow of the satirist,
will outlive all shots with his gray-goose shaft; for it shines with
the gleam of tempered steel. An exactness of knowledge that defines
all its landmarks, how is it master of the situation. A precision of
speech, born of clear thinking, what controversial battlefields of
sulphurous smoke and scattering fire might it prevent. He has been
called a public benefactor who makes two blades of grass grow where
one grew before. He is as great a benefactor, who in an age of
verbiage makes one word perform the function of two. Wonderful is the
precision with which this mental mechanism may be made to work. Some
men can even think their best on their feet in the presence of a great
assembly. There are others whose spontaneous thoughts move by informal
syllogisms. Emmons sometimes laid off his common utterances like the
heads of a discourse. Johnson's retorts exploded like a musket, and
often struck like a musket-ball. John Hunter fairly compared his own
mind to a bee-hive, all in a hum, but the hum of industry and order
and achievement. It reminds us, by contrast, of other minds formed
upon the model of the wasp's nest, with a superabundance of hum and
sting without, and no honey within. It was of the voluminous works of
a distinguished author that Robert Hall remarked,--'They are a
continent of mud, sir.' Nuisances of literature are the men who fill
the air with smoke, relieved by no clear blaze of light. There have
been schools of thought that were as smoky as Pittsburg. We have had
'seers' who made others see nothing, men of 'insight' with no outlook,
scientists who in every critical argument jumped the track of true
science, and preachers whose hazy thoughts and utterances flickered
between truth and error. Pity there were not some intellectual
Sing-Sing for the culprit!

"How refreshing, on the other hand, to follow the clear unfolding of
the silken threads of thought that lie side by side, single and in
knots and skeins, but never tangled. What a beautiful process was an
investigation by Faraday in electro-magnetism, as he combined his
apparatus, manipulated his material, narrowed his search, eliminated
his sources of error, and drew his careful conclusions. With similar
persistent acuteness, in the field of Biblical investigation, how does
Zumpt, by an exhaustive exclusion and combination, at length make the
annals of Tacitus shake hands with the gospel of Luke over the taxing
of Cyrenius. In metaphysics, how matchless the razor-like acuteness
with which Hamilton could distinguish, divide, and clear up the
questions that lay piled in confused heaps over the subject of
perception. What can be more admirable than the workings of the
trained legal or rather judicial mind, as it walks firmly through
labyrinths of statute and precedent and principle, holding fast its
strong but tenuous thread, till it stands forth in the bright light of
day;--it may be some Sir John Jervis, unraveling in a criminal case
the web of sophistries with which a clever counsel has bewildered a
jury; or it may be Marshall or Story, in our own college case,
shredding away, one by one, its intricacies, entanglements, and
accretions, till all is delightfully, restfully clear.

"It is a trait all the more to be insisted on in these very times,
because there is so strong a drift toward a seeming clearness which is
a real confusion. By two opposite methods do men now seek to reach
that underlying order and majestic simplicity which more and more
appear to mark this universe. The one distinguishes, the other
confounds, things that certainly differ. The one system belongs to the
reality and grandeur of nature, the other to the pettiness and
perverseness of man. Not a few seem bent on seeing simplicity and
uniformity by the short process of shutting their eyes upon actual
diversity. They proceed not by analytical incision, but by summary
excision. They work with the cleaver and not with the scalpel. What
singular denials of the intuitive facts of universal consciousness,
what summary identifications of most palpable diversities, and what
kangaroo-leaps beyond the high wall of their facts, mark many of the
deliverances of those who loudly warn us off from 'the unknowable!'
What shall we say of the steady confusion, in some arguments, of
structure and function, and of force with material? When men, however
eminent, openly propose to identify the force which screws together
two plates of metal with the agency which corrodes or dissolves both
in an acid, or to identify the affinity that forms chemical
combinations with the vitality that so steadily overrides, suspends,
and counteracts those affinities, is this an ascent into the pure
ether, or a plunge in the Cimmerian dark? When, in opposition to every
possible criterion, a man claims that there is but 'one ultimate form
of matter out of which successively the more complex forms of matter
are built up,' is this the advance march of chemistry, or the
retrograde to alchemy? When a writer, in a style however lucid and
taking, firmly assumes that there is no essential difference in
objects alike in material elements, but separated by that mighty and
mysterious thing, _life_, is that the height of wisdom, or the depth
of folly? And how such a central paralysis of the mental retina
spreads its darkness, as, for example, in the affirmation that as
oxygen and hydrogen are reciprocally convertible with water, so are
water, ammonia, and carbolic acid convertible into and resolvable from
living protoplasm!--a statement said to be as false in chemistry as it
certainly is in physiology. An ordinary merchant's accountant will, if
need be, work a week to correct in his trial balance the variation of
a cent. But when he listens to Sir John Lubbock calmly reckoning the
age of the human implements in the valley of the Somme at from one
hundred thousand up to two hundred and forty thousand years; when he
sees Croll, in dating the close of the glacial age, leap down from the
height of near eight hundred thousand to eighty thousand years; when
he finds Darwin and Lyell claiming for the period of life on the earth
more than three hundred millions of years, while Tait and Thompson
pronounce it 'utterly impossible' to grant more than ten, or, at most,
fifteen millions,--this poor, benighted clerk is bound to sit and
hearken to his masters in all outward solemnity, but he must be
excused for a prolonged inward smile. Who are these, he says, that
reckon with a lee-way of hundreds of thousands of years, and fling the
hundreds of millions of years right and left, like pebbles and straws?

"Brilliancy, so-called, is no equivalent or substitute for precision.
It is often its worst enemy. A man may mould himself to think in
curves and zig-zags, and not in right lines. He sends never an arrow,
but a boomerang. Or he thinks in poetry instead of prose, deals in
analogy where it should be analysis, puts rhetoric for logic, scatters
and not concentrates, and while he radiates never irradiates. A late
divine was suspected of heresy, partly because of his poetic bias; and
one of his volumes was unfortunate for him and his readers, in that
for his central position he planted himself on a figure of speech, and
not on a logical proposition. The well-known story _se non vero e ben
trovato_, of that keenest of lawyers, listening to a lecture of which
every sentence was a gem and every paragraph rich with the spoils of
literature, and replying to the question, "Do you understand all
that?" "No, but my daughters do." It was as beautiful and iridescent
as the Staubbach, and as impalpable.

"The more is the pity when a vigorous mind, in the outset of some
great discussion, heads for a fog-bank or a wind-mill. When a man
proposes to chronicle a 'Conflict between Religion and Science,' and
makes religion stand indiscriminately for Romanism, Mohammedanism,
superstition, malignant passion, obstinate prejudice, and what not,
also confounding Christianity with so-called Christians, and those
often most unrepresentative,--at the same time appropriating to
'Science' all intellectual activity whatever, though found in good
Christian men, and though fostered and made irrepressible by the fire
of that very religion, it is easy to see what must be the outcome of
such a sweepstakes race. There will be a deification of science, and
not even a whited sepulchre erected over the measureless Golgothas of
its slaughtered theories. There will be, on the other hand, the steady
_suppressio veri_ concerning books, systems, men, and events, the
occasional though unintended _assertio falsi_, the eager conversion of
theories into facts, constructions unfair and uncandid and,
throughout, with much that is bright and just, that 'admixture of a
lie that doth ever add pleasure' to its author and grief to the
judicious. Such confusions are no doubt often the outgrowth of the
will. But a main end of a true culture is to prevent or expose all
such bewilderments, whether helpless or crafty.

"The great predominance of the disciplinary process was what once
characterized the English university system even more than now. It
consisted in the exact and exhaustive mastery of certain limited
sections of knowledge and thought, as the gymnastic for all other
spheres and toils. At Oxford, not long ago, four years were spent in
mastering some fourteen books. Whatever may be our criticism of the
process, we may not deny its singular effect. In its best estate it
forged many a trenchant blade. To the man who asks for its monument,
it can point to British thought, law, statesmanship. Bacon and Burke,
Coke and Eldon, Hooker and Butler, Pitt and Canning, shall make
answer. The whole massive literature of England shall respond.

"But to this precision of working must be furnished material with
which to work. Mental fullness is, therefore, another prime quality of
a manly culture. To what degree it should be sought in the curriculum
has been in dispute. It is the American theory, and a growing belief
of the English nation, that the British universities have been
defective here. Their men of mark have traveled later over the broader
field.

"Provincialism of intellect is a calamity. All men of great
achievements have had to know what others achieved. The highest
monuments are always built with the spoils of the past. Any single
genius, if not an infinitesimal, counts at most but a digit in the
vast notation of humanity. The great masters have been the greatest
scholars. Many a bright mind has struggled alone to beat the air.
Behold in some national patent-office a grand mummy-pit of ignorant
inventors.

"Those men upon whom so much opprobrium has been heaped, the
Schoolmen, were unfortunate chiefly in the lack of material on which
to expend their singular acuteness. Leibnitz was not ashamed to
confess his obligations to them, nor South to avail himself of their
subtle distinctions. Doubtless theology owes them a debt. Some of them
have been well called, by Hallam, men 'of extraordinary powers of
discrimination and argument, strengthened in the long meditation of
their cloister by the extinction of every other talent and the
exclusion of every other pursuit. Their age and condition denied them
the means of studying polite letters, of observing nature, or of
knowing mankind. They were thus driven back upon themselves, cut off
from all the material on which the mind could operate, and doomed to
employ all their powers in defense of what they must never presume to
examine.' 'If these Schoolmen,' says Bacon, 'to their great thirst of
truth and unwearied travel of wit had joined variety of reading and
contemplation, they had proved great lights to the advancement of all
learning and knowledge.' And so, for lack of other timber, they split
hairs. Hence the mass of ponderous trifling that has made their name a
by-word. A force, sometimes Herculean, was spent in building and
demolishing castles of moonshine.

"A robust mental strength requires various and solid food. The best
growth is symmetrical. There is a common bond--_quoddam commune
vinculum_--in the circle of knowledge, that cannot be overlooked. Men
do not know best what they know only in its isolation. Even Kant
offset his metaphysics by lecturing on geography; and Niebuhr, the
historian, struggled hard and well to keep his equilibrium by throwing
himself into the whole circle of natural science and of affairs. Such,
also, are the interdependencies of scholarship, that ample knowledge
without our specialty is needful to save us from blunders within.
Olshausen was a brilliant commentator, and the slightest tinge of
chemistry should have kept him from suggesting that the conversion of
water into wine at Cana was but the acceleration of a natural process.
A smattering of optics would have prevented Dr. Williams from
repeating the old cavil of Voltaire, that light could not have been
made before the sun. A moderate reflection upon the laws of speech and
the method of Genesis would have restrained Huxley from sneering at
the 'marvelous flexibility' of the Hebrew tongue in the word 'day,'
and a New York audience from laughing at the joke rather than the
joker. Some tinge of ethical knowledge should have withheld Max Müller
from finding the grand distinctive mark of humanity in the power of
speech. The merest theorist needs some range of reality for the
framework of his theories, and the man of broad principles must have
facts to generalize. Indeed, a good memory is the indispensable
servant of large thought, and however deficient in certain directions,
the great thinkers have had large stores. 'The best heads that have
ever existed,' says an idealist,--'Pericles, Plato, Julius Cæsar,
Shakespeare, Goethe, Milton,--were well read, universally educated
men, and quite too wise to undervalue letters. Their opinion has
weight, because they had the means of knowing the opposite opinion.'

"While every year increases the impossibility of what used to be
called universal knowledge, it also emphasizes the necessity of a
scholarship that has its outlook toward all the vast provinces of
reading and thought. It cannot conquer them, but it can be on treaty
relations with them. The tendency of modern science is, of necessity,
steadily toward sectional lines and division of labor. It is a
tendency whose cramping influence is as steadily to be resisted, even
in later life, much more in early training. We are to form ourselves
on the model of the integer rather than the fraction of humanity. The
metaphysician cannot afford to be ignorant of the 'chemistry of a
candle' or the 'history of a piece of chalk,' nor the chemist of the
laws of language, the theologian of astronomy and geology, nor the
lawyer of the most ancient code and its history. Mill himself made
complaint of Comte's 'great aberration' in ignoring psychology and
logic.

"Intellectual fetichism is born of isolation, and dies hard. While in
the great modern uprising we may boast that the heathen idols have
been swept away from three hundred dark islands of Polynesia, new
'idols of the cave' stalk forth upon the world of civilized thought.
We are just now much bewildered with brightness in streaks, which
falls on us like the sunlight from a boy's bit of glass, and blinds
our eyes instead of showing our path. Half-educated persons seize
fragments of principles and snatch at half-truths. Crotchets infest
the brains, and hobbies career through the fields of thought.
Polyphemus is after us, a burly wretch with one eye. Better if _that_
were out.

"The remedy is, to correct our narrowness by a clear view of the wide
expanse. We must come out of our cave. We must link our pursuits to
those of humanity. Breadth and robustness given to the mental
constitution in its early training shall go far through life to save
us from partial paralysis or monstrosity.

"To insure this result, however, we must add to that fullness of
material the quality of mental equipoise or mastery, the power of
grasping and managing it all. A man is to possess, and not to be
'possessed with,' his acquisitions. He wants an intellect decisive,
incisive, and, if I might coin a word, concisive.

"The power to unify and organize must go with all right acquisition.
Knowledges must be changed to knowledge. It takes force to handle
weight. Some men seem to know more than is healthy for them. It does
not make muscle, but becomes plethoric, dropsical, adipose, or
adipocere. Better to have thought more and acquired less. Frederick W.
Robertson, in his prime, wrote,--'I will answer for it that there are
few girls of eighteen who have not read more books than I have;' and
Mrs. Browning confessed,--'I should be wiser if I had not read half as
much;' while old Hobbes, of Malmesbury, caustically remarked,--'If I
had read as much as other men I should know as little.' It may serve
as a hint to the omnivorous college student. Cardinal Mezzofanti knew,
it is said, more than a hundred languages. What came of it all? A
eulogy on one Emanuele da Ponte. He never said anything in all the
languages he spoke! What constitutes the life of an intellectual
jelly-fish? Even the brilliancy of Macaulay was almost overweighted by
the immensity of his acquisitions. The vivid glitter of details in his
memory may sometimes have dazzled his perception of a _tout ensemble_,
and for principles it was his manner to cite precedents. A multitude
of lesser lights have been almost smothered by superabundance of fuel.
A man knows Milton almost by heart, and Shakespeare too, can quote
pages of Homer, has read Chrysostom for his recreation, is full of
history, runs over with statistics right and left, and withal is
strong in mother-wit. But the mother-wit proves not strong enough,
perhaps, to push forth and show itself over the ponderous débris above
it, the enormousness, or, if you please, the enormity of his
knowledge.

"It requires a first-class mind to carry a vast load of scientific
facts. Hence the many eminent observers who have been the most
illogical of reasoners. What a contrast between Hugh Miller and his
friend Francia; the mind of the latter, as Miller describes it, 'a
labyrinth without a clew, in whose recesses was a vast amount of
book-knowledge that never could be used, and was of no use to himself
or any one else;' the former wielding all his stores as he swung his
sledge. What is wanted is the comprehensive hand, and not the
prehensile tail.

"Involved in such an equipoise is the decisiveness, the willforce,
that not only holds, but holds the balance. Common as it may be, it is
none the less pitiable to be just acute enough constantly to question,
but not to answer--forever to raise difficulties, and never to solve
them. Wakeful, but the wakefulness of weakliness. Fine-strung minds
are they often, acquisitive, subtle, and sensitive, able to look all
around their labyrinth and see far into darkness, but not out to the
light. It is by nature rather a German than an Anglo-Saxon habit. It
is not always fatal even there. De Wette, 'the veteran doubter,'
rallied at the last, and, like Bunyan's Feeble-mind, went over almost
shouting. In this country, youth often have it somewhat later than the
measles and the small-pox, and come through very well, without even a
pock-mark. Sometimes it becomes epidemic, and assumes a languid or
typhoidal cast,--not Positivism, but Agnosticism. It is rather
fashionable to eulogize perplexity and doubt as a mark of strength and
genius. But whatever may be the passing fashion, the collective
judgment of the ages has settled it that the permanent state of mental
hesitancy and indecision, in whatever sphere of thought and action, is
and must be a false condition. It indicates the scrofulous diathesis,
and calls for more iron in the blood. It is a lower type of manhood.
It abdicates the province of a human intelligence, which is to seek
and find truth. It abrogates the moral obligation to prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good. It revolts from the great problem of
life, which calls on us to know, and to know that we may do. Out upon
this apotheosis of doubt. It is the sick man glorying in his
infirmity, the beggar boasting of his intellectual rags.

"The comprehensive and decisive tend naturally to the incisive. The
power to take a subject by its handle and poise it on its centre is
perhaps the consummation of merely intellectual culture. When all its
nutriment has been converted into bone and muscle and sinew and nerve,
then the mind bounds to its work, lithe and strong, like a hunting
leopard on its game. It was exactly the power with which our Webster
handled his case, till it seemed to the farmer too simple to require a
great man to argue. It was the quality that Lincoln so toiled at
through his early manhood, and so admirably gained,--the power of
presenting things clearly to 'plain people.' You may call it 'the art
of putting things,' but it is the art of conceiving things. It is no
trick of style, but a character of thinking, and it marks the
harvest-time of a manly culture.

"I will add to this enumeration one other quality, one without which
this harvest will not ripen. I speak of mental docility and reverence.
A man will have looked forth to little purpose on the universe if he
does not see that, even with his expanding circle of light, there is
an ever-enlarging circle of darkness around it. He will have compared
his achievements with those of the race to little profit, if he does
not recognize his relative insignificance, gathering sands on the
ocean shore.

"The wide range and rapid outburst of modern learning tend undoubtedly
to arrogance and conceit. We gleefully traverse our new strip of
domain, and ask, Were there ever such beings as we? Yes, doubtless
there were,--clearer, greater, and nobler. Wisdom, skill, and strength
were not born with us. All the qualities of manly thought, though with
ruder implements and cruder materials, have been as conspicuously
exhibited down through the ages past as in our day. The power of
governing, ability in war, diplomacy in peace, subtle dialectics,
clear insight, the art of conversation, persuasive and impressive
speech, high art in every form, whatever constitutes the test of good
manhood, has been here in full force. It would puzzle us yet to lay
the stones of Baalbec, or to carve, move, and set up the great statue
of Rameses. Within a generation, Euclid of Alexandria was teaching
geometry in Dartmouth College, and Heraclides and Aristarchus
anticipated Copernicus by sixteen centuries. No man has surpassed the
sculptures of Rhodes, or the paintings of the sixteenth century. The
cathedral of Cologne is the offspring of forgotten brains. Such men as
Anselm were educated on the Trivium and Quadrivium. Five hundred years
ago Merton College could show such men as Geoffrey Chaucer, William of
Occam, and John Wickliffe. If the history of science can produce four
brighter contemporary names than Napier, Kepler, Descartes, and
Galileo, let them be forthcoming. But when, still earlier by a
century and a half, we behold a man who was not only architect,
engineer, and sculptor, and in painting the rival of Angelo, but who,
as Hallam proves, 'anticipated in the compass of a few pages the
discoveries which made Galileo, Kepler, Maestlin, Maurolycus, and
Castelli immortal,' it may well 'strike us,' he suggests 'with
something like the awe of supernatural knowledge;' and in the presence
of Leonardo da Vinci the modern scientist of highest rank may stand
with uncovered head.

"If wisdom was not born with us, neither will it die with us. There
will be something left to know. Our facts will be tested, our theories
probed, and our assertions exploded by better minds than ours. If it
be true, as Bacon says, '_prudens interrogatio dimidium scientiæ_,' it
is also true, '_imprudens assertio excidium scientiæ_.' We are in
these days treated to 'demonstrations' which scarcely rise to the
level of presumptions, but, rather, of presumption. There is an
accumulation of popular dogmatism that is very likely doomed within a
century to be swept into the same oblivion with the 'Christian
Astrology,' of William Lilly and the 'Ars Magna' of Raymond Lully--a
mass of rubbish that is waiting for another Caliph Omar and the
bath-fires of Alexandria.

"It will not answer to mistake the despotism of hypothesis for the
reign of law, nor physical law for the great 'I AM.' True thinkers
must respect other thinkers and God. They cannot ignore the primal
utterances of consciousness, the laws of logic, nor the truths of
history. Foregone conclusions are not to bar out the deepest facts of
human nature, nor the most stupendous events in the story of the race.
Hume may not rule out the settled laws of evidence the moment they
touch the borders of religion; nor may Strauss, by the simple
assertion that miracles are impossible, manacle the arm of God. Comte
may not put his extinguisher upon the great underlying verities of our
being, nor Tyndall jump the iron track of his own principles to
smuggle into matter a 'potency and promise' of all 'life.' Huxley
cannot play fast and loose with human volition, nor juggle the
trustiness of memory into a state of consciousness, to save his
system; nor may Haeckel lead us at his own sweet creative will through
fourteen stages of vertebrate and eight of invertebrate life up to
the great imaginary 'monera,' the father and mother of us all. It will
be time to believe a million things in a lump when one of them is
fully proved in detail. We have no disposition, even with so eminent
an authority as St. George Mivart, to denominate Natural Selection 'a
puerile hypothesis.' We will promise to pay our respects to our 'early
progenitor' of 'arboreal habits' and 'ears pointed and capable of
movement,' when he is honestly identified by his ear-marks, and even
to worship the original fire-mist when that is properly shown to be
our only Creator, Preserver, and Bountiful Benefactor.

"Meantime, as a late king of Naples was said to have erected the
negation of God into a system of government, not a few eager
investigators seem to have assumed it as a basis of science. And so we
reach out by worship 'mostly of the silent sort' toward the unknown
and unknowable, the 'reservoir of organic force, the single source of
power,' ourselves 'conscious automatons' in whom 'mind is the product
of the brain,' thought, emotion, and will are but 'the expression of
molecular changes,' to whom all speculations in divinity are a
'disregard of the proper economy of time,' and to whom, also, as one
of them has declared, 'earth is Paradise,' and all beyond is blank.
But it was Mephistopheles who said,--

    "'The little god of this world sticks to the same old way,
    And is as whimsical as on creation's day;
    Life somewhat better might content him,
    But for the gleam of heavenly light which thou hast lent him.
    He calls it Reason--thence his power's increased
    To be far beastlier than any beast.
    Saving thy gracious presence, he to me
    A long-legged grasshopper seems to be,
    That springing flies and flying springs,
    And in the grass the same old ditty sings.
    Would he still lay among the grass he grows in.'

"But even the man of theories might grant that the scheme of one
great, governing, guiding, loving, and holy God is a theory that works
wonders in practice for those that heartily receive it, and is a
conception of magnificence beside which even a Nebular Hypothesis with
all its grandeur grows small. And the man of facts may as well
recognize what Napoleon saw on St. Helena,--the one grand fact of the
living power of Jesus Christ in history, and to-day; a force that is
mightier than all other forces; a force that all other forces have in
vain endeavored to destroy, or counteract, or arrest; a force that has
pushed its way against wit and learning and wealth and power, and the
stake and the rack and the sword and the cannon, till it has shaped
the master forces of the world, inspired its art, formed its social
life, subsidized, its great powers, and wields to-day the heavy
battalions; a force that this hour beats in millions of hearts, all
over this globe, with a living warmth beside which the love of science
and art is cold and clammy. Surely it would be not much to ask for the
docility to recognize such patent facts as these. And I must believe
that any mind is fundamentally unhinged that despises the profoundest
convictions of the noblest hearts, or speaks lightly of the mighty
influence that has moulded human events and has upheaved the world. It
has, in its arrogance, cut adrift and swung off from the two grand
foci of all truth, the human and the divine.

"Of the several qualities,--the wakefulness, precision, fullness,
equipoise, and docility--that form, in other words, the motion, edge,
weight, balance, and direction of the forged and tempered
intellect,--I might give many instances. Such men as Thomas Arnold and
Mr. Gladstone instantly rise to the thoughts,--the one by his
truth-seeking and truth-finding spirit moulding a generation of
English scholars, the other carrying by the sheer force of his
clear-cut intellect and magnanimous soul the sympathies of a great
nation and the admiration of Christendom. But let me rather single out
one name from the land of specialties and limitations,--Barthold
George Niebuhr, the statesman and historian. Not perfect, indeed, but
admirable. See him begin in his early youth by saying,--'I do not ask
myself whether I can do a thing; I command myself to do it.' Read the
singular sketch of his intellectual gymnastics at twenty-one, spurring
himself to 'inward deep voluntary thought,' 'guarding against society
and dissipation,' devoting an hour each day to clearing up his
thoughts on given subjects, and two hours to the round of physical
sciences; exacting of himself 'an extensive knowledge of the facts'
of science and history; holding himself alike accountable for minute
'description,' 'accurate definitions,' 'general laws,' 'deep
reflection,' and 'distinct consciousness of the rules of my moral
being,' together with what he calls the holy resolve--'more and more
to purify my soul, so that it may be ready at all times to return to
the eternal source.' How intensely he toiled to counteract a certain
conscious German one-sidedness of mind, visiting England to study all
the varied phenomena of its robust life, and yet writing home from
London, at twenty-two,--'I positively shrink from associating with the
young men on account of their unbounded dissoluteness.' His memory,
not inferior to that of Macaulay or Scaliger, he made strictly the
servant of his thinking. Amid all the speculative tendencies of
Germany, he became a man of facts and affairs. Overflowing with
details, he probed the facts of history to the quick, and felt for its
heart. Fertile in theory, he preserved the truth of science so pure as
'in the sight of God,' not 'to write the very smallest thing as
certain, of which he was not fully convinced,' nor to overstrain the
weight of a conjecture, nor even to cite as his own the _verified_
quotation he had gained from another. Practicing on his own maxim to
'open the heart to sincere veneration for all excellence' in human act
and thought, not even his profound admiration for the surpassing
genius of Goethe could draw him into sympathy with the heartlessness
and colossal egoism of his later career. In the midst of public honors
he valued more than all his delightful home and literary life, and his
motto was _Tecum habita_. Surrounded by Pyrrhonism, and bent by the
nature of his studies toward skeptical habits, how grandly he
recovered himself in his maturity, and said,--'I do not know what to
do with a metaphysical God, and I will have none but the God of the
Bible, who is heart to heart with us.' 'My son shall believe in the
letter of the Old and New Testaments, and I shall nurture in him from
his infancy a firm faith in all that I have lost or feel uncertain
about.' And his last written utterance, signed 'Your Old Niebuhr,'
contains a lament that 'depth, sincerity, originality, heart and
affection are disappearing,' and that 'shallowness and arrogance are
becoming universal.' After all allowances for whatever of defect, one
can well point to such a character as an illustrious example of true
and manly culture.

"Shall I say that such a culture as I have endeavored to sketch, it
is, and will be, the aim of Dartmouth College to stimulate? I cannot,
at the close of this discourse, compare in detail its methods with the
end in view, and show their fitness. The original and central college
is surrounded by its several departments, partly or wholly
professional, each having its own specialty and excellence. The
central college seeks to give that rounded education commonly called
Liberal, and to give it in its very best estate. It will aim to
engraft on the stock that is approved by the collective wisdom of the
past, all such scions of modern origin as mark a real progress. By
variety of themes and methods it would stimulate the mental activity,
and by the breadth of its range it would encourage fullness of
material, both physical and metaphysical, scientific and historic. It
initiates into the chief languages of Europe. By the close, protracted
concentration of the mathematics, by the intuitions, careful
distinctions, and fundamental investigations of intellectual and
ethical science, and by the broad principles of political economy,
constitutional and international law, as well as by a round of
original discussions on themes of varied character, it aims to induce
precision and mastery. And all along this line runs and mingles
harmoniously and felicitously that great branch of study for which,
though often severely assailed because unwisely defended or
inadequately pursued, the revised and deliberate judgment of the
ablest and wisest men can find no fair substitute,--the study of the
classic tongues. Grant that it may be, and often is, mechanically or
pedantically pursued. Yet, when rightly prosecuted, its benefits are
wide, deep, and continuous, more than can be easily set forth--and
they range through the whole scale, rising with the gradual expansion
of the mind. It comprises subtle distinctions, close analysis, broad
generalization, and that balancing of evidence which is the basis of
all moral reasoning; it tracks the countless shadings of human
thought, and their incarnation in the growths of speech, and seizes,
in Comparative Philology, the universal affinities of the race: it
passes in incessant review the stores of the mother tongue; it
furnishes the constant clew to the meaning of the vernacular, a basis
for the easy study of modern European languages, and a key to the
terminology of science and art; it familiarizes intimately with many
of the most remarkable monuments of genius and culture; and it imbues
with the history, life, and thought which have prompted, shaped, and
permeated all that is notable in the intellectual achievements of two
thousand years, and binds together the whole republic of letters. To
such a study as this we must do honor. We endeavor to add so much of
the esthetic and ethical element throughout as shall give grace and
worth. And we crown the whole with some teaching concerning the track
of that amazing power that has overmastered all other powers, and
stamped its impress on all modern history. The college was given to
Christ in its infancy, and the message that comes down through a
century to our ears, sounds not so much like the voice of a president
as of an high-priest and prophet--the 'burden of Eleazar:' 'It is my
purpose, by the grace of God, to leave nothing undone within my power
which is suitable to be done, that this school of the prophets may be,
and long continue to be, a pure fountain. And I do, with my whole
heart, will this my purpose to my successors in the presidency of the
seminary, to the latest posterity; and it is my last will, never to be
revoked, and to God I commit it, and my only hope and confidence for
the execution of it is in Him alone who has already done great things
for it, and does still own it as his cause.' God has never yet revoked
the 'last will' of Wheelock. The college is as confessedly a Christian
college as in the days of her origin; and in the impending conflict
she sails up between the batteries of the enemy with her flag nailed
to the mast and her captain lashed to the rigging.

"The college stands to-day in its ideal and the intention of its
managers, representative of the best possible training for a noble
manhood. And I may venture to say, here and now, that if there be
anything known to be yet lacking to the full attainment of that
conception, if anything needs to be added to make this, in the fullest
sense, the peer of the best college in the land, it will be the
endeavor of the Trustees and the Faculty to add that thing.

"Dartmouth College is fortunate in many particulars. Fortunate in its
situation, so picturesque and so quiet, fitted for faithful study, and
full of healthful influences, physical and moral; fortunate in being
the one ancient and honored as well as honoring college of this
commonwealth; fortunate in enjoying the full sympathy of the people
around and the entire confidence of the Christian community of the
land; fortunate in the great class of young men who seek her
instruction, with their mature characters, simple habits, manly aims,
and resolute purposes; fortunate in a laborious Faculty, whose
well-earned fame from time to time brings honorable and urgent calls
to carry their light to other and wealthier seats of learning;
fortunate in her magnificent roll of alumni, unsurpassed in its
average of good manhood and excellent work, and bright with names of
transcendent lustre. The genius of the place bespeaks our reverence
and awe. For to the mind's eye this sequestered spot is peopled to
overflowing with youthful forms that went forth to all the lands of
the earth to do valiantly in the battle of life. Across this quiet
green there comes moving again invisibly a majestic procession of the
faithful and the strong, laden with labors and with honors. In these
seats there can almost be seen to sit once more a hoary and venerable
array of the great and good whose names are recorded on earth and
whose home is in heaven. And over us there seems to hover to-day a
great cloud of witnesses--spirits of the just made perfect. It is good
to be here. I only pray that the new arm may not prove too weak to
bear the banner in this great procession of the ages."




CHAPTER XX.

PROF. JOHN SMITH.--PROF. SYLVANUS RIPLEY.--PROF. BEZALEEL WOODWARD.


Having completed our survey of the work of the successive presidents,
the deceased professors now claim our attention.

The following sketch of the life and labors of Prof. John Smith, is,
in substance, from "Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit."

"John Smith, son of Joseph and Elisabeth (Palmer) Smith, was born at
Newbury, (Byfield parish,) Mass., December 21, 1752. His mother was a
descendant of the Sawyer family, which came from England to this
country in 1643, and settled in Rowley, where she was born. The son
was fitted for college at Dummer Academy, under the instruction of the
well known 'Master Moody.' He early discovered an uncommon taste for
the study of the languages, insomuch that his instructor predicted,
while he was yet in his preparatory coarse, that he would attain to
eminence in that department.

"He entered the Junior class in Dartmouth College, in 1771, at the
time of the first Commencement in that institution. He went to Hanover
in company with his preceptor and Governor Wentworth, and so new and
unsettled was a portion of the country through which they passed, that
they were obliged to encamp one night in the woods. Their arrival at
Hanover excited great interest, and was celebrated by the roasting of
an ox whole, at the Governor's expense, on a small cleared spot, near
where the college now stands.

"He was admitted to the degree of Bachelor of Arts in 1773; and
immediately after, was appointed preceptor of Moor's school at
Hanover. This appointment he accepted; and, while discharging his duty
as a teacher, was also engaged in the study of Theology under the
direction of President Wheelock. In 1774 he was appointed tutor in
the college, and continued in the office until 1778. About this time
he received an invitation to settle in the ministry in West Hartford
Conn., and, in the course of the same year, was elected professor of
Languages in the college where he had been educated. His strong
predilection for classical studies led him to accept the latter
appointment; and until 1787 he joined to the duties of a professor
those of a tutor, receiving for all his services one hundred pounds,
lawful money, annually. His professorship he retained till the close
of his life. He was college librarian for thirty years,--from 1779 to
1809. For two years he delivered lectures on Systematic Theology, in
college, in connection with the public prayers on Saturday evening. He
was a Trustee of the college from 1788 to the time of his death. He
also officiated for many years as stated preacher in the village of
Hanover. In 1803, the degree of Doctor of Divinity was conferred upon
him by Brown University.

"Dr. Smith's abundant and unceasing labors as a professor, a minister,
and an author, proved too much for his constitution, and are supposed
to have hastened him out of life. He died in the exercise of a most
serene and humble faith, on the 30th of April, 1809, in the
fifty-seventh year of his age. His funeral sermon was preached by the
Rev. Dr. Burroughs of Hanover.

"Dr. Smith was enthusiastically devoted to the study of languages
through life. He prepared a Hebrew Grammar in his Junior year in
college, which is dated May 14, 1772; and a revised preparation is
dated February 11, 1774. About this time he also prepared a Chaldee
Grammar. The original manuscript of these grammars, as also the
greater part of his lectures on Theology, is deposited in the Library
of the Northern Academy of Arts and Sciences at Dartmouth College. As
early as 1779, he prepared a Latin Grammar, which was first published
in 1802, and has gone through three editions. In 1803 he published a
Hebrew Grammar; in 1804, an edition of "Cicero de Oratore," with
notes, and a brief memoir of Cicero, in English; and in 1809, a Greek
Grammar, which was issued about the time of his decease. He published
also a Sermon at the dedication of the meeting house at Hanover, 1796,
and a Sermon at the ordination of T. Eastman, 1801.

"Prof. Roswell Shurtleff, D.D., says of him: 'Dr. Smith was rather
above the middling stature, straight, and well proportioned. His head
was well formed, though blanched and bald somewhat in advance of his
years. His face, too, as to its lineaments, was very regular and
comely. His eyes were of a light-blue color, and tolerably clear.

"'As a linguist, he was minutely accurate, and faithful to his pupils,
although I used to doubt whether he was familiar with the classic
writers much beyond the field of his daily instructions. But in his
day, philology, like many other sciences, was comparatively in its
cradle, especially in this country. His reputation in his profession
depended chiefly on the recitations; and there he was perfect to a
proverb. The student never thought of appealing from his decision.

"'In his disposition he was very kind and obliging, and remarkably
tender of the feelings of his pupils--a civility which was always duly
returned.

"'In religious sentiment, he was unexceptionably orthodox, though
fearful of Hopkinsianism, which made some noise in the country at that
period. His voice was full and clear, and his articulation very
distinct. His sermons were written out with great accuracy, but were
perhaps deficient in pungency of application. On the whole, he could
hardly be considered a popular preacher.

"'Professor Smith was a man of uncommon industry. This must be
apparent from what he accomplished. Besides his two recitations daily,
he supplied the college and village with preaching for about twenty
years, and exchanged pulpits but very seldom; and, in the mean time,
was almost constantly engaged in some literary enterprise. I well
remember a conversation with the late President Brown, then a tutor in
college, soon after the professor died,--in which we agreed in the
opinion, that we had known no man of the same natural endowments, who
had been more useful, or who had occupied his talent to better
advantage.'"

We give the substance of some leading points of a notice of Professor
Smith, in the "Memoirs of Wheelock."

"In 1809 the college experienced an immense loss, in the death of Dr.
Smith. He had devoted his life chiefly to the study of languages. No
other professor in any college of the continent, had so long sustained
the office of instructor; none had been more happy, useful, or
diligent. Though indefatigable in his studies, he was always social
and pleasant with his friends, entirely free from that reserve and
melancholy, not infrequent with men of letters. At an early age he
obtained the honors of this seminary, and even while a young man was
appointed professor of the Oriental Languages. These were the smallest
moiety of his merit and his fame. Without that intuitive genius, which
catches the relation of things at a glance, by diligence, by laborious
study, by invincible perseverance, which set all difficulties at
defiance, he rose in his professorship with unrivaled lustre. He, like
a marble pillar, supported this seminary of learning. This fact is
worth a thousand volumes of speculation, to prove the happy and noble
fruits of well-directed diligence in study. But the best portrait of
Dr. Smith is drawn by President Wheelock, in his eulogium on his
friend, from which we make the following extract.

"'Early in life, so soon as his mind was susceptible of rational
improvement, his father entered him at Dummer school, under the
instruction of Mr. Samuel Moody. It is unnecessary to take notice of
the development of his juvenile mind, his attention to literature, and
especially his delight in the study of the ancient, Oriental
Languages. That distinguished master contemplated the height, to which
he would rise in this department; and his remark on him, when leaving
the school to enter this institution, was equal to a volume of eulogy.

"'His mind was not wholly isolated in one particular branch.
Philosophy, geography, criticism, and other parts of philology, held
respectable rank in his acquirements; but these yielded to a
prevailing bias: the investigations of language unceasingly continued
his favorite object. The knowledge of the Hebrew with his propensity
led him to the study of Theology. He filled the office of tutor in the
college, when an invitation was made to him from Connecticut to settle
in the ministry.

"'At this period, in the year 1778, the way was open to a
professorship in the learned languages. On him the public eye was
fixed. He undertook the duties, and entered the career of more
splendid services in the republic of letters. His solicitude and
labors were devoted to the institution, during its infantile state
embarrassed by the Revolutionary war. He alleviated the burdens of the
reverend founder of this establishment; and administered comfort and
solace to him in his declining days.

"'From that period in 1779, Dr. Smith continued indefatigable in
mental applications; faithful in the discharge of official duties; and
active for the interest of the society, through scenes of trouble and
adversity. The board of Trustees elected him a member of their body.
The church at the college, founded by my predecessor, intrusted with
him, as pastor, their spiritual concerns, and were prospered under his
prudent and pious care. God blessed his labors; a golden harvest
reminds us of the last. To the force of his various exertions, under
Divine Providence, justice demands that we ascribe much in the rise
and splendor of this establishment.

"'While surveying the circle of knowledge, and justly estimating the
relative importance of its different branches, still his eye was more
fixed on classical science; and his attachment seemed to concentrate
the force of genius in developing the nature of language, and the
principles of the learned tongues, on which the modern so much depend
for their perfection. The Latin, the Greek, and the Hebrew, were
almost as familiar to him as his native language. He clearly
comprehended the Samaritan and Chaldaic; and far extended his
researches in the Arabic.

"'The eminent attainments of Dr. Smith in the knowledge of the
languages are attested by multitudes, scattered in the civilized
world, who enjoyed his instruction. They will be attested, in future
times, by his Latin Grammar, published about seven years ago; and by
his Hebrew Grammar, which has since appeared. In each of these works,
in a masterly manner, he treats of every matter proper for the student
to know. Each subject is displayed, in a new method, with perspicuity,
conciseness, simplicity, and classic taste. His Greek Grammar, we may
suppose, will exhibit the same traits, when it shall meet the public
eye. This last labor he had finished, and committed to the printer a
few months before his decease.[39]

      [39] It was afterward published and much approved.

"'If we turn to take a moral view of this distinguished votary of
science, new motives will increase our esteem. What shall I say of the
purity of his manners, his integrity and amiable virtues? These are
too strongly impressed on the minds of all, who knew him, to need
description. He was possessed of great modesty, and a degree of
reserve, appearing at times to indicate diffidence, in the view of
those less acquainted. But this, itself, was an effusion of his
goodness, which led to yielding accomodation in matters of minor
concern: yet, however, when the interest of virtue, or society,
required him to act, he formed his own opinion, and proceeded with
unshaken firmness. Those intimately acquainted with him can bear
witness; and it is confirmed by invariable traits in his principles
and practice, during life.

"'The virtues of Dr. Smith were not compressed within the circle of
human relations, which vanish with time. Contemplating the first
cause, the connections and dependencies in the moral state, his mind
was filled with a sense of interminable duties. He was a disciple of
Jesus. The former president admired and loved him, and taught him
Theology. An amiable spirit actuated his whole life, and added
peculiar splendor to the closing scene.

"'His intense pursuit of science affected his constitution, and
produced debility, which, more than two years before, began to be
observed by his friends. It gradually increased, but not greatly to
interrupt his applications till six weeks before his death. While I
revive the affliction at his departure, its accompanying circumstances
will assuage our sorrow. The thoughts of his resignation to Divine
Providence, through all the stages of a disease, that rapidly preyed
upon his vitals, his composure, serenity, and Christian confidence,
remain for the consolation of his friends, and instruction of all.

"'The fame of Dr. Smith does not arise from wealth, nor descent from
titled ancestors. It has no borrowed lustre. He was indebted wholly to
his genius, his labors, and his virtues. His monument will exist in
the hearts of his acquaintance; and in the future respect of those,
who shall derive advantage from his exertions.

"'In the immense loss, which his dear family sustain, they have saved
a precious legacy; his example, and lessons of social and religious
duties. The church, with mournful regret, will retain the tenderest
affection for their venerable pastor. What shall I say of this seat of
science, now covered with cypress? Those who have trod its hallowed
walks, will never forget his instructions, nor the benevolent
effusions of his heart. Where, in the ranges of cultivated society, is
one to be found, qualified with those rare endowments, which can
supply the chasm made by his death?'"

We insert in its appropriate place the contract made with Professor
Smith by President Wheelock.[40]

      [40] See Appendix.

His first wife was Mary, daughter of Rev. Ebenezer Cleaveland, of
Gloucester, Mass., his second wife was Susan, daughter of David Mason,
of Boston, Mass.



Prof. Sylvanus Ripley, who filled the chair of Divinity from 1782 to
1787, was the son of Jonathan Ripley, and was born at Halifax, Mass.,
September 29, 1749.

In introducing him to the favorable notice of Mr. Wheelock, previous
to the commencement of his religious life, Rev. William Patten says:
"Gracious exercises alone excepted, I know not a more promising young
man."

Some extracts from President Wheelock's "Narratives," relating to
Prof. Ripley's missionary labors, are worthy of attention.

"Mr. Sylvanus Ripley, who finished his course of collegiate studies
here last fall, very cheerfully complied with the openings of
Providence, to undertake a mission to the tribes in Canada, and
accordingly prepared for that purpose, and set out with Lieut. Thomas
Taylor, whom he had made choice of for his companion in that tour, as
he had been long a captive with the French and Indians in those parts,
and was well acquainted with the customs of both, and with their
country, and could serve him as an interpreter. He sat out July 17,
well recommended to the Lieut.-governor and Commander-in-chief, and
others of that province, by his Excellency Governor Wentworth, and
others. The special design of his journey was to see what door, or
doors, was, or might be opened for him, or others, to go as
missionaries among them, to open a way for intercourse between them
and this school, and obtain a number of suitable youth, if it may be,
to receive an education here; in the choice of which, he will have
special respect to the children, whose parents were in former wars
captivated by the Indians, and were naturalized, and married among
them."

"September 26, 1772. A delay of sending the foregoing narrative to the
press, gives an opportunity to oblige my friends with a short account
of the success of Mr. Ripley's mission to Canada.

"He returned on the 21st instant, with his companion and interpreter,
Lieut. Taylor, and brought with them ten youths, eight belonging to
the tribe at Caughnawaga, near Montreal, and two of the tribe at
Lorette, near Quebec. Soon after his arrival at the former of these
places, he made known to them the errand on which he was sent, and
disclosed the proposal of sending a number of their children to this
school for an education; and left it to their consideration, till he
should go and wait upon the Commander-in-chief of that province at
Quebec. And after he had passed through the small-pox, which he took
by inoculation, as it was judged unsafe for him to travel that country
without it, he went to Quebec. But his Honor the Governor, as well as
other English gentlemen, were apprehensive that the Indians were so
bigoted to the Romish religion, that there was no hope of success, and
advised him not to go on that errand to Lorette: he accordingly
returned without visiting them as he proposed.

"But on his coming to Caughnawaga he found there two likely young men
of the tribe at Loretto, who set out with a design to go to Sir
William Johnson, with a single view to find a school in which they
might get useful knowledge. They had heard nothing of Mr. Ripley, nor
of any such design as he was upon in their favor, till they came to
Caughnawaga, which is 180 miles on their way to Sir William's, and on
hearing of the proposal Mr. Ripley had made, they waited five weeks at
that place for his return, and on his coming complied with his offer
of taking them into this school with cheerfulness. The same day a
council of the chiefs of that tribe was called to consider of the
proposal of sending their children to this school, which Mr. Ripley
had left to their consideration, in which they were to a man agreed in
the affirmative, and acknowledged with gratitude the benevolence and
kindness of the offer. They continued united and firm to the last in
that determination against the most warm and zealous remonstrances of
their priest, both in public and private; in consequence of which
determination, nine of their boys were made ready to accompany Mr.
Ripley hither; three of which were children or descendants from
captives, who had been captivated when they were young, and lived with
them till they were naturalized and married among them."

A later "Narrative" says:

"The beginning of May [1773], the Rev. Mr. Ripley and Mr. Dean sat out
on a mission to visit the Indians at Penobscott, and on the Bay of
Fundy, as they should find encouragement, agreeable to representations
heretofore made of a door open for service among them."

They had a good measure of success, in some respects, in this mission.

The following tribute to Professor Ripley is from the "Memoirs of
Wheelock."

"In the winter of 1786-7, the college experienced the loss of an
eminent instructor, the Rev. Sylvanus Ripley. He was suddenly called
from his labors, in the vigor of life and the midst of extensive
usefulness.

"After taking his degree in 1771, in the first class which received
the honors of the college, he continued with Mr. Wheelock as a tutor
in the college. In 1775, he was appointed master of Moor's Charity
School, and in 1779, upon the decease of Dr. Wheelock, he succeeded
him in the pastoral care of the church in the college, and soon after
was elected professor of Divinity. Professor Ripley was a learned man,
an orthodox divine, an evangelical and popular preacher. His eloquence
had nothing artificial or studied. His sermons were seldom written;
his manner was pleasing and winning, his words flowed as promptly and
readily in the pulpit as in the social circle."

Professor Ripley died at Hanover, February 5, 1787, of injuries
received in a fall from his carriage, while returning from a religious
service in a distant part of the town.

His wife was Abigail, daughter of Pres. Eleazar Wheelock.



Bezaleel Woodward, the first professor of mathematics in the college,
was the son of Israel and Mary (Sims) Woodward, and a descendant of
Henry Woodward of Dorchester, Mass., 1638, and Northampton, Mass.,
1639, where he was one of the "seven pillars" of the church formed
there in 1661. He was born at Lebanon, Conn., July 16, 1745, and
graduated at Yale College in 1764.

In 1767, Mr. Wheelock refers to him as an associate teacher, and "a
dear youth, willing to do anything in his power" to aid him. The
school is said to have been put on a college basis, in the matter of
study, in 1768, with Mr. Woodward as tutor.

The following letter addressed to President Wheelock illustrates the
versatile nature of his talents:

"Lebanon Sep^r 6^th 1770.

"Rev^d & hon^d Sir,

"Bingham arrived home well last week, and proposes to set out with two
teams about the 18^th Ins^t. We have all of us been endeavouring to
expedite the removal ever since he came home--but I fear Madam will
not be able to set out so soon. She with Miss Nabby propose to ride in
the Post Chaise as soon as they can possibly be ready. Hutchinson is
to drive it for them. The Scholars will likely the most of them foot
it when Bingham goes. Abraham & Daniel seem to resent it that they in
particular should be sat to drive the Cows the Doctor mentioned in
his to me & the English Scholars be excused from it. I have not
procured Cows as yet--we have all been doing & shall do every thing in
our power. Madam is so weak that a little croud overcomes her, that
she has her poor turns very often; tho' on the whole I hope she is on
the mending hand. I fear the fatigue of preparing & the journey will
be too much for her--be sure unless she takes both very leisurely--but
God is able to support her. By the tenor of the Doctor's Letters I
apprehend he has forgot my proposed Journey to the eastward, which I
would neglect, and with vigor pursue the grand object, the removal;
for I see need enough that every one who is able to do any thing
towards preparing should be doubly active now. I see eno' & more than
eno' that is important and necessary to be done, & I never had a
greater disposition to exert myself in getting things forward--but I
have had such a croud of affairs on my mind, & still have, & must have
so long as I continue here, that my health is so much impaired, my
constitution become so brittle, & my nerves so weak, that I am
rendered entirely unfit for application to any business at present; &
therefore that I may be fit for some kind of business the ensuing
winter I am advised and think it highly expedient & neccessary that I
take my Journey soon (before I am rendered unable to do it)--and
Providence seems to point out my duty to set out to-morrow, tho' it is
with the greatest reluctance that I do it, on acco^t of the need of
help here, but I am unfit to do anything to purpose if I stay. M^r
MacCluer will do all in his power, tho' he is obliged (agreeable to
the Doctor's directions) to attend Co[=m]encement next week to collect
Subscriptions--he'll do all he can before he goes, & after he
returns--what _is_ done _must_ be done in a hurry and confusion, &
what _cannot_ be done _must remain undone_. We have been examining the
Scholars this week (& find they make a pretty good appearance) besides
which we have done all we could that I might leave affairs in the best
manner. My present proposal is to go to Boston & settle
affairs--thence to Salem & visit dear Doctor Whitaker--thence perhaps
to Portsmouth--then either return & accompany Madam & Family to Cohos
(which I think of doing if I can get back in season)--or go directly
from Portsmouth to Cohos--in either case I hope to be with the Doctor
within a month. I want much--I long to see you. I want to do more,
much more than I am able, to assist in removing--but the wise Governor
of the Universe seems to forbid my doing much. I desire to commit the
conduct of affairs to him. I shall endeavour as far as I am able to
comply with all the D^r desires in his letters--shall carry the letter
to M^r Whitefield to Boston myself. I shall write to M^r Keen a
general Sketch of affairs. I hope to be able when I see the D^r & the
Trustees meet to be able to determine what to do the ensuing winter.
This Parish have M^r Potter to preach next Sabbath & expect M^r Austin
after that. M^r Austin is now asleep in your house. I expect M^r
Wheelock will be at home the last of next week or beginning of week
after. Mary & Cloe I expect will ride up in the Carts. Porter, Judson
& Collins are to set out next Monday (at their desire) that they may
assist in making preparation. School must (I think) unavoidably break
up till they remove. Scholars have been much engaged in study
(especially in the Art of Speaking) since the Doctor went away. If
Scholars are engaged Instructors must be so too--and if Instructors
are diligent and faithful, Scholars will make improvement. We cannot
learn that the duty on tea is taken off; and I expect difficulty in
disposing of Bills; but shall do the best I can. I have tho'ts of
carrying a Set to Boston. Is it not best to desire Miss Zurviah
[Sprague] not to engage herself in business 'till the Doctor's mind
can be known respecting her going to Cohos--I know not where one can
be had to supply her place (omnibus consideratio)--will the D^r write
his mind respecting it in his next? I have many things to say; but it
is now between 1 & 2 o'Clock in y^e morning, and I find nature flags.
I could get no other time to write. I have neither time nor strength
to copy, therefore hope the D^r will excuse the scrawl from him who is
with much duty & esteem Rev^d & hon^d Sir,

    "Your obedient and humble Serv^t.
    "Beza Woodward.

"N. B. Family are all asleep. Please give love to Ripley &c. &c.

The "Memoirs of Wheelock" contain the following paragraph relating to
Professor Woodward:

"At the anniversary commencement of 1804, the Honorable Bezaleel
Woodward, professor of Mathematics and Philosophy, departed this life.
He had fulfilled the duties of a professor and Tutor from the
foundation of the college. His profound knowledge of the abstruse and
useful science of Mathematics, the facility of his instructions in
natural and experimental Philosophy and Ethics, his condescending and
amiable manners, will be long and gratefully remembered by those who
have received the benefit of his instructions."

The "Monthly Anthology and Massachusetts Magazine" for September,
1804, has the following notice of Professor Woodward:

"Died at Hanover, New Hampshire, August 25, Hon. Bezaleel Woodward,
Professor of Mathematics and Philosophy in Dartmouth College.
Professor Woodward was born at Lebanon, in the State of Connecticut.
In the twentieth year of his age he graduated at Yale College, 1764.
After a few years successfully employed in the ministry, he was
elected a tutor in this university. Here he soon displayed such
talents and improvements, such readiness of thought and ease of
communication, that he was appointed to the office of professor in
Mathematics and Philosophy. The dignity with which he discharged the
duties of his station is witnessed by all who have shared in his
instruction. In the civil department, and as a member of society, he
was no less eminent than as an instructor in college. We might also
add his usefulness in the church of Christ at this place, of which he
was long a worthy member, and high in the esteem and affections of his
Christian brethren.

"His remains were interred on Tuesday, the 28th. The Rev. Doctor Smith
delivered upon the occasion a well-adapted discourse. The officers,
Trustees, and members of the college joined as mourners with the
afflicted family, and the solemnities were attended by a very numerous
collection of friends and acquaintance.

"The alumni of Dartmouth will join with its present officers and
members in deploring the loss of a faithful and able instructor.
Those who visited him in his late illness have had a specimen of
decaying greatness, alleviated by an approving conscience, and
sustained by resignation and hope. The friends of science will lament
the departure of one of its enlightened patrons. Society sympathizes
with the bereaved family, retaining a lively sense of his public and
domestic virtues; and a numerous acquaintance will mingle their grief
in bemoaning the loss of a sincere friend, a valuable citizen, and an
exemplary Christian."

The records of the public life of Professor Woodward are thoroughly
interwoven with the history of northern New England. Few pioneers in
the valley of the upper Connecticut did more to promote the general
welfare of the community.

His wife was Mary, daughter of Pres. Eleazar Wheelock.




CHAPTER XXI.

PROF. JOHN HUBBARD.--PROF. ROSWELL SHURTLEFF.


Prof. John Hubbard succeeded Professor Woodward. We quote from a
published eulogy by Rev. Elijah Parish, D.D., his college classmate.

"The Hon. John Hubbard, the son of John and Hannah (Johnson) Hubbard,
late Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy in this
university, was born in Townsend, Mass., August 8, 1759. Dark and
dismal was the dawn of that life, which has been so fair and luminous.
Five months before his birth his father died, and this, in his last
moments, when his children stood weeping round his dying bed, he made
use of as an argument of consolation to them, entreating them not to
weep, for God had taken care of him when a fatherless infant. During
his minority most of his time was employed in the labors of
agriculture. At the age of twenty-one he commenced his studies, and
the next year became a member of this institution. In the second year
of his residence at college, when many were awakened to a religious
sense of divine things, our friend was one of the happy number. His
subsequent life and death have proved that his conversion was not
imaginary. While this increases our loss, it is the best reason for
consolation.

"In his college life Mr. Hubbard was a youthful cedar of Lebanon. He
gave visible tokens of his approaching eminence. So tenacious was his
memory, that his progress in the languages was remarkably rapid. While
he lived, the Greek and Roman writers were his amusement; and with a
taste refined, he was charmed with their classic beauties; his memory
was stored with numerous favorite passages.

"On leaving college, his love of study, his delight in religious
inquiries, his devout regard for the best interests of man, led him to
the study of theology. Becoming a preacher of the gospel, his voice,
naturally small and feeble, was found to be ill adapted to such an
employment. After a fair experiment his good sense forbade him to
persevere. The transition was easy to his 'delightful task to teach
the young idea how to shoot,' and form the minds of youth to science
and virtue. Of the academy in New Ipswich he was elected preceptor.
Under his able instruction that seminary rose to distinction, and
became a favorite of the public. Some who were his pupils are already
eminent in the walks of literature.

"After several years, quitting this situation, he was appointed Judge
of Probate for the County of Cheshire. This office was peculiarly
adapted to that gentle and tender philanthropy for which he was
remarkable. It was luxury to him to comfort the widow and the
fatherless. The blended resolution and exquisite sensibilities of his
heart qualified him, in a singular manner, impartially to weigh the
claims of justice and compassion. But this situation was not congenial
with his love of study, and his delight in the instruction of youth,
which was so pleasant, that he declared he would make it the business
of his life. Accordingly he accepted the invitation of Deerfield
Academy, Massachusetts, where for several years he continued with
great reputation. After the death of Professor Woodward, who had, from
its origin, been an able instructor in this university, he was elected
his successor in the Professorship of Mathematics and Philosophy. So
high was his reputation, that a successor of common attainments could
not have satisfied the raised expectations of the public. To supply
the place of such a man was the arduous task assigned to Mr. Hubbard.
His success equaled the fond hopes of his friends. Here you rejoiced
in his light; here he spent his last and his best days; here he had
full scope for the various, the versatile powers of his vigorous mind.
His amiable virtues, his profound learning, you cheerfully
acknowledged.

"He had a happy facility in illustrating the practical advantages of
every science. He not only explained its principles, but traced its
relation to other branches of knowledge. Not satisfied by merely
ascertaining facts, he explored the cause, the means, the ultimate
design of their existence.

"Though he has been my intimate friend from cheerful youth, yet
neither inspired by his genius, nor enriched with his attainments, it
is not possible I should do justice to his merits. His person,
muscular and vigorous, indicated the energy of his mind. Every feature
of his face expressed the mildness of his spirit; never did I witness
in him the appearance of anger. Without that undescribable
configuration which constitutes beauty, his countenance was pleasing
and commanded respect. Without formality or art, his manners were
refined and delicate; his address was conciliatory and winning. By his
social and compliant temper he was calculated for general society.
Though instructed 'in the learning of Egypt,' and the civilized world,
he was too discreet and benevolent to humble others by his superior
lustre. His light was mild and clear, like that of the setting sun. He
had no ambition to shine, or to court applause. More disposed to make
others pleased with themselves than to excite their admiration, it is
not strange that he was universally beloved. His heart was impressed
with an exquisite sense of moral obligations. In every passing event,
in every work of nature, the formation of a lake, a river, a cataract,
a mountain, he saw God. When as a philosopher, surrounded with the
apparatus of science, extending his researches to the phenomena of the
universe, amazed at the minuteness of some objects, astonished at the
magnitude and magnificence of others, his mind was transported; when
he explored the heavens, and saw worlds balancing worlds, and other
suns enlightening other systems, his senses were ravished with the
wisdom, the power, the goodness of the Almighty Architect. On these
subjects he often declaimed, with the learning of an astronomer, the
simplicity of an apostle, the eloquence of a prophet. He illustrated
the moral and religious improvement of the sciences; the views of his
students were enlarged; the sciences became brilliant stars to
irradiate the hemisphere of Christianity. The perfect agreement
between sound learning and true religion was a favorite theme of his
heart. This remark is confirmed by his conversation, his letters, his
lectures.

"In theology his researches were not those of a polemic divine, but of
a Christian, concerned for his own salvation and the salvation of
others."

Professor Hubbard published several works, one of them being entitled
"Rudiments of Geography." He died at Hanover, August 14, 1810.

His wife was Rebecca, daughter of Dr. John Preston, of New Ipswich.



Mr. Roswell Shurtleff was elected the second professor of Divinity in
the college. We give some of the more important points in a published
"Discourse," by Professor Long:

"Roswell Shurtleff, the son of William and Hannah (Cady) Shurtleff,
was born at Ellington, then East Windsor, Ct., August 29, 1773. He was
the youngest of nine children, two of whom died before he was born.
From his earliest years he was fond of reading, and at school he was
called a good scholar. His religious training was carefully attended
to, and to this, and the Christian example which accompanied it, he
ascribed his conversion, and the views he subsequently embraced of the
Christian doctrines.

"When he was seven or eight years old he had many serious thoughts of
God and duty. The requirement that he should give up all for God, as
he understood it, filled him with gloom.

"During several of the subsequent years, the subject of religion dwelt
on his mind, and he was occasionally deeply impressed. One of the
difficult things was to comprehend the notion of faith. The promise
was: 'He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.' He believed,
as he supposed, and he had been baptized, but he could not feel that
he was safe. Must he believe that he, personally, should be saved? But
what if he mistook his own character, and believed what was false;
would his opinion of his safety _make_ him safe. He was ashamed to be
known as a religious inquirer, and, therefore, remained longer in
darkness. Finding that he had been observed by his father to have
become a more diligent student of the Scriptures, he left the practice
of reading them before the family. Sometimes, assuming a false
appearance of indifference, he carried his difficulties to his mother,
who was able to furnish a satisfactory solution. She seems to have
been a person of unusual intelligence as well as goodness. Her memory
was ever cherished by him with the most grateful affection, as it
regarded his own spiritual progress. He believed that he suffered
unspeakable loss from the concealment of his early feelings on the
subject of religion, and did not doubt that many failed of conversion
from this foolish reserve. It was not till a number of years after
this that his religious life commenced.

"The only school which young Shurtleff had the opportunity of
attending, before his eighteenth or nineteenth year, was the common
school of the district. He made good proficiency, but nothing worthy
of note occurred in relation to his studies till he was about fifteen
years of age. He then began to think, as he says. Before that time, he
had repeated by rote whatever he had been taught. The first impulse to
reflection was a new discovery. He had been taught from childhood that
accent is a stress of voice laid on some syllable or letter of a word.
But this definition had not been illustrated by an example, and the
classification of words by their accent, in the spelling-book, he had
never understood. The definition had been to him an unmeaning
collection of words. He now discovered what it meant. This was in
itself a trifling event, but it led to the further discovery that
other things, which he had been accustomed, parrot-like, to repeat
_memoriter_, had a meaning; that the meaning of things was that which
the student should be set to learn, and that his own education had, in
this view, been greatly neglected. He says that a new world seemed to
be opened to his view; that nothing now appeared so important as an
opportunity to reflect on what he had learned, and that he was greatly
displeased with the instructors by whom he had been so badly cheated.
He resolved that, if ever he should be a teacher, he would propose it
to himself, as his leading object, to make his pupils understand
whatever they should study. This resolution he afterward had the
opportunity of carrying into effect in five or six winter schools; and
his attempt was attended with gratifying success.

"It was the opinion of Dr. Shurtleff, grounded on his own experience
as learner and teacher, that too much importance is attached to the
books used in schools; that the end to be reached is too generally
regarded as the learning of the book rather than the mastery of the
subject, and that books are too often prepared mainly with a view to
abridge the labor of the teacher. He believed that, while the pupil
might, through the text-book, possess himself of the knowledge of
others, he was in danger of acquiring little which could be called his
own.

"In consequence of using his eyes too soon, after his recovery from
the measles, when he was about seventeen years old, Shurtleff was
almost wholly cut off from the reading of books for two years, and he
never afterward perfectly recovered from the injury resulting from
this imprudence. He made some proficiency, however, by listening to
the reading of others. About two years after this affliction he
entered the academy at Chesterfield, N. H., whither his father's
family had removed a few years before. He attended first to English
studies. The weakness of his eyes continued, and he was considerably
embarrassed for a time from the necessity of using the eyes of his
friends. At length he commenced the study of Latin, going through
Ross' Grammar, the only one then in use, in just two weeks, and then
beginning to construe and parse in Corderius.

"He met, at the academy, one who had been his school-fellow and
playmate, and with whom he was intimately associated from that time
till the end of his college course,--the late Hon. Levi Jackson, who
died at Chesterfield in 1821. They got out their lessons together,
taking turns in looking out new words; and afterward, at college,
where they were classmates and room-mates, continued the practice. Dr.
Shurtleff felt under great obligations to this friend and helper, and
said that 'few friendships among men had been more ardent, confiding
and permanent.'

"Shurtleff had supposed, at first, that the Greek language was beyond
his reach, on account of his infirmity of sight. But some improvement
having taken place, he ventured to commence the study. He went through
the Westminster Greek Grammar, the book then in use, in one week, and
began to read the Gospel of John. Having completed the New Testament,
and read several books of Homer's Iliad, he was reputed in the school
as tolerably versed in Greek. He and Jackson studied from the love of
study, and did not think of college till a year before they applied
for admission, at Commencement, in 1797, and entered the Junior class
in this institution.

"The round of college duties presents few marked events. Time has left
no record of most of the occurrences which diversified and enlivened
the period from 1797 to 1799. How the two friends studied, and read,
and discussed, and recreated together, has been lost, just as the
facts of our daily life will be lost sixty years hence. They made
constant and good progress. They were about equally good scholars,
neither of them being a dead weight upon the other. Each was happy in
the other's proficiency. The amount of learning requisite for a degree
was less then than now. Sciences have been introduced into the course
which were then in their infancy. But it may be doubted whether the
students of our day have the advantage over those of an earlier
period, in respect to thoroughness as well as extent of attainment.
They read fewer books, in the first years of the college, but they
thought the more. They were as well disciplined and able, and as
competent to handle a difficult subject, I imagine, as our students,
if they were not as well informed. We know from the esteem in which
Shurtleff was held by the Trustees and Faculty, as it appeared not
long after his graduation, that he was one of the best scholars of his
time.

"Peculiar interest attaches to the religious experience of Shurtleff
during his college course.

"He had performed some of the duties of a Christian before he supposed
himself to possess the Christian character. The first school he taught
he opened daily with prayer, persevering in the practice as a
conscientious duty, in spite of many misgivings and much timidity. And
this he did in every school he afterward taught. He kept up the habit
of secret prayer, at the same time, asking more earnestly than for
anything else, that his weak eyes might be cured, and that he might
have the means of intellectual improvement.

"He seems to have supposed that during his senior winter vacation he
became a true Christian.

"Soon after his return to college, he intimated a desire to a
classmate, who, as he supposed, was the only professor of religion in
the class, to join with others in a private meeting for religious
conference and prayer. He had never attended, or even heard of such a
meeting. After a little delay he was surprised to learn from his
friend that such a meeting as he had proposed had been held for years,
and that he was desired to attend. On the Saturday evening following,
he and five or six other persons assembled, and by the free
interchange of thought and feeling, and the apparently humble prayers
that were offered, he felt himself greatly refreshed and quickened. On
leaving college he regretted the loss of nothing more than of these
Saturday evening conference meetings.

"The time had now come for choosing a profession. His success in
teaching led him to seek for a situation in an academy; but no opening
of this kind presented itself, and he believed himself thus
providentially called to preach the gospel. There were at the time no
theological seminaries; the students of the distinguished clergymen
who gave instruction in theology were supposed to represent the views
of their teacher; and that he might not be thought to go forth as the
advocate of some exceptionable _ism_, Mr. Shurtleff chose to study
theology by himself. Having pursued this course one year, he was
appointed a tutor in the college, and at the same time was licensed to
preach. The pressure of a considerable debt hastened the period of
obtaining license, but we may be certain, from the opportunities
subsequently enjoyed, and from the character of the man, that any
deficiency he may have felt at first, from hasty preparation, was
abundantly supplied.

"Mr. Shurtleff continued in the tutorship from 1800 to 1804, and was
also engaged, for the greater part of the time, in preaching in vacant
parishes.

"After the close of the four years' tutorship, Mr. Shurtleff was
appointed a professor of Divinity in the college. It was a part of his
duty to preach to the students and the people of the village. The
church was at that time Presbyterian. The predecessor of Professor
Shurtleff--Professor Sylvanus Ripley--had been the pastor of this
church. Since his death, in 1787, Dr. John Smith, professor of
Languages, previously associate pastor with Professor Ripley, had been
the sole pastor of the church. Dr. Backus, of Conn., Dr. Worcester, of
Salem, and Dr. Alexander, of Princeton, had been appointed at
different times to the vacant professorship, but all had declined, in
consequence, as it was supposed, of the influence of Dr. John
Wheelock, the second president of the college. Professor Shurtleff
accepted the office, expecting that the same causes which had kept it
so long vacant would render it an uncomfortable post. The difficulties
which he feared, he was called to encounter. The president wished him
to become the colleague of Professor Smith in the pastoral office, but
he refused,--agreeing in his decision with the views of the largest
part of the church and of the village. In consequence of this
disagreement, a controversy ensued which lasted several years, and
ended in the law-suit between the college and the State, in 1816-17.
In July, 1805, twenty-two persons, professors of religion, were
constituted 'The Congregational Church at Dartmouth College.' To this
church, and the religious society of which it was a part, Professor
Shurtleff was invited to preach, performing pastoral labors so far as
his other duties would permit. Professor Smith was, meanwhile, the
pastor of the Presbyterian church till the time of his death, in
April, 1809. Professor Shurtleff was ordained as an evangelist, at
Lyme, N. H., in 1810. He continued in this relation until the year
1827.

"The literary labors of his office would have been quite sufficient to
occupy all his time. In addition to these, an amount of work nearly
equal to that of any pastor of a church was imposed on him--fully
equal, perhaps, we shall say, if we consider the character of the
congregation to whom he ministered. He was faithful and assiduous,
both as a preacher and a pastor. But he performed the many duties of
his station with acceptance and success. And he had the satisfaction
of seeing that his efforts were crowned with the special blessing of
God. In 1805 God displayed his saving power among the students and
people of the village. As many as forty persons became Christians
during the revival. But the most extensive and powerful work of grace,
probably, which the church ever enjoyed was that of 1815. The revival
began in the hearts of God's people. Some of the pious students
resolved that they would every day talk with some unconverted person
respecting the interests of his soul. The effect of this soon appeared
in a general religious awakening. In one week forty persons expressed
hope in Christ, and in four weeks as many as one hundred and twenty
persons were supposed to be converted. There were also revivals in
1819, 1821, and 1826,--that of 1821 being the most extensive, and
embracing among the converts a greater number of citizens than of
students. Public religious meetings were less numerous during the
revivals than in most of those of a later period. It was before the
day of protracted meetings. Perhaps there was less reliance then on
means, and more on the Spirit of God. It was not thought necessary
that business should be suspended, and every day converted into a
Sabbath. But such means as the state of feeling seemed to require were
faithfully used. Professor Shurtleff was never happier than when
engaged in conversation with inquirers, or in conducting meetings for
conference and prayer. The informality and freedom of these meetings
made them attractive. They were probably quite as useful as the more
regular ministrations of the pulpit. The speaker can say that he never
visited a more solemn place than the old district school-house--which
stood where the brick school-house now stands--often was, on a Sunday
evening during the progress of a conference meeting. A distinguished
professor of a neighboring college, who was here in 1815, says that
'The evidence of an increasing seriousness among the students at
large, in that revival, was first shown, so far as I can recollect, by
the more crowded attendance at these meetings.' Not that the more
formal services of the Sabbath were not also impressive and
profitable. The same gentleman says of the preaching of Professor
Shurtleff at this time: 'The general impression made on me by several
of his sermons I remember to the present day. I liked to hear him
preach, even before I took any especial interest in religion as a
personal concern. His sermon on the text, "The harvest is past, the
summer is ended," etc., produced a deep effect at the time of its
delivery which was not soon forgotten. I remember the stillness and
solemnity of the audience. This sermon must have been delivered some
little time before the revival.' The same gentleman further states,
that 'During the whole of this revival, and the gathering in of the
fruits of it into the church, Professor Shurtleff was the leading
instrument of the work, so far as human agency was concerned. He went
into it with his whole heart. I have seen him and his excellent wife
almost overpowered with joy when told of a new case of conversion
among the students. He did a great deal--all that one man could do, as
it seemed to me--to promote the good work by his own personal
efforts.' It is in the power of the speaker to give similar testimony
respecting the revival of 1821.

"When Professor Shurtleff entered upon the duties of his
professorship, and for many years afterward, he met with much
opposition. But his position was constantly growing stronger, both as
it respects the sympathy of his Christian brethren and the clergy, and
his popularity as an instructor. I have not been able to learn that
there was a whisper of discontent with his instructions during the
whole of the period from 1804 to 1827. The testimony of one of the
best students of the Class of 1816 is, that 'As an instructor,
particularly in Moral Philosophy, he was much thought of; and we were
careful never to miss one of his recitations on this subject. His way
of putting questions, and answering such as were proposed to himself,
showed great judgment and shrewdness.' Quite a number of persons in
the classes for seven or eight years following the time here referred
to, were preëminent as scholars and as men. May not the fact be partly
accounted for by the impulse and guidance of the mind of this
instructor? He constituted a large portion of the faculty from 1815 to
1819, there being at that time only two professors,--Professor Adams
and Professor Shurtleff. The graduates of the college who had been his
pupils were never backward in acknowledging their obligations to him.

"In 1810, Professor Shurtleff was united in marriage with Miss Anna
Pope, only daughter of Rev. Joseph Pope of Spencer, Mass. Of her he
said, 'She was truly an helpmeet--one who did me good and not evil all
the days of her life.' By her vivacity and cheerfulness she was
eminently fitted to comfort him in his hours of suffering and
depression. But it pleased God to take her from him in March, 1826,
after having enjoyed with her, during sixteen years, a degree of
domestic happiness which rarely falls to the lot of man. He also lost
two children, sons, in 1820, after a brief illness. Respecting the
oldest, he had already begun to indulge very pleasing anticipations,
although he was less than five years old at the time of his decease.
Little did the speaker then know, when helping to carry to the grave
the remains of these children, who, if they had survived, would now
have been men of mature age, what hopes he was assisting to bury! But
who knows the future? It was better they should die, than that they
should live to dishonor him and themselves. The husband and father
mourned incessantly, though not without resignation, for these
bereavements, till the time of his own death.

"In 1825, Professor Shurtleff was in very feeble health, from the
spring till Commencement. The Trustees adjourned at that time to
reassemble in November, supposing it might be necessary then to
appoint another professor of Divinity. But by the blessing of God on
medical advice and careful nursing, he was able to resume instruction
before the meeting of the Trustees.

"In January, 1827, Professor Shurtleff was transferred from the
professorship of Divinity to one newly established, of Moral
Philosophy and Political Economy, which he filled till the year 1838,
when, by his own resignation, his active labors in the college ceased.
It was understood, when this appointment was made, that Professor
Shurtleff should instruct in all the Senior classes, and should also
hear the recitations of other classes in particular branches. During
the last half of this period, he preached in vacant neighboring
parishes. No particular account of the literary labors of these years
can be required. Any one of them may be regarded as a fair sample of
the rest. A member of the class of 1828 can testify that that class
greatly enjoyed his instructions. We never heard the summons to the
recitation-room without pleasure. We were always interested and
excited, always profited. The questions were put by the professor in
the plainest Saxon. They were well adapted to develop the knowledge or
the ignorance of the student, as the case might be, but not to give
him undue assistance. If there was anything in the text-book which was
obscure, the questions made it plain. A clearly wrong opinion advanced
by an author was briefly, yet thoroughly, exposed. His own opinions
were lucidly stated and sustained, and for the time being, at least,
we seldom saw reason to differ from him. The recitation was enlivened
with anecdote, illustration, and wit, and never dragged heavily. If
our objections were sometimes curtly silenced, it was so effectually
and handsomely done that we bore it with perfect good-nature. He ever
lent a willing ear to our real difficulties, and assisted in their
removal. Together with unusual freedom in the mode of conducting the
recitations, there was good order and earnest attention to the subject
in hand. He knew how to control us, while he had with us all the
sympathy of a young man and an equal. I think it was the opinion of
the class that Professor Shurtleff, in his ripe manhood, had few
equals as an instructor.

"At the time of his retirement, in 1838, Dr. Shurtleff had been in the
service of the college thirty-eight years. After what manner he has
lived among us since that time, most of this audience know. He has not
been noticeably active in the affairs of the village, but when you
have met him in private intercourse, you have known that he retained
the fine social qualities--the love of story-telling, and the keen,
yet harmless wit--for which he was always remarkable. Those whose
memory goes back thirty years, must have noticed, I think, that he
became more uniformly serene and cheerful in the latter part of his
life. The old graduates of the college who revisited the place know
how cordially he received them, and with what hearty zest he recalled
with them the scenes of their college days. He continued to be deeply
interested in the prosperity of the college, and he was the means of
eliciting in its behalf the interest and the benevolence of his
friends. He continued the habit, commenced at an early period, of
assisting students who were in needy circumstances. These were
objects of benevolence toward which he was naturally drawn. In his
feelings he never grew old, but carried forward the vivacity of youth
into old age; and always enjoyed the society of the young. He loved to
have young men about him; and he has thus, by his unobtrusive
charities and counsels, and his interesting and instructive
conversation, been a benefactor to a large number of students. The
spiritual welfare of the college was near his heart. He had passed
through many revivals of religion, and he longed for the return of
such seasons. He devoutly observed the days set apart for prayer for
colleges, and, as you remember, often urged the students, assembled on
those occasions, to give their hearts to God.

"When he left his post as an instructor he was sixty-five years old.
After this he had more than twenty-two years of leisure, during which
he retained, in a remarkable degree, the vigor of his intellectual
powers. But he had good and sufficient reasons, as he judged, for his
resignation; and no new and suitable field of labor presenting itself
to a man who wanted but a few years of threescore and ten, he could
enjoy the offered leisure with a good conscience, occupying it with
such pursuits as his taste suggested. Even at the time when his labors
were the most multiplied, and the church and the college were
successively engaged in bitter controversy, he had but little to do
with administrative and practical matters. Even then a life of
reflection appeared to be more attractive than a life of action. And
when his public duties were ended, he naturally chose such a life. He
was still intellectually active. He could not let his faculties sink
into sluggish repose if he would. His temperament would not suffer it.
If he was not a hard student, he was, what he had always been, a
thinking man to the last."

In a published notice of Professor Shurtleff, by Professor (now
President) Brown, we find the following language:

"The life of Dr. Shurtleff extended over the largest and most
important part of that of the institution itself. For nearly twenty
years he was college preacher, and at the same time pastor of the
church on Hanover Plain,--during which period more than two hundred
persons connected themselves with the church, a large proportion of
them by original profession. In the contest of the college with the
State, he and the late venerable Professor Adams, with the president,
constituted the permanent Faculty for instruction and government. Upon
the issues then presented he exerted a full measure of influence,
though it was comparatively quiet and private.

"As a professor, Dr. Shurtleff had some remarkable qualities. He
possessed a mind of extraordinary subtleness and acuteness, ever
alert, active and ingenious. Whatever he saw, he saw distinctly, and
was able, with equal clearness, to express to another. If a student
were really perplexed, he knew how to relieve him by a pertinent
example or illustration, but it was generally done by a question or a
suggestion which demanded the activity of the student's own mind, and
disciplined while it, helped him. If a pupil, on the other hand, were
captious, or conceited, he was apt to find himself, before he
suspected it, inextricably entangled in a web of contradictions, where
he was sometimes left till he came to a sense of his weakness, or till
he was dismissed with the benign declaration that 'he might sit.'

"Dr. Shurtleff's wit was sharp and pungent, and on any occasion which
involved the exercise of it he was quite equal to his part. He
sometimes engaged in controversy, and versed as he was in all logical
art, those who encountered him once were seldom anxious to provoke a
second contest. His opinions, both religious and philosophical, were
early settled and firmly held. He was in nothing given to change; his
friends were generally the friends of his life, and those who were
familiar with his habits of thought could easily tell where, upon any
given question, he would probably be found.

"His interest in young men was a noticeable trait in Dr. Shurtleff's
character, while preacher to the college; the effect of his private
conversations and friendly advice was almost equal to that of his
public ministrations. His quiet study was often the scene of meetings
for prayer or religious conversation from which were carried away
influences for good, never to be forgotten, and for which many were
grateful to their dying day.

"The efforts of deserving young men to obtain a liberal education
always excited his sympathy, and there has seldom been a time for many
years when some such one has not been a member of his own family,
aided and encouraged by his kindness. The number thus assisted no one
can now tell, nor probably could he himself. It was greater than most
persons would think possible.

"The last twenty years of his life Dr. Shurtleff spent in dignified
retirement, in the enjoyment of a competency, and in full exercise of
his faculties. He especially enjoyed the visits of former pupils, no
one of whom seemed to be lost from his retentive memory, and the
annual commencements were always exhilarating reunions to him. His
conversation, at such times especially, abounded in anecdote and
reminiscences of earlier days, and his cheerfulness survived to the
end. He has seldom, of late years, taken part in any public service,
the last time he did so being at the meeting of the alumni of
Dartmouth in 1859, to initiate measures for properly noticing the
death of Mr. Choate."

A volume would be required to set forth adequately the value of the
public services of this distinguished educator, who acted a most
important part in strengthening the foundations and adorning the
superstructure of a leading literary institution. Professor Shurtleff
died at Hanover, February 4, 1861.




CHAPTER XXII.

PROFESSOR EBENEZER ADAMS.--PROFESSOR ZEPHANIAH S. MOORE.--PROFESSOR
CHARLES B. HADDOCK.


Professor Ebenezer Adams succeeded Professor Hubbard. From a reliable
source we have received, in substance, the following statements:

"Ebenezer Adams, the son of Ephraim and Rebecca (Locke) Adams, was
born at New Ipswich, N. H., October 2, 1765. His father was a farmer
in moderate circumstances, and having a large family of children,
nineteen in all, he could not give them many educational advantages,
but they shared in such as were commonly enjoyed in those days. The
subject of this sketch, however, earnestly desired something more; he
had set his heart upon obtaining a higher education, and ultimately
succeeded in doing so. After becoming nearly or quite of age, he
commenced preparation for Dartmouth College, which he entered in 1787,
graduating with honor in 1791, and in the following year he became
preceptor of Leicester Academy, where he remained fourteen years,
laboring faithfully and very successfully in the instruction of those
under his care. While there he married, in 1795, Miss Alice Frink, of
Rutland, Mass., who died early, leaving five young children. In 1806
he removed to Portland, where he engaged as teacher in the academy,
and it was while residing there that he came under the pastoral care
of Rev. Dr. Payson, and in a time of general revival he was deeply
interested in religious truth and became a subject of renewing grace.
He publicly professed his faith in Christ and united with Dr. Payson's
church. While there he formed a second marriage with Miss Beulah
Minot, of Concord, Mass., who became the mother of his two youngest
children, and the subsequent year he taught in Phillips Academy,
Exeter, but he did not long remain there.

"In 1809, he was called to Dartmouth College, where for one year he
was Professor of Languages, and was then transferred to the
professorship of Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, which
he held until the appointment of a successor, in 1833. As a teacher he
was faithful, patient, laborious, earnestly desiring the best good of
his pupils, whose affection he often succeeded in gaining, their
esteem always. Possessed of much intellectual force, of sound and
varied attainments in learning, which he had the happy faculty of
imparting to others clearly and distinctly, he was thus eminently
fitted for the position of instructor, so many years occupied by him.
He was truly devoted to the interests of the college, and ever ready
to make efforts and sacrifices for it, and in those dark days, when
its fate hung in suspense, he was deeply anxious, and had no small
share in aiding and sustaining it through the struggle. During
President Brown's illness, and after his death, for more than two
years in all, he filled the office of president in addition to his
own, thus having a great increase of care and responsibility, and the
same thing occurred on other occasions, when the college was
temporarily without a head. He did not enjoy the situation, for while
he truly delighted in teaching, he found the enforcement of discipline
very irksome; still he was faithful and energetic in it when it became
his duty.

"He was interested in every good cause, philanthropic and religious,
especially in the Bible Society, of which he was for many years the
presiding officer in New Hampshire; in the Colonization Society, which
he then thought the only possible agency for removing the curse of
Slavery; in Foreign Missions and in Temperance, of which he was an
earnest and able advocate. In this connection it should be mentioned
that he was Trustee and Treasurer of Kimball Union Academy, at
Meriden, almost from its first commencement until nearly the close of
his life, and in the success end prosperity of that institution he
always felt a deep interest, and labored to promote its welfare.

"After his resignation in 1833, he devoted much of his leisure to
objects of public interest, to the affairs of the town and village, in
which several important trusts were committed to him, and of the
church, in which for years he had worthily filled the office of
deacon. In these he was actively and usefully employed, even to the
last, and thus, in the unfailing resource of reading and study which
he enjoyed, in the society of attached friends, and of the dear family
circle, those closing years of his life passed away cheerfully,
happily, leaving blessed memories behind them. He was quite active in
his habits and usually of firm and vigorous health. It almost seemed
as if he had been stricken down in his full strength, so sudden and
short was his last illness. A heart-disease, of which he had suffered
some symptoms a few months before, attacked him with great violence,
and after ten days of intense suffering and distress, during which he
manifested a true submission to God's will, and a calm reliance in
Christ, his atoning Saviour, he 'fell asleep in Jesus,' August 15,
1841.

"The college, the church, the village, mourned his departure, but
nowhere was it so deeply felt as in the home which had so long been
blest with his presence and affection. For in all family relations he
was most truly kind and affectionate, in social life, genial and
friendly, especially, even to the last, delighting in little children,
and in the society of the young, generous and public-spirited, of
spotless integrity in business affairs, faithful, earnest and skillful
as a teacher, in all his ways a sincere and humble follower of the
Lord Jesus."

His associate, Professor Stowe, says:

"Professor Adams was one of the stoutest of that noble band of men who
upheld Dartmouth College in the great crisis through which it passed,
and thus established, not only the principles on which that venerable
and most useful institution maintained its existence, but gave the
foundation for permanency to all other educational institutions in our
country, for it was the decision of the Supreme Court of the United
States, in the Dartmouth College case, that became the _magna charta_
of all our colleges.

"Sailors speak of 'men who in a storm can ascend to the mast-head, and
hold on with their eyelids' while they use both hands to adjust the
rigging. Such were the men who saved Dartmouth College during that
great conflict.

"A little girl once said that if God really did make the whole
universe in six days, she should like to know what he stood on while
he was making it.

"Such a question has often occurred to me in thinking of that period
in the history of Dartmouth College. What had the champions of the
college to stand on? But they did stand, and did their work
completely, and for all time.

"Professor Adams had just the qualities for such an emergency. His was
the sturdy self-reliance, the unshrinking courage, the indomitable
perseverance, and the unwavering faith in God, which holds what it has
and carries what it holds. His was not the coward's courage, which
consists in the denying of the danger, but the courage of the brave
man, which sees the danger and faces it."

A pupil says:

"Professor Adams was 'a manly man,' well-proportioned,
broad-shouldered, with a commanding presence and amiable countenance.
He was bold, earnest, energetic, persevering; artless, and honest as
the day. He said exactly what he meant. His mental vision was clear,
strong, and accurate. Imagination was never active; oratory was not
his forte. Demonstrative evidence suited him best. In his religious
character he was conscientious, devout, and reverent, never excited
nor sentimental."



In "Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit" we find this account of
Prof. Zephaniah Swift Moore. "He was the son of Judah and Mary (Swift)
Moore, and was born at Palmer, Mass., November 20, 1770. His parents
were in the middle walks of life, and were much esteemed for their
integrity and piety. When he was seven or eight years old, he removed
with his father's family to Wilmington, Vt., where he worked upon a
farm till he was about eighteen. From his early childhood he evinced
great inquisitiveness of mind, and an uncommon thirst for knowledge;
in consequence of which, his parents consented to aid him in acquiring
a collegiate education. Having prosecuted his preparatory studies at
an academy in Bennington, Vt., he entered Dartmouth College, when he
was in his nineteenth year. He graduated in 1793, and delivered on
the occasion a philosophical oration on the 'causes and general
phenomena of earthquakes,' which was received with marked approbation.

"On leaving college, he took charge of an academy at Londonderry, N.
H., where he gained the reputation of an able and faithful teacher.
Having occupied this post for a year, he repaired to Somers, Conn.,
and commenced the study of Theology under the direction of the Rev.
Dr. Charles Backus; and, having gone through the usual course of
preparation for the ministry, was licensed to preach by a committee of
the Association of Tolland County, February 3, 1796. After preaching
to good acceptance in various places, and receiving several
invitations to a permanent settlement in the ministry, he finally
accepted a call from the Congregational church and congregation in
Leicester, Mass. Here his labors proved alike acceptable and useful.
Very considerable additions were made to the church, and the spirit
and power of religion became increasingly visible under his
ministrations. During a part of the time that he resided at Leicester,
he joined to his duties as a minister those of principal of the
Leicester Academy; and here, also, he acquitted himself with much
honor.

"In October, 1811, he accepted the chair of professor of Languages in
Dartmouth College. Here he was greatly respected as a man, a teacher,
and a preacher; and if his attainments in his department were not of
the very highest order, they were at least such as to secure both his
respectability and usefulness.

"In 1815, he was elected to the presidency of Williams College, then
vacant by the resignation of Dr. Fitch. He accepted the appointment,
and was regularly inducted into office at the annual Commencement in
September of that year. Shortly after his removal to Williamstown,
Dartmouth College, which he had just left, conferred upon him the
degree of Doctor of Divinity. He adorned this new station, as he had
done those which he had previously occupied. His connection with the
college was attended by some circumstances of peculiar embarrassment,
in consequence of an effort on the part of the Trustees to remove the
college to Northampton or some other town in Hampshire County. The
measure failed in consequence of the refusal of the Legislature to
sanction it. Dr. Moore, however, decidedly favored it from the
beginning, but in a manner that reflected not in the least upon his
Christian integrity and honor.

"In the spring of 1821, the collegiate institution at Amherst, Mass.,
having been founded, he was invited to become its President, and was
inaugurated as such in September following. The institution, then in
its infancy, and contending with a powerful public opinion, and even
with the Legislature itself, for its very existence, put in
requisition all his energies; and the ultimate success of the
enterprise was no doubt to be referred, in no small degree, to his
discreet, earnest, and untiring efforts. In addition to his
appropriate duties as president and as chairman of the Board of
Trustees, he heard the recitations of the Senior class, and part of
the recitations of the Sophomore class, besides taking occasional
agencies with a view to increase the funds of the institution. His
constitution, naturally strong, was over-taxed by the efforts which he
felt himself called to make, and had begun perceptibly to yield,
before the last violent attack of disease which terminated his life.

"On Wednesday, the 25th of June, 1823, he was seized with a bilious
colic, which reached a fatal termination on the Monday following.
During the brief period of his illness, the greatest anxiety prevailed
in the college, and unceasing prayer was offered in his behalf. His
own mind was perfectly tranquil, and he anticipated the closing scene
and passed through it without a word or look that told of
apprehension. In the very moment of breathing out his spirit, he
uttered in a whisper,--'God is my hope, my shield, my exceeding great
reward.' The funeral solemnities were attended on the Wednesday
following, and an appropriate sermon was delivered on the occasion by
the Rev. Dr. Snell, of North Brookfield.

"Dr. Moore lived to celebrate the first anniversary of the
institution, and to see more than eighty of its students professedly
religious, and preparing for extensive usefulness among their fellow
men.

"Shortly after his settlement at Leicester, he was married to Phebe,
daughter of Thomas Drury, of Ward, now Auburn, Mass., who survived
him. They had no children.

"Dr. Moore published an Oration at Worcester on the 5th of July, 1802;
Massachusetts Election Sermon, 1818; an Address to the public in
respect to Amherst College, 1823; a Sermon at the ordination of Dorus
Clark, Blandford, 1823."


FROM THE REV. EMERSON DAVIS, D.D.

    "Westfield, Mass., November 16, 1849.

"Dear Sir: You have requested me to give you my impressions and
recollections of President Moore. They are all exceedingly pleasant,
and yet I must say he was a man of such equanimity of temper and
uniformity of life, that I am unable to single out one act or saying
of his that produced a deeper impression than others.

"My first introduction to him was in the spring of 1818, when I was
ushered into his study with a letter of recommendation for admission
to Williams College. It was to me a fearful moment, but the cordial
manner in which I was received, and his kind inquiries after his
friend who had furnished me with a letter, made me at once easy in his
presence. I found that he had the heart of a man, and through an
acquaintance of several years, to the time of his death, he manifested
the same kindness and cordiality that he did the first time I saw him.

"He was a man of medium stature, rather corpulent, his complexion
sallow, the top of his head nearly bald, there being a slight
sprinkling of hair between the forehead and crown. His voice, though
not loud, was clear and pleasant, and in animated conversation and in
the pulpit pitched upon the tenor key.

"He was dignified in his appearance, serious in his aspect,
instructive and agreeable in his conversation, kind and benevolent in
his feelings, modest and unassuming in his manners, deliberate and
cautious in coming to a conclusion, but firm and determined when his
position was taken. If a student had at any time spoken against him,
he would have been regarded as a rebel against law and order. In
managing cases of discipline, he was calm and entirely self-possessed.

In preaching, he had very little action; and yet there was an
impressiveness in his manner that fixed the attention of his hearers.
In the more animated parts of his discourse, his utterance became
more rapid, and the sound of his voice shrill and tremulous, showing
that he felt deeply the force of the sentiments he uttered. In his
religious views, I know not that he differed from the great mass of
the orthodox clergy of New England, of his day.

"Such are my recollections of President Moore.

    "Yours truly,
    "Emerson Davis."

The following tribute to one of Dartmouth's most eminent and honored
teachers is from a "Discourse" by Professor (now President) Brown.

"Charles Bricket Haddock was born in that part of Salisbury, N. H.,
which is now Franklin, June 20, 1796. His mother was Abigail Webster,
an older sister of Ezekiel and Daniel Webster. She had two children,
Charles and William. She was a person of uncommon excellence and
loveliness, a favorite with her brothers, who always spoke of her with
great affection. She was a religious woman, and on her death-bed
manifested great solicitude for her sons, especially dedicating the
oldest, Charles, to the Christian ministry. This expression of feeling
was almost the only recollection which Mr. Haddock had of his mother.

"The place of his birth was retired, but full of rural beauty; the
rushing Merrimac-making sweet music of a summer evening, the broad
intervals basking in the summer sun, the granite mountains 'dumbly
keeping watch all round,' from whose summits, looking almost to the
White Hills on one side, and almost to the sea on the other, you would
behold a landscape picturesque and lovely beyond the power of
description. The quiet scenes of his youth, the simple pleasures, and
the common amusements of village life, varied with few excitements,
could not have been without their effect upon the mind of a sensitive
boy. To what age he was left to these alone, I do not know.

"He fitted for college mainly at the academy in Salisbury, and entered
in 1812. Nature had done more for him than his instructors, and he
very soon took the position, which he ever maintained, as intellectual
leader in a class, which, though small, numbered among its members
several young men of distinguished ability. In that little community
he was at once the best scholar and the most popular man. 'In looks,'
writes one of his class-mates,[41] 'Haddock was decidedly the most
striking man in the class. He was tall and well-proportioned. He had
an intellectual cast of features, a well-chiseled profile,--and
altogether you might pronounce him a man intended for a scholar, and
destined, if he lived, to make his mark in the world. I, who entered
college a mere boy, singled him out the first day. He was always an
industrious student. He never failed of a recitation, so far as I can
remember, and he never failed to be prepared for it.'

      [41] Professor Torrey, of Burlington.

"Adding thus to the distinction of attainment and scholarship so much
beauty of person, so much modesty, gentleness, and propriety of
demeanor, it was natural that he should be regarded as a model young
man, nor was there wanting that profounder moral element, without
which no character can be complete.

"The year 1815 was memorable in the religious history of the college.
The period immediately preceding had been marked by unusual religious
depression. In some classes only one person, and but a few in any of
them, made profession of a serious religious purpose. Of this small
number, there were some, however, whose feelings were deep, and whose
lives were exemplary. To them,--not more, perhaps, than eight or ten
in all,--was due, under the Divine favor, the moral regeneration of
the college. First among those who, in that 'Great awakening,' avowed
his purpose of a new life, was Mr. Haddock, then in the summer of his
Junior year. The avowal was open, unreserved, and decisive, and, it is
almost unnecessary to add, produced a strong sensation. From that time
no one in college exerted a more positive influence in favor of
personal religion, and not a few traced their own most serious
thoughts to his example and to his faithfulness.

"This change in his feelings naturally determined his course in life,
and immediately after taking his first degree he entered the seminary
at Andover as a student in Theology. Here he pursued the profound and
difficult studies of his profession with a more than ordinary breadth
of scholarship, mingling classical and literary studies with those of
theology, but entering with zeal and a chastened enthusiasm into all
the duties and requirements of the place.

"He remained at Andover about two years, when, on account of a
threatened pulmonary complaint, he made a journey to the South, going
as far as Savannah, and spending the winter in various parts of the
Southern States. Having performed a considerable part of the tour on
horseback, he returned, in 1819, invigorated in health, and with a
mind enlarged and liberalized by what were then quite unusual
opportunities of observation and society, and was at once appointed to
the newly established chair of Rhetoric, at the early age of
twenty-three years. The college had but just gained the victory in its
desperate struggle for existence. It was poor, but hopeful, and it
moved forward with a policy of enlargement, determined to keep pace
with all advancing learning and culture.

"Before that time, the duties of the new department had been
distributed among all the college officers, and necessarily must have
lacked something in fullness and method. No other New England college,
except Harvard and Yale, then possessed such an officer, and the first
appointment to the post in New Haven bears date but two years
earlier."

"As an instructor, Professor Haddock was one of the best I ever knew.
I never knew a better. It is with unfeigned gratitude that I remember
my obligations to him, and I know I speak for thousands. As a critic,
he was discriminating and quietly suggestive, guided by a taste that
was nearly immaculate. His scholarship was unobtrusive, and his manner
without ostentation. He made no pretense of knowledge, but it was
always sufficient, always fresh, always sound. The range of his
thought was broad. His mind was versatile and active. You could hardly
find a subject with which he was not somewhat familiar, or in which he
would not readily become interested. His opinions were never
fantastic, nor exaggerated, nor disproportioned. He was not, perhaps,
so exacting nor so stimulating a teacher as some, but he was careful,
clear, distinct, and encouraging. He saw the difficulty in the mind
of the pupil, if there was one, adapted himself with admirable
facility to his wants, and by a lucid statement, a test question, or a
distinct suggestion, would often free a subject from its obscurity, so
that the way would all be in clear sunlight. He felt that, in
education, the best results are not produced violently, but by
influences quiet and protracted, gradually, but potently, moulding the
affections and the life, 'finely touching the spirit to fine issues.'"

"In 1846, Professor Haddock published a volume of 'Addresses and
Miscellaneous Writings,' gathered from reviews, and from his speeches
before the New Hampshire Legislature, and on various public occasions.
These are marked by the peculiar completeness and finish which
characterized all his productions. There is in them no superfluous
word, no affectation, no straining after effect, but much that is wise
and everything that is tasteful. Yet, interesting as they are, I
hardly feel as if they give an adequate expression of his rich and
varied abilities. His more recent writings,--notes of foreign travels,
lectures, and discourses,--he had begun to prepare for the press, when
he was so suddenly taken from us, and I am glad to hope that some of
them may yet see the light.

"For many years Professor Haddock acted as secretary of the New
Hampshire Education Society. In discharge of the duties of this
office, sometimes little more than a sinecure, he made it an object to
bring before the society, in his annual reports, subjects of permanent
interest. In looking them over, I perceive such topics as these:
'Objections to Charitable Education,' 'The Standard of Education for
the Pulpit,' 'The Influence of Educated Mind,' 'Personal
Qualifications for the Pulpit,' 'Manual Labor Institutions,' 'The
Clergy the Natural Advisers of Young Men,' 'Personal Piety in
Candidates for the Christian Ministry,' 'Wisdom in Clergymen,' 'The
Eloquence of the Pulpit as affected by Ministerial Character.' These
addresses, somewhat brief, never impassioned, are full of excellent
suggestions, both to the laity and the clergy. They abound in
practical wisdom, and any one may read them with profit.

"In all his writings his style was unambitious, unaffected, chaste,
pure, and transparent as crystal. It was true to his subject and
himself. If not fervid and vehement, it was because of his moderation
and self-restraint; if not pungent and dogmatic, it was marked by
sustained earnestness and finished beauty. If he had not predominantly
that power which is called by the older rhetoricians amplification, he
eminently had another, as rarely met with in perfection, the power of
exact, unincumbered, logical statement. There was sometimes in him a
reticence as admirable as it was unique. You wondered why he did not
say more, and yet if he had, it would only have injured the effect.
The word exactly fitted the sentiment. The idea was insphered in the
expression. There was no excess or extravagance in anything he did or
said. His thoughts glided softly and sweetly from his pen, as a
rivulet from a silver fountain.

"I have sometimes thought that Professor Haddock's intellectual powers
were nowhere displayed to more advantage than in the mingled grave and
gay, learned and mirthful intercourse of social life. The very tones
of his voice, sympathetic and attractive, the absence of dogmatism, or
superciliousness, or self-assertion,--the mingled deference and
independence, the clear and sustained thought, the ready insight, the
quick apprehension of proprieties, the intelligent, dexterous, but
never caustic reply, the sure appreciation of the feelings of others,
and the power of making them, even the lowliest, feel that what they
said was listened to with interest,--the sense of the droll and
ludicrous, the responsive laughter, not boisterous, but hearty,
bringing tears into the eyes,--all gave a peculiar charm to this form
of intercourse. It was a ministry of beneficence, diffusing kindness,
intelligence, and gentleness, enlivening many a dull hour, filling
many a vacant mind, and inspiring many a worthy purpose.

"'Great openness and candor, good sense, the reading of a scholar, the
originality of a man who sometimes thought for himself, aspirations
after excellence much higher than those of many others,--all these
traits came out in his familiar talks, in which he rather unbent than
exerted himself; at the same time he was as gentle and attentive a
listener as a man could wish, a truly sociable being, with whom you
could talk all day, and then all night, and never feel weary.'[42]

      [42] Professor Torrey.

"In 1850, he received from Mr. Fillmore the appointment of _Chargé
d'Affaires_ at the court of Portugal, and in the spring of 1851 sailed
for Lisbon, by way of England. I have the best means of knowing that,
while at Lisbon, his intercourse and influence with the Court, and
with the representatives of all the great powers, was most acceptable
and most salutary. His residence in Portugal was in many ways
delightful. The delicious climate, the cultivated and refined society
of the diplomatic circle, temporary rest from labor, and change of
scene and occupations, were all sources of pleasure. Yet here he was
touched by one of his deepest sorrows, for at Lisbon, November, 1851,
'by the side of Philip Doddridge, in the English cemetery,' he buried
his youngest son, a beautiful boy of eleven years.

"He returned from Portugal early in 1856, after an absence of nearly
four years; and, having previously terminated his connection with the
college, spent the remainder of his life at West Lebanon."

Prof. N. S. Folsom says:

"Professor Haddock was the 'orator suavi loquenti ore,' and he was
much more than this. Both by precept and example he raised the
standard of speaking and writing among the students, and stimulated
them to the pursuit of a manly eloquence. There also prevailed a very
general conviction of his sincerity and moral earnestness, and of his
interest in our successful career in life. The themes he gave led us
to discriminate both intellectually and morally, and if he thought the
theme worthily treated, a kind note in the margin of the sheet was
sure to tell us so. The spirit in which he met the class was that of
the closing paragraph in his Phi Beta Kappa Oration of 1825: 'Young
men of my country, God has given you a noble theatre, and called you
into life at the most interesting of all times. Forget not that you
are descendants of men who solemnly dedicated themselves and their
posterity through all coming time to the cause of free and enlightened
reason--unrestricted divine reason--the portion inscribed on our
hearts of the universal law, 'whose seat is the bosom of God, her
voice the harmony of the world.' Occasionally he preached in the
Hanover village church, where the students attended. He never had so
much as a scrap of any notes before him; and this was his habit also
at White River, where he steadily officiated. I need not add that the
students always were greatly delighted when they had the privilege to
hear him. Every discourse was as complete as though it had been
carefully written and committed to memory; but evidently his was no
_memoriter_ preaching. One sermon I particularly remember, delivered
early in March, 1826, from the words, 'If this counsel or this work be
of men it will come to nought, but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow
it; lest haply ye be found fighting against God.' (Acts v. 38, 39.) No
discourse I had ever heard in my whole life before surpassed this in
eloquence and weight of sentiment; none even from Dr. Tyler was more
magnetic, more persuasive to right action on the part of an already
awakened conscience, or put the soul more directly in an attitude in
which it would be naturally drawn towards what is true and best. My
recollection of the feeling of the students toward him is, that he
was, on the whole, not inferior in popularity with them to any other
member of the Faculty. There is no man I could name so absolutely
faultless, as he seemed to us young men of that period. I am not sure
that his prestige and charm were not increased by the faultlessness of
his dress, and by the manifestations of the becoming in personal
appearance,--a well-known trait of his great kinsman, Daniel Webster,
whom he not distantly resembled also in features, port, and step, and
in distinct, measured utterance. Not that he in the least consciously
imitated him, but there was the natural growth into the likeness of
the object of his admiration; and there was, as in Mr. Webster,
absolutely no affectation, nor sign of overmuch thought about raiment,
nor vestige of anything like conscious, personal display."

A later pupil says:

"As a teacher Professor Haddock was remarkable for his dignity and
refinement. His presence among young men was always sufficient to
maintain perfect order and decorum. The true gentleman beamed forth
from every feature and spoke in every tone of his voice. With apparent
ease, he chained the attention of the most thoughtless to the most
abstruse and uninviting topics. The deep things of Logic and
Psychology he handled so adroitly, and presented so tastefully, as to
give them a charm, indeed, a fascination.

"In the recitation room his words were few, but his statements were so
clear and so elegantly expressed, that what the student had been able
to learn only partially or obscurely from the book was now fully
comprehended and securely treasured by the memory. The students were
never willingly absent, for it was always a delight to listen to his
instructions, and a failure to be present was counted an irreparable
loss, inasmuch as the teacher always seemed greater than the
text-book.

"It is hardly necessary to say that the influence of such a man was an
important factor in the last two years of our college life. His noble
bearing, his handsome face, his impressive manner, his uniform
kindness and courtesy, and, especially, his manifest appreciation of
young men who were struggling against heavy obstacles in their course
of study, will never be forgotten by those who were so fortunate as to
be under his tuition. Nor can it be doubted that the power of his
refined intellect and taste has been felt in many places where his
name has never been heard."

Professor Haddock married, first, Susan Saunders, daughter of Richard
Lang, of Hanover; second, Mrs. Caroline (Kimball) Young, daughter of
Richard Kimball, of Lebanon, N. H. He died at West Lebanon, N. H.,
January 15, 1861.




CHAPTER XXIII.

PROFESSOR WILLIAM CHAMBERLAIN.--PROFESSOR DANIEL OLIVER.--PROFESSOR
JAMES FREEMAN DANA.


William Chamberlain, the successor of Professor Moore in the chair of
Languages, was the son of General William and Jane (Eastman)
Chamberlain, and was born at Peacham, Vt., May 24, 1797. From a
reliable source we have the following account of him:

Perhaps there is on record no more worthy and comprehensive testimony
to his character and his work than the few lines which the late
President Lord furnished for the inscription on his tombstone. They
read:

"William Chamberlain, Jr., A. M., Professor of Languages in Dartmouth
College. A man of strong intellect, distinguished literary
attainments, and moral worth.

"He added respectability to the institution, by prudence, efficiency,
and a well-earned reputation; and contributed largely to promote its
interests. By disinterested and unwearied labors, with fidelity in all
his relations, beloved and honored, he filled up the measure of a
short but useful life, and died with humble confidence in the Divine
mercy, through the atonement of Jesus Christ, July 11, 1830, aged 33."

He gave to the college for ten years the unremitting labor of his
life, and we may say his life itself. To his abundant and complete
work as a teacher he added the labor of overseeing the material
affairs of the college,--a labor devolved upon him, perhaps, on
account of his superior executive ability.

Thus he superintended the building of Thornton and Wentworth Halls,
and employed his vacations, and particularly the long winter
vacation, in travelling over what was then the wilderness of northern
New Hampshire and Vermont, in care of the wild lands belonging to the
college. Stricken with pneumonia on one of these journeys,--he would
not wait for a complete convalescence before returning to duty,--his
malady assumed the chronic form, and terminated his life in about six
months after its first invasion.

The influences of his early life were such as may well have conduced
to a broad and strong character.

His mother belonged to a family long identified with the early history
of southern New Hampshire.

His father, General William Chamberlain, after serving in the armies
of the Revolution, became a pioneer settler of northern Vermont, where
he acquired a handsome estate and a prominent public position. He
became Lieutenant Governor of the State, and represented it in
Congress for several terms. Among his public services may be mentioned
his care for the Caledonia County Grammar School, where his sons were
fitted for college. This school was at that time taught by Ezra
Carter, a man greatly respected for his attainments and dignity of
character.

Thus the future professor grew up amid the versatile life of the
frontier, surrounded by the contests and traditions of public service.

Distinguished for scholarship in college, a bold but prudent leader
among his classmates in their conflicts with the University,[43]
immediately after graduation he became the preceptor of Moors Charity
School, and a year later entered, as a student of law, the office of
Daniel Webster in Boston. Thence, in his twenty-fourth year he was
recalled to the college as professor of Languages, and in the ordinary
and extraordinary service of the institution he was intensely occupied
for the remainder of his short life.

      [43] The Rev. Daniel Lancaster, of the Class of 1821, supplies the
           following recollections of the assault upon the college
           libraries, made by a band of towns-people, under the guidance
           of Professors Carter and Dean of the University. They had
           forced the doors only to find that the books had already been
           removed, and themselves thus inclosed, the prisoners of the
           college students, led, among others, by senior Chamberlain.
           Mr. Lancaster continues: "Having stationed three or four of
           his classmates at the door of the library to prevent ingress
           or egress, he ascended a few steps on the flight of steps
           leading to the next floor, and called the excited throng to
           order. He then spoke in substance as follows: 'Fellow
           students, we are in the midst of a desperate emergency. The
           door of our library has been demolished. The vandals have
           entered and taken possession, but we have met the enemy. They
           are our prisoners and the library is safe. I have come from
           the president, who wishes me to say to you that he is
           confident you will conduct yourselves as gentlemen--using no
           violence or insult--in all the arrangements to be adopted,
           until order and quiet are restored.'

           "He then proceeded to marshal them in two files, beginning at
           the door of the library, and extending down stairs to the
           lower floor, through which files the University professors
           were conducted, each under escort of three students, to
           their homes."

           General H. K. Oliver, of Massachusetts, a member of the then
           Senior class, gives substantially the same account. He adds:

           "Having released the roughs on condition of good behavior,
           we exacted a promise of the learned professors of Mathematics
           and Dead Languages, 'that they would do so no more.'
           Classmates Fox, Shirley, and I then escorted Professor Carter
           home. Dean was escorted by Crosby (Hon. Nathan Crosby) and
           others. He (Carter) was very polite to us, invited us in, and
           treated us with wine and cake."

A life so brief and active leaves behind it little but its example.
Yet I shall venture to extract a few paragraphs from an address
delivered by him on the 4th of July, 1826, the end of the first half
century of our national life.

Remembering that they were written at a period before the great
problems which have since controlled our history were recognized or
appreciated among the people at large, they will be found to indicate
a moral tone and a political prescience quite remarkable in a young
man of twenty-eight years.

... "I have already alluded to it as the first of the appropriate
duties of this day, to turn to Heaven in the exercise of devout
gratitude, and render thanksgiving and praise to Him who was the God
of our fathers in the day of their trial; who gave to them and has
continued to us a fairer portion than was ever allotted to any other
people. Is there one in this consecrated temple of the Almighty who
would not join in the offering? I know it is unusual to dwell long
upon such considerations at a time like this, but surely, if there
ever were a call for a nation's gratitude to God, and ever a proper
occasion for expressing it, we are the people in whose hearts that
emotion should be deep and permanent, and this is a time to give it
utterance."...

"We must do all in our power to promote liberal feelings among the
several communities and sections of our federal republic, so as to
preserve inviolate the Union of the States. Were this Union now in
danger, it would call forth a more authoritative voice than mine; yet
it may be in danger before the close of another half century. I will
only speak my own conviction, that the States cannot be separated
without the destruction of the country. They lie together on the bosom
of this vast continent, a protection and an ornament, each to the
other, and all to each, like the gems on the breast-plate of the
Jewish Hierarch, indicative of the union of the Tribes, mutually
lending and receiving lustre."...

"We must root out from among ourselves the institution of domestic
slavery, or, before the close of another half century, we may have to
abide the consequences of a servile war. In effecting this
all-important object, we must indeed proceed gradually, temperately,
in the observance of all good faith and good feeling toward the people
of that portion of our Union on which the curse was entailed by the
colonial policy of the mother country.

"It is a work which demands the full concurrence of all the States,
and, sooner or later, it must be accomplished. Common sense will not
cease to upbraid us with inconsistency, humanity will not be
satisfied, nor Heaven fully propitiated, while we hold up boastfully
in one hand this declaration, affirming that "all men are created
equal," and grasp with the other the manacles and the scourge.

"Whatever may have been inferred by reason from a difference of
physical attributes, and whatever may have been forced by criticism
out of the word of God, the traffic in human flesh is _contraband_ by
the law of Nature written in our hearts, and _forbidden_ by the whole
tenor and spirit of the religion revealed in the Gospel.

"Even in the darker and imperfect dispensation of the ancient Jews,
every fiftieth year, at least, brought freedom to _all_ the
inhabitants of the land. It is almost needless to say, that, if he who
first procured the slave and brought him hither had no right to do so,
then neither could he who bought him acquire a rightful ownership.
There is no _property_ to a private man in the life or the natural
faculties of another; no right can accrue by purchase, or vest by
possession, and no inheritance on either side descend. A title, which
by its very nature was void from the beginning, can never be made
good; a dominion which Heaven never gave, must be perpetuated, if at
all, by means which it will never sanction."...

Surely, the trumpet of this youth gave no "uncertain sound."

    "One blast upon that bugle horn.
    Were worth ten thousand men."

To the recognition of such qualities it was due, probably, that in
1829 he was called to New York city to assume the editorship of a
journal ("Journal of Commerce") founded by an association of
gentlemen, and which afterwards exerted great influence upon public
opinion. He declined the offer, unwilling to leave his Alma Mater at a
critical epoch in her history. He stayed by her to die in her service.

His widow, Mrs. Sarah L. (Gilman) Chamberlain, daughter of Dr. Joseph
Gilman, of Wells, Me., and niece of Mrs. President Brown, survived him
twenty years, residing at Hanover. The memory of her moral,
intellectual, and social worth is warmly cherished by all who knew
her.

Mr. Lancaster adds: "Professor Chamberlain was tall, erect, square
built, well-proportioned, and of graceful mien and bearing,--such a
man as the eye could rest upon with pleasure. His voice was clear,
sonorous, yet smooth and agreeable."

Professor Folsom says:

"Professor Chamberlain, the youngest member of the Faculty, who was
only twenty-three years old when, in 1820, he entered on his
professorship of the Latin and Greek Languages and Literature, and
only thirty-three when he died, was much admired and loved and
reverenced by many of us. To myself, whenever I think of Dartmouth,
his image invariably appears, and he stands out among the objects
presenting themselves second only to that of Dr. Tyler, as the latter
appeared when at his best and noblest in the pulpit. It was indeed in
that same pulpit, and before I came under his instruction, that I
first heard him, when he delivered an oration on the Fourth of July
in the year 1826. It was to a crowded audience, filling the floor and
the galleries. I doubt whether there is one survivor of that number,
whether student or townsman, from whose recollection can have faded
away the image of the orator, his form and attitude, his voice and
action, and some of his thrilling words, especially when he described
the nation holding in one hand the Declaration of Independence which
proclaims human equality, and with the other grasping the manacles and
scourge to torture millions of human beings bought and sold, and
compelled to labor in slavery.

Professor Chamberlain took charge of the Class of 1828 in Latin and
Greek when they entered on their Junior year. As soon as our class met
him in the east recitation-room--he being seated at a small table on
his left, and the class in lines of a half-parallelogram extending on
the right and in front of him--we felt that we had come under a noble
teacher. Some of us who loved the languages that he taught, and also
had become acquainted with the best of the upper classes, carried with
us none other than very high anticipations of a most profitable and
pleasant term of study. And so it proved. How he used to electrify us
at times by repeating something that had just been recited, as at the
close of the Agricola of Tacitus, his strongly marked face all lighted
up, new significance and something like inspiration being given us,
when with his deliberate, distinct, emphatic, rhythmical, rich
utterance, flowed out that prophetic sentence in the world's
literature, 'Quidquid ex Agricola amavimus, quidquid mirati sumus,
manet mansurumque in animis hominum, in aeternitate temporum, in fama
rerum!'

"I remember that while my class were in the Oedipus Tyrannus of
Sophocles and the Medea of Euripides, I was suffering from weak eyes,
and went to the recitation-room with no other preparation than that of
hearing each lesson twice read to me by two different students, who
did me the kindness to perform that service. But with Professor
Chamberlain's luminous explanation and comment, no Greek of my whole
college course more deeply interested and helped me.

"He heard the rehearsal of my Commencement oration, and some of his
words on that occasion I have not ceased to remember with gratitude.
Nor was I the only one who received from him words of encouragement
that proved of most valuable service in our subsequent career. Still
it was the _moral_ element that constituted his highest power of
influencing young men, and was his distinguishing personality. May I
say, for one, that in this moral and spiritual personality he has
again and again come to me since his departure, and been a present
helper toward whatever of good I have attained in life.

"A single anecdote will serve to illustrate the _love_ with which his
pupils cherish his memory. I cannot but think that every survivor of
my class must have some recollection of the fact, and share all my
feelings in regard to it. He had been occasionally late at recitation,
and the class, to give him a lesson of promptness, one morning having
assembled as usual after service in chapel, and waited some four
minutes past the hour, carried the vote to go to our rooms; and so,
the professor just turning the corner, and hastening up the slope, and
his approach being announced by some on the lookout, we dashed out,
through the rear doors, or up the stairways, and not a solitary member
of the class remained in the room. The next morning he was already
there when we reached the place, made no remark on the occurrence of
the previous day, and none of us could discern in him the faintest
trace of displeasure. When, two years after we graduated, I heard of
his death, I remembered a slight, hacking cough which he had, and that
slightly bent, spare, though large and tall frame, and always placid
face, and realized for the first time that what we imputed to him as a
fault was the hindrance of disease, and possibly of sleepless nights;
and I would have given a world for an opportunity to ask his
forgiveness."[44]

      [44] The writer did not know until a few years ago that he was
           related, though somewhat distantly, to the wife of Professor
           Chamberlain. He was personally acquainted with her from his
           Sophomore year. He then boarded and roomed at Mrs. President
           Brown's (Mrs. C.'s aunt). Her paternal great-grandfather,
           Rev. Nicholas Gilman, of Durham, N. H., and the writer's
           paternal great-grandfather (as well as maternal
           great-great-grandfather), Dr. Josiah Gilman, of Exeter,
           N. H., were brothers. He has felt, ever since he knew this
           fact, like having a clearer right of inheritance in Professor
           Chamberlain.

Another pupil says of Professor Chamberlain:

"He was well-proportioned, tall, active, and energetic. His expression
was dignified and commanding. In his word there was power. Integrity
marked all his life. His word was as good as his bond. His principles
were firmly grasped and implicitly followed. His intellectual powers
were of a high order. He impressed every acquaintance with his
intellectual greatness. His discourse was lofty but impressive.

"His religious life was less marked in public. He united with no
church, though he was a man of prayer and from his dying bed sent a
religious message to the students."



From a reliable source we have the following notice of another of
Dartmouth's eminent and honored teachers:

Daniel Oliver, whose name appears on the list of teachers of past
years in both the Medical and Academical departments of Dartmouth
College, was born on the 9th of September, 1787. He was the third son
of the Rev. Thomas Fitch Oliver, at that time rector of St. Michael's,
Marblehead, and belonged to a family distinguished in the history of
Massachusetts from the earliest period of the colony. He was a direct
descendant of Mr. Thomas Oliver, whom Winthrop calls "an experienced
and very skilful surgeon," and who acted as one of the ruling elders
of the church in Boston soon after his arrival in 1632. Through his
mother he was descended from William Pynchon, one of the founders of
the Massachusetts Colony, and the Rev. William Hubbard, the historian
of New England; and, through his paternal grandmother he was a
descendant of the Rev. John Eliot, the noted Indian missionary.

After the death of his father, which took place at Garrison Forest,
near Baltimore, before he had attained his tenth year, he was placed
in the care of Colonel Lloyd Rogers, of that city, and almost
immediately commenced his preparatory course for college, applying
himself to his studies with great diligence, and entered. Harvard
College in 1802. Although fond of study, and possessed of a mind of
unusual vigor and brilliancy, the ambitions of college life do not
seem to have dimmed the memories of his forest home in the South, and
in his letters, while at Cambridge, he more than once recalls the
pleasant hours when living within its shades, in a strain at once
suggestive of a refined and poetic nature.

To one of his thoughtful and contemplative mind it is not strange
that, suddenly transferred from the quiet of home life to the turmoil
of college scenes, he should have found much that was distasteful; and
the following extract from a letter to him from the late Mr. Justice
Story, at that time betrothed to his eldest sister, and with whom he
was on terms of intimacy, would seem to imply no little disquietude on
the part of his student friend during the earlier years of his life at
Cambridge.

"You can hardly imagine with what delight I recur to the days which I
spent at Cambridge. In the delightful seclusion from noisy vulgarity,
in the sweet interchange of kind sentiments, and in the mutual
competition of classic pursuits, I possessed a unity and tranquillity
of purpose far beyond the merits of my later years. My first years
there were not marked with this peculiar character. It was in my
Junior and Senior years that, from forming a choice of friends, and
participating in the higher views of literature, I felt that happiness
resulted in the activity of intellect and possession of friendship.
That period will in future be yours; and though you may start with
surprise at the thought at this moment, that period will be marked out
in the calendar of your years as among the _dies fortunatos_. You and
I are not widely distinct in years, and you can therefore readily
believe that this attachment is not the moral relation of comparison
and experience; no, it was reality which charmed me when present, and
reflects a lustre in remembrance. Go on, then, my dear fellow, in the
academic course with awakened hope. A high destiny awaits you. The
joys of youth shall give spirit to the exertions of manhood, and the
pursuits of literature yield a permanent felicity attainable only by
the votaries of taste. Sweet are the attainments which accomplish the
wishes of friends. Our reliance upon you is founded on a belief that
ambition and literature will unite us in as close bonds as sympathy
and affinity.

"On a subject so interesting to me as my collegiate course I seldom
reflect without melancholy; not a harsh and dark brooding, but a soft
and tender pensiveness which

    "'Sheds o'er the soul a sympathetic gloom.'

"The thousand associations of festivity, pleasantry, study, and
recreation live to hallow the whole. The picture, by its distance,
loses its defects, and retains only the strong colorings of primitive
impression. Never do I cast my eyes on that dear seat of letters but I
exclaim involuntarily with Gray:

    "'Ah! happy fields, ah! pleasing shade,
        Ah! groves beloved in vain,
    Where once my careless childhood strayed,
        A stranger yet to pain;
    I feel the gales that round ye blow
        A momentary bliss bestow.'

"By the way, when you are at leisure and feel a little dull, I advise
you to take up some of our good-natured writers, such as Dr. Moore,
Goldsmith, Coleman, Cervantes, Don Quixote, Smollett's novels, or the
pleasant and airy productions of the muse. These I have always found a
powerful anti-splenetic; and, although I am not a professed physician,
I will venture to prescribe to you in this instance with all the
confidence of Hippocrates. The whole system of nostrums from that
arch-quack, the old serpent, down to the far-famed Stoughton of our
own day, does not present so powerful a remedy, amid all its _antis_,
as cheerful reading to a heavy spirit. I will venture to say, in the
spirit of Montesquieu, that an hour of such reading will place one
quietly in his elbow chair in all the tranquillity of a Platonic
lover."

It is probable that Mr. Story's influence was not without its effect
in reconciling his young friend to college life, for he was very soon
to be found among the foremost in the race for honorable distinction.
He was graduated with distinguished honor, in 1806, in a class of
remarkable ability, among whom were the late Hon. Alexander Everett,
Judge William P. Preble, Professor J. G. Cogswell, and the venerable
Dr. Jacob Bigelow, its last surviving member.

After leaving college he began the study of law under the direction of
Mr. Story, but very soon abandoned it, and entered the office of his
uncle, the late Dr. B. Lynde Oliver, of Salem, as a student of
medicine. In 1809, he entered the University of Pennsylvania, at that
time distinguished by the names of Rush, Wistar, and Physick, and by
his talents and attainments soon attracted the notice of Dr. Rush,
whose favorite pupil and warm friend he afterwards became. On
receiving his medical degree, the following letter, written in terms
of the highest compliment, was addressed by Dr. Rush to his uncle and
former instructor.

    "Philadelphia, May 1, 1810.

"Dear Sir: I sit down with great pleasure to answer your letter by
your nephew, now Dr. Oliver, and to inform you at the same time that
he has received the honor of a doctor's degree in our university much
to his credit and the satisfaction of his teachers. From his singular
talents, and from his acquirements and manners, he cannot fail of
becoming eminent in his profession. Long, very long, may he live to
reflect honor upon all who are related to him, or who have been
instrumental in opening and directing his acute and capacious mind in
the prosecution of his studies! Be assured he carries with him my
highest respect and sincere affection.

"With respectful compliments to the venerable patriarch of medicine,
Dr. Holyoke (if not translated to a better world),

    "I am, dear sir, very sincerely yours,
    "Benjamin Rush.
    "Dr. B. Lynde Oliver."

On his return to Salem, Dr. Oliver commenced the practice of medicine,
and in July, 1811, as appears from his diary, he connected himself
with Dr. R. D. Mussey, then a rising young surgeon, and with whom he
was afterwards so long associated. From the following entry in the
diary referred to, under date of July 12, 1812, may be learned
somewhat of his tastes at this time, and his mode of passing the
waiting hours of an early professional life:

"This day completed the first year of my connection in the medical
profession with Dr. R. D. Massey. On reviewing this period, I am
sensible of a great loss of time, and of a degree of professional and
literary improvement altogether inadequate to such an extent of time.
Some improvement, however, has I hope, been made. With respect to the
books which I have read during the past year, the most important are
Mosheim's 'Ecclesiastical History,' which I have not yet quite
completed,--a learned and judicious outline of the history of the
church, embracing many collateral topics of learning and
philosophy ...; Homer's 'Iliad' in Greek, with the exception of
the last book; the 'Æneid' except the last two; two or three books
of Livy, and several of Juvenal's 'Satires.'

"The most important literary enterprise which I have undertaken and
accomplished has been the delivery of a course of lectures on
Chemistry in connection with Dr. Mussey. In Anatomy, also, we have
executed something. Medicine will, in future, claim more of my
attention, but not to the neglect of the two important collateral
branches above mentioned."

In the autumn of 1815, Dr. Oliver was appointed to deliver a course of
chemical lectures before the medical class at Dartmouth College.
Although he had thus far pursued the study of chemistry as a
collateral branch of medical science, he felt warranted in accepting
the appointment, without, however, proposing to himself a more
permanent position in this department.

In 1817, he was married to Miss Mary Robinson Pulling, the only
daughter of Edward Pulling, Esq., an eminent barrister of Salem, and
almost immediately went again to Philadelphia to avail himself of the
advantages of that seat of medical learning, returning to Salem in the
spring of 1818.

In the following year he was induced to undertake, in connection with
the Hon. John Pickering, the preparation of a Greek lexicon, a work
involving much labor and research, and the larger portion of which
fell to his lot. Although mainly based on the Latin of Schrevelius,
many of the interpretations were new, and there were added more than
two thousand new articles. The magnitude of the task and its
successful accomplishment at once raised him to a conspicuous rank
among the scholars of his day.

In the summer of 1820 he accepted an appointment to the professorship
of the Theory and Practice of Medicine, and of Materia Medica and
Therapeutics in Dartmouth College, where he delivered his first course
of lectures in the following autumn. He was also made Professor of
Botany, and his lectures upon Physiology were among his most valuable
contributions to medical literature. He took up his permanent
residence in Hanover, in August, 1821, and from this time to the close
of his connection with the college he was most faithful to all its
interests. In 1825 he was appointed to the chair of Intellectual
Philosophy in the Academical department of the college, a position
which he filled with the ability that distinguished him elsewhere. The
address delivered by him on the occasion of his induction into this
professorship, upon the "Comparative Importance of the Study of Mental
Science," was thus far, perhaps, his most successful literary effort.
Clear, comprehensive, and abounding in passages of remarkable beauty
and force, it established the reputation of its author both as a
writer and a metaphysician.

In 1835 was published his "First Lines in Physiology," a treatise
which received the highest commendation both at home and abroad. It
passed through three editions, and although the rapid advance in
physiological science since its publication has long since led to its
disuse, it will still be admired by medical scholars for the purity of
its style and the learning it everywhere displays.

In the spring of 1837, Dr. Oliver closed his connection with the
college, and returned to Cambridge, where he was temporarily residing
at the time of his appointment, again to resume the practice of his
profession. He, however, delivered a course of lectures at the
Dartmouth Medical School in the autumn of this and the following year.
He was also induced, in 1840, after declining professorships both in
St. Mary's College, Baltimore, and in Pennsylvania University, to
deliver a course of lectures on Materia Medica at the Medical College
of Ohio, but he resigned the chair at the close of the session, and
returned again to Cambridge, where he resided to the close of his
life. Although in declining health at this time, he did not relinquish
professional practice until within a few months of his death, which
took place on the 1st of June, 1842.

During his comparatively brief career, Dr. Oliver had become widely
known as a medical and general scholar. As a teacher in the various
departments of medical science with which he was connected he was also
eminently successful. His lectures, always prepared with great care,
were written with remarkable clearness and elegance, and were often
listened to with attention by many outside the ranks of the
profession. "His lectures to the under-graduates of the college," says
a contemporary,[45] "would be thought, I am persuaded, still more
remarkable than those upon Physiology. They were intended to exhibit
the present state of mental philosophy. And the singular clearness
with which he discriminated the settled points of absolute knowledge
in this comprehensive and yet imperfect science, his happy development
of intricate and complicated principles, and the beautiful colors
which a true poetic spirit enabled him now and then to throw over the
bald peaks and angles of this cold region, entitle him to a rank among
metaphysicians as eminent as he maintained in his appropriate
profession."

      [45] Eulogy on Daniel Oliver, delivered by Rev. C. B. Haddock,
           professor of Belles Lettres.

"The intellectual character of Dr. Oliver," the same writer afterwards
adds, in language admirably chosen, "came nearer than it has been my
fortune to observe in almost any other instance to the idea of a
perfect scholar. He was at once profound, comprehensive, and elegant.
Upon no subject which he had considered was his knowledge fragmentary
or partial. A philosophic, systematic habit of mind led him always to
seek for the principles of things, and to be satisfied only with the
truth. The compass of his inquiries was as extraordinary as their
depth. He had investigated with care a surprising extent of knowledge.
A master of his own language, and minutely acquainted with all its
principal productions, he was also thoroughly versed in the Greek, and
familiar with the original works which have given to that tongue the
first place among human dialects. The German he read with facility,
and had pursued his favorite studies in the masters of its profound
learning. Of French and Italian he was not ignorant. Music, both as a
science and an art, was his delight and recreation. In the arts of
painting and sculpture his information was liberal and his taste said
to be excellent. Morals and politics he had studied in their theory,
and in the history of the world. His acquaintance with civil history
was among the most extraordinary of his attainments. The beautiful in
Nature, in life, or in art or literature, few men have so exquisitely
enjoyed or so justly appreciated.

"Thus, the principal elements of a perfect mind seem to have been
singularly united and harmonized in him,--exactness of knowledge,
liberal learning, and true taste."

Bred from infancy in the Church of England, Dr. Oliver continued to
the end a faithful member of that communion, and few persons have had
a firmer faith in the sublime truths of revealed religion. It was no
less to his deeply religious and truthful spirit than to his innate
love of right that may be ascribed that regard for things sacred, that
singular modesty, that unfailing courtesy, and the high sense of
personal honor that distinguished him. It had been his desire, at a
late period of his life, to become a candidate for Holy Orders, a step
for which his ripe theological scholarship and his critical knowledge
of Greek and Hebrew had already prepared him, but his age deterred
him.

Dr. Oliver had published little. Besides the treatise on Physiology
already mentioned, there are a few pamphlets containing addresses
delivered on various occasions, the most important of which are one
before the New Hampshire Historical Society in 1836, and that before
the college at the time of his induction into the professorship of
Moral and Intellectual Philosophy.

Among his medical manuscripts may be mentioned an unfinished work on
General Pathology, which, had he lived to complete, would have added
to his reputation as a medical author. Among his papers were also a
few unpublished addresses and a few short and fragmentary poems, the
effusions of his earlier years, all characterized by that elegance of
style and fine poetic taste and feeling that marked their author.

A member of many learned literary and medical societies at home, Dr.
Oliver was honored in 1835 with a diploma from the Academy of Sciences
and Belles Lettres of Palermo, and in 1838 received the degree of
Doctor of Laws.

The following notice of a gentleman of rare eminence in the scientific
world, is from a reliable source:

James Freeman Dana, who was connected as a teacher with both the
Academical and Medical departments of Dartmouth College, was born at
Amherst, N. H., September 23, 1793. He was the eldest son of Luther
and Lucy (Giddings) Dana, and grandson of Rev. and Hon. Samuel Dana.
On the father's side he was descended from Richard Dana, who was among
the early settlers in Massachusetts; on that of his mother he was a
descendant in the seventh generation from Rev. John Robinson, the
pastor of the noble band of Pilgrims who founded Plymouth, Mass.

Dana was fitted for college at Phillips Academy, Exeter, N. H.,
entered Harvard in 1809, and graduated in 1813, his name standing on
the catalogue as Jonathan Freeman Dana; the first name, by which,
however, he had never been known, was changed to James, by act of
legislature.

Immediately after entering Harvard, Dana showed a decided partiality
for scientific pursuits. To Natural Philosophy, Natural History, and
Chemistry, he mainly devoted his attention, making excursions into the
surrounding country for the purpose of examining its geological
structure, and collecting mineralogical and other specimens. The
result of these rambles was embodied in a small volume, published in
conjunction with his brother Dr. S. L. Dana, in 1819, entitled
"Mineralogy and Geology of Boston and its Environs." While in college
he formed, together with his brother and several classmates, a society
for the cultivation of Natural Science and Philosophy, named at first
for two distinguished French chemists, but afterward known as the
Hermetic Society. Towards the close of his collegiate course he was
appointed to assist Dr. Gorham, the professor of Chemistry, in
preparing his experiments. That eminent physician and chemist soon
became so much interested in the pupil who displayed such assiduity in
scientific researches, that finding he intended to pursue the study of
medicine, he kindly invited him to do so under his tuition.

In 1813, Mr. Dana commenced his studies with Dr. Gorham, attending
lectures at the Medical College, but though he became well acquainted
with the principles and practice of the profession, he never
relinquished his preference for Chemistry and Mineralogy. He became an
active member of the Boston Linnæan Society, and the first paper read
before it, entitled "An Analysis of the Incrustation formed upon the
Basket of Eggs from Derbyshire, England" (presented by Judge Davis),
was read by him. In the spring of 1813, the Corporation of Harvard
College employed Mr. Dana to visit England in order to procure
suitable apparatus for its chemical department. During his stay abroad
he studied, for a time, under the instruction of the somewhat
distinguished Frederic Accum. In consequence of this absence he did
not receive his degree of M.D. till 1817, that of A. M. having been
previously conferred.

In the autumn of 1817, Dr. Dana was appointed to deliver a course of
chemical lectures to the medical students of Dartmouth College. The
professors in the Medical School were Dr. R. D. Mussey and Dr. Cyrus
Perkins. These lectures were so satisfactory that the appointment was
continued, and during the autumns of 1818, 1819, and 1820, he lectured
at Dartmouth, residing during the intervals at Cambridge, where, in
January, 1818, he was united in marriage with Matilda, third daughter
of Samuel Webber, D.D., late president of Harvard College.

In 1821, being appointed professor at Dartmouth, Dr. Dana removed to
Hanover, where, relinquishing the practice of medicine, he devoted his
whole attention to his favorite studies, to which was now added
Botany, upon which he delivered some courses of lectures.

Dr. Perkins, the Professor of Materia Medica, removed to New York
after the dissolution of the "University of New Hampshire," and the
late admired and lamented Dr. Daniel Oliver, of Salem, was appointed
to the professorship. Dr. Mussey, celebrated for his surgical
knowledge and skill, remained as the head of the Medical School, and
among these gentlemen, differing widely as they did in many
characteristics, the warmest friendship subsisted. During the
intervals of leisure from strictly professional duties, Dr. Dana
occupied himself in continuing to write for "Silliman's Journal," and
in frequent excursions to various parts of New Hampshire, for the
purpose of analyzing the ores and waters of mines and springs. His
published analysis of the waters of a spring in Burton, N. H., was
considered so scientific a production, that he was written to as to
accepting a professorship in the University of Virginia. Not wishing
the appointment, he declined becoming a candidate.

In the latter part of 1825, Professor Dana published "An Epitome of
Chemical Philosophy," designed as a text-book for his own classes, but
which was afterwards adopted as such in two other institutions. In
1826, he was appointed one of the visitors of West Point Military
Academy, and soon after his return was chosen to the chair of
Chemistry, in the College of Physicians and Surgeons in the University
of New York, to which city he then removed. He was elected member of
the Linnæan Society of New York, and accepted an invitation to deliver
a course of lectures before the Athenæeum.

During his residence at Hanover, Professor Dana had been much
interested in Electro-magnetism, then a new science, and in preparing
apparatus for exhibiting its wonders, freely stating his conviction
that it would produce more astonishing results than any power
previously known. When surprise was expressed at his selecting for his
Athenæeum lectures this subject, so little known even in Europe, and
in which so few in this country would feel any interest, Dr. Dana
replied that he had chosen it for those reasons; that he thought it
time for public attention to be directed to it, as he was certain it
would lead to most valuable results, and that he should endeavor to
render it popular. How far he succeeded, the delighted audiences that
crowded to hear him bore evidence. Of the truth of his prediction as
to the results to be wrought out by the science, the marvels of the
electro-magnetic telegraph bear witness to the world.

Samuel F. B. Morse was then following his profession as a painter in
New York, and lectured upon art before the Athenæeum. An intimacy
sprang up between him and Dr. Dana, whose lectures he attended, and
whom he used to visit in his laboratory, thus becoming familiar with
his views on scientific subjects. Morse's published statements as to
the origin of his knowledge of electro-magnetism are as follows:

"I learned from Professor Dana, in 1827, the rationale of the
electro-magnet, which' latter was exhibited in action. I witnessed the
effects of the conjunctive wires in the different forms described in
his lectures, and exhibited to his audience. The electro-magnet was
put in action by an intensity battery; it was made to sustain the
weight of its armature, when the conjunctive wire was connected with
the poles of the battery or the circuit was closed; and it was made to
'drop its load' upon opening the circuit. These, with many other
principles of electro-magnetism were all illustrated experimentally to
his audience. These being the facts, to whom do I owe the first
knowledge which I obtained of the science of electro-magnetism bearing
upon the practical development of the telegraph? Professor Dana had
publicly demonstrated in my hearing and to my sight all the facts
necessary to be known respecting the electro-magnet.... The volute
modification of the helix to show the concentration of magnetism at
its centre, adapted to the electric magnet, the modification since
universally adopted in the construction of the electro-magnet, is
justly due, I think, to the inventive mind of Prof. James Freeman
Dana. Death, in striking him down at the threshold of his fame, not
only extinguished a brilliant light in science--one which gave the
highest promise of future distinction--but the suddenness of the
stroke put to peril the just credit due him for discoveries he had
already made. Dana had not only mastered all of the science of
electro-magnetism then given to the world, a science in which he was
an enthusiast, but, standing on the confines that separate the known
from the unknown, was at the time of his decease preparing for new
explorations and new discoveries. I could not mention his name in this
connection without at least rendering this slight but inadequate
homage to one of the most liberal of men and amiable of friends, as
well as promising philosophers of his age."

The delivery of these lectures was amongst Dr. Dana's last public
efforts. A severe cold, resulting in an attack of erysipelas affecting
the brain, terminated his brief life of thirty-three years, on the
15th of April, 1827.

In the various relations of private life he had won the warm
attachment of all who knew him. To the charm of a buoyant and
affectionate disposition he added Christian principle and character.
During his student life at Harvard, he had become a communicant of the
Episcopal Church, and continued a devout worshipper according to her
liturgy. Her Burial Service was read over his remains, by his friend
Dr. Wainwright, the funeral rites being performed at Grace Church, on
the 17th of April.

When it was proposed, in 1871, by the National Telegraph Monument
Association to erect a monument to Professor Morse, at Washington, the
family of Dr. Dana furnished, at its request, a portrait of him from
which a likeness was to be cast for one of the faces at the base of
the monument. Since the death of Professor Morse, no progress seems to
have been made in the effort to erect this memorial of scientific
progress.




CHAPTER XXIV.

PROF. BENJAMIN HALE.--PROF. ALPHEUS CROSBY.--PROF. IRA YOUNG.


From reliable sources we have the following account of another
gentleman of distinguished worth, who was an instructor also both in
the Academical and Medical departments of the college.

Benjamin Hale was born on the 23d of November, 1797, in Newbury,
Mass., now a part of the city of Newburyport. He was the eldest son of
Thomas Hale, who was the grandson of the fifth Thomas, in that series
of Hales, whose first representative came to Newbury in about 1637.
His mother was Alice Little, a daughter of the Hon. Josiah Little of
Newbury, and grand-daughter of Col. Moses Little, an officer in the
Continental Army. On both sides of the house Benjamin Hale came of a
race of vigorous, industrious, and useful men, held in honor by their
fellow citizens, and invariably distinguished for their exemplary
habits, their domestic virtues, their sterling goodness, and their
faithfulness in the discharge of trusts and duties. In childhood he
was studious, quiet, kind, and genial; fond of books, the favorite of
his youthful companions, and the cheerful companion of the aged.

In the autumn of 1813, he went to Atkinson Academy; and in September,
1814, entered Dartmouth College; but his health becoming impaired, he
went to Dummer Academy, Byfield, in the autumn of 1815, to pursue his
studies under the direction of its principal, the Rev. Mr. Abbott. In
February, 1816, he entered the Sophomore class at Bowdoin College,
then under the presidency of the venerable Dr. Appleton, whose grave
kindness soon won his reverent love. He at once secured an honorable
position in his class, which was the largest that had then been in
that college. In September, 1818, he received the degree of B. A.;
his part at Commencement being the salutatory oration. Having been
previously offered the academy at Saco, and recollecting a remark of
his old pastor, Dr. Spring, that "one who meant to be a minister would
do well to try his hand at being a schoolmaster," he took charge of
the academy for one year.

In the autumn of 1819, he became a member of the Theological Seminary
at Andover, Mass. Here his college classmate, Rufus Anderson,
afterwards the distinguished Secretary of the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions, was his class-mate and room-mate.
Dr. Anderson thus writes of him: "Our friendship was founded in mutual
knowledge and esteem, and continued during his life. The operations of
his mind were effective, equally so in nearly every branch of
learning. He was quick and accurate in the Mathematics, in the
Languages, and in Music. I know not in what one branch he was best
fitted to excel. While perfect in all his recitations, he was social,
always ready for conversation when I desired it. He had, and through
his whole life retained, my entire confidence as a man of God, nor was
I surprised at the eminent position he afterwards attained in the
church of Christ. Pleasant is his memory, and pleasant is the thought
of meeting him in a better world." While at Andover he had leisure for
reading, and that part of it which he devoted to Ecclesiastical
History had an important influence as it turned out, in deciding his
future ecclesiastical connection.

At the Commencement of Bowdoin College, in 1820, he was appointed
tutor. He taught the Junior class in Natural Philosophy, and Locke's
Essay on the Human Understanding, and the Sophomore class in Geometry
and some other parts of Mathematics, and in Logic. At the same time he
continued to pursue his theological studies, and in January, 1822, was
licensed to preach by the York Association. In September, 1821, he
delivered a Latin valedictory oration, and took his degree of A. M.
With regard to this period of his life, his fellow tutor, now the
venerable Prof. Packard, thus writes: "Mr. Hale gave at once the
impression of a kind, generous, faithful heart, a clear, acute, and
rapid intellect, and a vigorous grasp of any subject to which he gave
his thought. He was a diligent student. He loved books. Without
conceit he had sufficient self-reliance, which was always of service
to him as a teacher and governor. He always had the good-will of his
pupils, and whether with them or with his colleagues he exerted an
influence above rather than below his age and standing. He was a true
man, unselfish, of a decidedly social turn, of warm affections, of a
genial humor."

In the summer of 1822, he received proposals from R. H. Gardiner,
Esq., of Gardiner, Me., to take charge of a new institution which he
had determined to establish for the education of farmers and mechanics
in the principles of science. Mr. Hale accepted, and closed his
connection with Bowdoin College in 1822, and entering upon his duties
January 1, 1823, opened the Lyceum, was inaugurated as its principal,
and delivered an address on the occasion. He soon after returned his
license, finding it inconvenient to meet the many calls for preaching
extended to him, and having become also so settled in his preference
for the Protestant Episcopal Church that he determined to take Orders
therein, should he ever be so situated as to think it his duty to
preach again. On the 9th day of April, 1823, he was married to Mary
Caroline King, the eldest daughter of the Hon. Cyrus King, M. C.

The Lyceum soon attracted students and became a flourishing
institution. Its principal gave lectures in Chemistry and taught
Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, and in winter had classes in
Architecture and in Agricultural Chemistry. For the former of these
classes he prepared, in 1827, a work on the "Elementary Principles of
Carpentry."

In July, 1827, having received an invitation to succeed Professor Dana
in the chair of Chemistry at Dartmouth College, Mr. Hale accepted, and
delivered his inaugural address on the day after Commencement. His
esteemed and able colleagues in the Medical College were Reuben D.
Mussey, M.D., Prof. of Anatomy and Surgery; and Daniel Oliver, M.D.,
Prof. of Theory and Practice of Medicine. It should be noted that at
that period the importance of physical studies was not fully
appreciated at Dartmouth. The college had not taken a scientific
periodical in half a century. There was no cabinet of minerals.
"There was not," writes Dr. Oliver, "a single modern volume in the
college library upon either Mineralogy or Geology; and scarcely one,
if one, upon Chemistry, later than the days of Fourcroy or Vauquelin.
The prevailing taste was decidedly anti-physical. It was directed
another way, and not only so, but there was among the college Faculty
a disposition to undervalue the physical sciences." Dr. James F. Dana,
the predecessor of Professor Hale, writing of the college in reference
to physical science, used the following remarkable expression: "It was
anchored in the stream, and served only to show its velocity." When
Professor Hale was engaged, his duties comprised a course of daily
lectures to the medical class through the lecture term, to which
lectures the members of the Senior and Junior classes were to be
admitted; and instruction to the Junior class in some chemical
text-book by daily recitations for five or six weeks. This was all.

Professor Hale, however, addressed himself to his work with
characteristic activity and zeal. He proceeded to give each year to
the college classes a separate course of over thirty lectures, and
discharged the expenses of them himself. He substituted a larger and
more scientific text-book for that in use, and obtained an allowance
of forty or more recitations instead of thirty. He laid the foundation
of the cabinet of minerals by giving five hundred specimens,
classifying and labeling all additions, leaving the collection in
respectable condition with 2,300 specimens. He gave annually about
twenty lectures in Geology and Mineralogy; and for some years was the
regular instructor of the Senior class in the Philosophy of Natural
History. For two years, also, he took charge of the recitations in
Hebrew, and occasionally took part in other recitations; and, with
another, served as building committee during the whole process of
repairing and erecting the college edifices.

December 11, 1827, Professor Hale wrote, in a family letter, "I have
made out a plan, for the repair of the College building, and the
addition of a building for libraries, etc., for the use of Trustees at
their next session. It takes with the president mightily, and I think
they will make it go."

And in another family letter, the first after returning from a
journey, under date of March 20, 1828, he wrote:

"My arrival at Hanover was very opportune. I was looked for for
sometime, and letters were about being despatched for me.... I have
the honor of being one-half of the building committee, Professor
Chamberlain being the other moiety, and we are commencing operations.
The prospects of the College are now so bright, _that the plan I at
first proposed, and which was adopted by the Trustees_, is abandoned,
and we are preparing to erect two brick buildings, three stories in
height, and fifty feet by seventy. One for students' rooms, and the
other for public rooms.... And what is more comforting, our funds are
improving so much that the building will not distress us very much if
the $30,000 should not be realized. A good many old debts have been
collected, and are coming in, by which one building could be erected.
About $13,000 have already been subscribed, and subscriptions are
daily arriving."

All this was voluntary and gratuitous work. It is no wonder that
students thus cared for should respond, as they did, with enthusiasm
and regard. Happily, in this department as well as in all others,
Dartmouth College is now in motion, and fully up with the foremost in
the current of physical study.

During his last three years, Professor Hale was President of the Phi
Beta Kappa Society. His portrait, presented, it is believed, by the
members of that society, now hangs in the college library.

While at Hanover, Professor Hale thought it his duty to resume his
purpose of preaching, and was accordingly ordained Deacon by the Rt.
Rev. Dr. Griswold, Bishop of the Eastern Diocese, September 28, 1828,
at Woodstock, Vt.; and Priest by the same bishop, in St. Paul's,
Newburyport, January 6, 1831. In taking this step he violated in no
respect the charter of the college, he undertook nothing which
conflicted with the duties of his professorship, he acted neither
obtrusively nor illiberally; but while he occasionally preached in
neighboring churches, he always, in Hanover, scrupulously observed the
appointment at the village meeting-house. On Sunday nights, however,
he held a service in his own house, for his own family, and the family
of Dr. Oliver, and such other communicants of the Episcopal Church,
and friends, as might desire to attend. Difference in sentiment on
religious subjects, between Professor Hale and the Trustees of the
college, and action on their part which can hardly be regarded as
justifiable, led to the termination of Professor Hale's connection
with the college, in 1835.

In 1835, Professor Hale published two works, "A Valedictory Letter to
the Trustees," and "Scriptural Illustrations of the Liturgy." In
August of that year he attended the General Convention of the
Protestant Episcopal Church as a delegate from the Diocese of New
Hampshire. In October, 1836, the degree of D.D. was conferred upon him
by Columbia College. In December, having had a severe attack of
bronchitis, he sailed to St. Croix to spend the winter. His published
letters under the signature of "Valetudinarius" were very pleasant to
the reading public.

In the course of the next year he entered upon the laborious and high
duties of an office which occupied the remaining years of his active
life. He was elected, August 2, 1836, to the Presidency of Geneva
College, N. Y., and entered upon his duties in the following October;
delivering an inaugural address on the 21st of December. It is of
course impossible here to give the varied and interesting details of
his presidential life. To this institution he freely gave the wealth
of his well stored and acute mind, his tried experience, and his
cheerful, patient resolution. The trials were sometimes great, the
laborers few, the support scanty, and there were times when it seemed
as if the one man only stood between the life of the college and its
death. As one of the Trustees wrote, "Life was already nearly extinct,
and death would have soon followed, had not the president given
himself wholly to the work with a faith that never faltered, a
perseverance which strengthened with difficulties, and a thorough
conviction that his work, if well done, would promote the glory of God
and his church through all time." And he was successful, as much so as
it was within the power of one man to be, both in correcting the evils
which he found existing, and in securing the stability of the college
beyond all peradventure. Wherever he was, in the recitation room, in
the academic circle, in the Medical School of which he was _ex
officio_ president, in the Board of Trustees, in the councils of the
bishop and the Diocese, in the conferences with the Vestry of Old
Trinity Church, before the Board of Regents, before the Legislature of
the State, he was always the learned, sagacious, loyal, and inspiring
president; respected and beloved always, by all who entered the circle
of his influence; and illustrating daily in his own character, the
symmetry, strength, and purity of the principle by which he was
governed.

Dr. Hale instructed easily in every department of learning. He was
most fond of ethical and metaphysical studies. His class room will
never be forgotten by those who delighted to go to it, and regretted
to leave it. His courses of lectures for many years included Civil and
Ecclesiastical Architecture. He loved music, and read it as easily as
the words. His diction was always remarkable for the best English,
expressed in the happiest style. His memory and power of association
were almost unerring. His temper was held in the nicest balance. In
preaching he was a Chrysostom in wisdom, truth, and sweetness.

We have not space to dwell upon this theme, nor upon the wholesome
influence which Dr. Hale exerted in the diocese in which he was
placed, both towards preparing the way for a second diocese in the
State of New York, and in ministering in his place to its unity and
order, when under the Episcopal charge of the noble De Lancey. In
1858, he left Hobart (once Geneva) College, and in 1859 he left
Geneva, with this distinguished record: "The thorough and skillful
teacher, the laborious and self-sacrificing president, the
sympathizing friend, the genial companion, the judicious adviser, the
courteous Christian gentleman; in all these relations so bearing
himself as to gain the profound respect and tender affection of all
who knew him."

Dr. Hale retired to live in Newburyport, near his birth-place and by
the graves of his forefathers, with his children around him. Even then
"his influence upon the community distilled like the dews of heaven
to gladden the earth." He departed to his rest in Paradise on the 15th
of July, 1863. Dr. Hale had four sons and three daughters, of whom the
sons (one has since departed) and one daughter survived him.

His published works, beside communications to newspapers on current
topics, are: "An Address to the Public from the Trustees of Gardiner
Lyceum," 1822. "An Inaugural Address at Gardiner," 1823. "Address to
the Public in regard to the Lyceum," 1824. "Introduction to the
Mechanical Principles of Carpentry," 1827. "Sermon before the
Convention of New Hampshire," 1830. "Lecture before the American
Institute of Instruction, On the Best Method of Teaching Natural
Philosophy," 1830. "Sermon, On the Unity of God, preached before the
Convention of the Eastern Diocese," 1832. "Scriptural Illustrations of
the Liturgy of the Protestant Episcopal Church," 1835. "Valedictory
Letter to the Trustees of Dartmouth College," 1835. "Inaugural
Address, Geneva College, On the Equalizing and Practical Tendency of
Colleges," 1836. "A Lecture before the Young Men's Association of
Geneva, On Liberty and Law," 1838. "Baccalaureate: Education in its
Relations to a Free Government," 1838. "The Present State of the
Question," a pamphlet, in relation to the division of the Diocese of
New York, 1838. "Baccalaureate: The Languages," 1839. "Baccalaureate:
Mathematics," 1841. "Lecture on the Sources and Means of Education,"
1846. "Baccalaureate: The Position of the College, the State, and the
Church," 1847. "Historical Notices of Geneva College," 1849. "Sermon
on the Death of Major Douglass," 1849.



Professor Alpheus Crosby, who was elected to the Chair of Greek and
Latin in the College, in 1833, Professor Calvin E. Stowe having filled
the position in the interval after the death of Professor Chamberlain,
was the son of Dr. Asa and Abigail (Russell) Crosby, and was born at
Sandwich, N. H., October 13, 1810. Although less than twenty-three
years of age, his superior scholarship fully warranted the
appointment. After ably filling this chair several years, by a
division of labor he was permitted to confine himself exclusively to
the Greek language and literature. To his refined and sensitive nature
the stern old Roman was less attractive than the more polished Greek.
It is quite probable that Professor Crosby was more largely indebted
than he himself was aware to the moulding influence of his amiable and
excellent mother, for that particular type of mind and heart which
placed him among the foremost Grecian scholars of his time. Professor
Crosby's career as a linguist illustrated two distinct forms of
success. He excelled both as a _teacher_ and as an _author_. His
success as a teacher no one will question who had the privilege of
listening to his instructions, if only for a single hour. He
questioned the student with a critical eye and ear, but a womanly
gentleness. His translations might well be likened to celestial music,
long pent-up in foreign caves, but now finding rich and varied and
sweet expression, in the mother tongue. His success as an author is
sufficiently indicated by the extensive use of his text-books,
especially the "Greek Grammar."

His classmate, Rev. Dr. Tenney, says:

"It is very pleasant for me to bring back before me your brother as I
remember him at the commencement of our college life. He was, as you
know, a boy of twelve years, dressed in a boy's jacket with a ruffled
shirt, collar coming down over his shoulders, such as boys wore in
those days--playful as a kitten, and as innocent as the purest-minded
girl. He was probably the best fitted (as the phrase is) for college,
of any member of the class. He had, I believe, gone over all the
studies of the Sophomore year. Without any apparent effort he
maintained his preëminence through his entire college course, not only
in the Languages, but also in Mathematics and Mental Philosophy. My
recollection is that he had committed to memory all the Greek
primitives before he left college, yet with all his preëminence as a
scholar he never seemed to have the remotest consciousness that there
was anything remarkable about himself. We had ambitious men in the
class and some bitter rivalries, but no one ever thought of
questioning his position. In short he was both the pet and pride of
the class; his conscientiousness as a boy was that which
characterized him as a man. I do not think he would have done a
consciously wrong thing for his right hand. I remember being with him
one Sabbath, when a letter was handed him from home, and his views of
the sacredness of the Sabbath were such that he would not open it
until the Sabbath was passed. I mention this, not to illustrate the
earnestness of his conscience, but simply to show its authority over
him.

"As your brother was the youngest of the class, I was one of the
oldest, but from the commencement of our class life our intimacy was
constant. I could very readily tell why I was attracted to him, but
his friendship for me I could never understand; sure I was that I
never loved any other man as I did him; he visited me a number of
times; as I was at his home in Salem not long before his lamented
death, he seemed to me the same at the end as he was at the beginning,
one of the most lovable and remarkable men I ever knew, and the world
has seemed to be poorer ever since he left it."

Mr. C. C. Chase, Principal of the High School in Lowell, of the class
of 1839, says:

"I have had many laborious, faithful teachers, but only one genius,
and that was Professor Alpheus Crosby. He was accurate upon a point
not because he appeared to have looked it up in the books, but because
he instinctively knew it. It was in the Greek that I was instructed by
him, and I clearly recall, at this day, the expression of his face, as
he explained it to us. He seemed to revel in the beautiful thoughts
and splendid conceptions of the great dramatists. He did not appear to
be so anxious as most teachers, that our recitations should show our
critical grammatical knowledge, but rather that we should appreciate
and enjoy the wonderful creations of the great minds of antiquity. He
loved to teach. It seemed to be his delight to tell others what he had
so much enjoyed himself. It was the study of his Greek grammar that
first gave me a love for the noble language of ancient Greece. I know
of no grammar that has so few bones and so much meat in it. One can
really enjoy reading it in an idle hour! It so clearly reveals the
fact that that most beautiful of languages, with all its sweetness and
euphony, is but a transcript of the mind of the race of men that knew
more of beauty, of taste, and of philosophy than all the ancient world
besides. Professor Crosby entered into the secret chambers of Greek
thought, and became himself a Greek, and seemed to feel a perpetual
flow of delight, as he told to others what seemed so charming to
himself. Others might compel an indolent student to devote more time
and study to his lessons, but none could equal him in leading those
who loved to follow, into the 'green pastures' and 'sweet fields' of
the domain of learning."

Hon. George Stevens, of the class of 1849, says:

"My acquaintance with Professor Crosby began upon my admission to
college. My preparation in Greek was imperfect, and my knowledge of
the language was quite limited. His manner of dealing with and
instructing the class soon won my admiration, love, and respect for
him, and opened to me a new and unexpected source of pleasure in the
beauties of the Greek language. The primitive simplicity, the euphony,
sweetness, and artistic perfection of the language awakened a response
and an appreciation which only those who are like him can feel. This
appreciation of the beauties of his favorite language, kindled in him
an enthusiastic love for it. His manner of teaching imparted something
of this same enthusiasm in the students. The thoroughness of his
instruction, his perfect courtesy towards all the students, the
extreme kindness with which he always treated them, his constant
mildness and equanimity in the presence of the class, in the face even
of rude conduct and inexcusable ignorance of the lesson, his great
love and supreme devotion to his duties, apparent to all, won the love
and respect, and gave him the control of every student under him,
which no sternness or severity could ever have secured. I never knew
the least disobedience to him or the slightest disrespect shown
towards him, either in his presence or absence. The great simplicity,
purity, and honesty of his character, was a perfect shield to him
against all attacks, in word or act, open or covert. I consider him,
after years of reflection and experience, the best teacher I ever had;
and of all the impressions of the teachers of my boyhood and youth,
those made by him upon me I find are the deepest and most lasting,
and now, after the lapse of more than a quarter of a century, are the
dearest to me."

Professor Hagar, in the "New England Journal of Education", says:

"Professor Alpheus Crosby, whose death occurred in Salem, Mass., on
the 17th of April, 1874, was so widely and favorably known as a
scholar, and was so much esteemed as a man, that a notice of his life
and labors, more extended than has hitherto appeared, is justly due
his memory.

"Professor Crosby very early showed remarkable power in the
acquisition of knowledge. He learned the rudimentary branches of
education almost without a teacher. Mathematics, Latin, and Greek came
to him almost by intuition. When engaged in study, he was so deeply
absorbed that he seemed wholly unconscious of time, place, or
surroundings. When in his tenth year he was taken to Hanover, the seat
of Dartmouth College, and was placed temporarily under Professor Adams
in Algebra and Euclid, under Tutor James Marsh in Latin, and under
Tutor Rufus Choate in Greek; and these gentlemen pronounced him fitted
for college. He was then returned to Gilmanton Academy, and, to
prevent him from trespassing upon college studies, he was put to the
study of Hebrew, under the Rev. John L. Parkhurst, who was well known
as a ripe scholar. He was subsequently sent to Exeter Academy to
bridge over, with various studies, the months which his friends
thought must be passed before he should enter college. At the fall
term of the college, in 1823, in his thirteenth year, he entered; and
he passed through the four years' course of study without a rival and
far beyond rivalry. His power of acquisition and retention was
marvelous.

"After his graduation, he was kept at Hanover four years; the first,
as the preceptor of Moor's Indian Charity School, and the following
three as tutor in the college. During this period he joined the
college church, and formed his purpose to prepare for the ministry,
and spent nearly two years at the Theological Seminary, in Andover,
Mass. He was appointed to a professorship of Latin and Greek, in 1833.
In 1837 he was released from the Latin and became professor of Greek
only, which office he held until 1849, when he resigned; but he
remained Professor _Emeritus_ until his death.

"In 1834 he married Miss Abigail Grant Jones Cutler, only child of
Joseph and Abigail Cheesboro Grant (Jones) Cutler, of Newburyport,
Mass. Mrs. Crosby becoming an invalid, Professor Crosby took her to
Europe and traveled with her through England, Germany, and France,
until they reached Paris, where Mrs. Crosby died. On his return he
resumed the duties of his professorship. After the death of his
father-in-law, Mr. Cutler, he resigned his professorship, and removed
to Newburyport to care for Mrs. Cutler, who was an invalid. His Greek
Grammar, theological disquisitions, and the superintendency of schools
in Newburyport occupied his attention until Mrs. Cutler's death in
1854, when he entered into the employment of the Board of Education in
Massachusetts as its agent. In this capacity he rendered the State
most valuable services by visiting the public schools in various parts
of the State, and by his instructive and practical lectures on
educational subjects. So efficient were his labors, that in 1857 he
was appointed by the Board of Education to the principalship of the
State Normal School in Salem; this important post he occupied eight
years. To the interests of this school he zealously devoted his great
knowledge and ability, raising it to a high standard of excellence and
giving to it a most honorable reputation. He gave the school the
largest part of its valuable library, and obtained for its use the
most of its considerable cabinet. By his heartfelt kindness and his
faithful instructions he secured the love and profound esteem of his
pupils, who will ever hold him in affectionate remembrance. In the
Normal School and elsewhere, as he had opportunity, Professor Crosby
earnestly advocated the liberal education of women, believing that
their educational advantages ought to equal those enjoyed by men.

"While principal of the school at Salem he, for several years, was the
editor-in-chief of the 'Massachusetts Teacher,' performing gratuitous
labors which were highly appreciated by the teachers of Massachusetts
and of other States.

"Having traveled through the Southern States, that he might gain a
better knowledge of his own country before he went abroad, he became
deeply impressed with the iniquities of slavery, and dropped readily
into the ranks of the abolitionists. He was intensely interested in
all the discussions and phases of freedom, from Adams's 'Right of
Petition' crusade down to the day of his death. His patriotism during
the war was full and glowing. The political disquisitions in his
'Right Way,' which he edited for a year, upon the question of
reconstruction, were keen and convincing. He also published a series
of elementary lessons for teaching the freed-men of the South to read.

"During all these years, after leaving his professorship,
he was building other educational books besides his Greek
Grammar--'Xenophon's Anabasis,' 'Eclogæ Latinæ,' 'Lessons in
Geometry,' a 'Greek Lexicon' for his Anabasis, and, last, 'Explanatory
Notes to the Anabasis,' which he had nearly ready for the press when
death closed his labors.

"The heart of Professor Crosby was full of love for everybody and
every creature of God. He drank deeply at every spring whence flowed
charity, benevolence, freedom, and patriotism. He remained to his
death a member of an orthodox church, but, during the last years of
his life, he worshipped with Christians of other denominations, having
softened his early faith by a more liberal trust in the boundless love
and mercy of God, his Heavenly Father.

"In his association with teachers of every class, he showed himself a
friend to all. His geniality of manner, his pleasant words, his
sympathizing spirit, his overflowing desire to make others happy, his
seemingly inexhaustible knowledge, and his intelligent and
ever-courteous discussion of controverted questions in education,
morals, and religion, secured for him the warm affection and deep
respect of all who were privileged to know him."

Mr. Collar, of the Roxbury Latin School, says:

"Professor Crosby belonged not to Massachusetts alone, but to all New
England--to the whole land. Our country is poorer by the loss of an
eminent scholar, one of that small band of classical scholars in
America who are known and honored at foreign seats of learning. In the
latest, freshest, and most original Greek grammar that I am acquainted
with, that by Professor Clyde, of Edinburgh, the author acknowledges
his obligations to four distinguished scholars, three Europeans, and
one American, and the American is Professor Crosby."

"Professor Crosby's first marriage has been referred to; his second
wife was Martha, daughter of Joseph Kingman, of West Bridgewater,
Mass."



The following paragraphs, from an authentic source, introduce another
eminent teacher.

Ira Young was born at Lebanon, N. H., May 23, 1801. His parents were
Samuel and Rebecca (Burnham) Young.

His early years were chiefly spent in working at his father's trade,
that of carpenter, though every winter after he was sixteen, he taught
in one of the district schools in the neighborhood. He cherished a
strong desire for a collegiate education, but was not at liberty to
take any steps in that direction until he became of age. Want of means
would have been with many int his circumstances an insurmountable
obstacle,--not so with him. By the willing labor of his hands, he
obtained in eight months the means of fitting for college at Meriden
Academy, where he studied one year, and soon after leaving that
institution, where he stood high in scholarship, he entered Dartmouth
College. Neither in this year of preparation, nor during all his
college course, did he ever receive pecuniary aid from any individual
or society. He paid his way by teaching.

While at Meriden, he became, with many of his classmates, savingly
interested in religion, and made a public profession of his faith in
Christ in his native place. His religious experience, we have reason
to believe, was deep and thorough,--producing an humble, loving faith
in Christ as the only Saviour, and a sincere, benevolent goodwill to
all around him--to all mankind. His mind was calm and peaceful--not
subject to the agitations felt by so many in their religious life, and
his trust and confidence in God were never shaken. He could never bear
to hear any questioning of the ways of Providence, however dark and
mysterious they might appear. "God wills it," was always enough for
him.

Through his college course he passed with honor and success, taking
high rank in a class which was exceptionally good, producing a large
number of men who were afterwards distinguished in professional and
public life. Though himself guided in all things by the highest
Christian principle, he yet knew how to feel for those who were in
danger of falling into evil courses; and certainly in one instance, by
his tender and watchful care, he was the means of reclaiming and
saving a young friend from threatening ruin.

He graduated in 1828, and taught afterwards for a year in Berwick
Academy, Maine, and subsequently in a large public school in Boston,
from which, in 1830, he was called to a tutorship in Dartmouth
College. He held that position for three years, during which he
continued his theological studies, which he had commenced with the
ministry in view, and in that year he preached regularly in some of
the neighboring towns.

He gave up this purpose, however, when he received the appointment of
Professor of Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, in place
of Professor Adams, who resigned at that time, August, 1833. Before
the close of that month, he became Professor Adams' son-in-law by
marriage to his youngest daughter, Eliza, and seldom were father and
son more closely united in affection or more happy in mutual
intercourse.

In regard to his qualifications for his department and success in the
same, it may be well to refer to some remarks contained in an obituary
notice of him, written by one who for many years was associated with
him in instruction, and who is now placed at the head of a sister
institution.

"Professor Young had some qualities which fitted him eminently for
this position. He was, in the first place, thoroughly master of the
science and literature of his own department. Distinguished while in
college for mathematical attainments, he never relaxed in careful and
constant study of those branches to which he particularly directed his
attention. His mind was thoroughly disciplined for truth and not for
victory, and thus he was ready to test his attainments by the most
thorough methods. As he was thorough with himself, so he was with his
pupils, trying them with doubtful questions which the studious could
easily answer, but which the ignorant could not evade. Yet he was
never harsh, nor captious, nor irritating, though quick and ingenious
in exposing mistakes and follies. Besides his ample knowledge, he
possessed remarkably the power of clear and distinct statement. It was
the habit of his mind to reduce his facts to principles, and to
present them in their simplest forms. Few instructors have excelled
him in the facility with which he could disentangle and elucidate a
complicated problem, whether for the satisfaction of his own mind, or
the instruction of another. And he was as patient as he was acute. Of
a quiet temperament, not easily roused, nor rendered impatient at the
dullness or want of perspicuity in another, unless this resulted from
a moral rather than an intellectual weakness."

In April, 1858, he went to Europe and spent five months abroad, for
the purpose of procuring books and instruments for the college,
especially those which were needed for the equipment of the
Observatory, whose foundations were laid that year. He had labored
successfully in obtaining funds for this object, in which he took a
deep interest, and after the completion of the building, it afforded
him much pure enjoyment, as it gave him greatly increased facilities
both for observing and instructing in his favorite field of science.

Teaching was to him a real pleasure, and he often said that he would
not willingly exchange it for any other employment that could be
offered him. He felt a truly affectionate interest in the young minds
that successively came under his care, sympathizing with them in their
perplexities and troubles, grieving for their errors, and rejoicing in
whatever advances they made in scientific attainments and true
excellence of character. Remembering his own early struggles, he felt
much sympathy with young men similarly situated, and often rendered
them efficient aid.... Nor was his care and interest limited
exclusively to the college, but he sought to do good "as he had
opportunity," and in the manifold relations he sustained to others, in
the family, the church, the neighborhood, the village, his unselfish
kindness was ever manifested. He held the office of Treasurer of
Meriden Academy for several years after the resignation of his
predecessor, and at the time of his death had been a deacon of the
church for twenty years.

During the summer term of 1858, he was unusually occupied with college
labors, being employed most of the day in attending his recitations
and lectures, and in preparation for them. He had obtained some new
philosophical apparatus, which interested him much, and he never
seemed to find more pleasure in his work than then, though it often
left him quite weary and exhausted.

At that time there was a remarkable degree of religious interest
throughout the country, in which the college and the village shared,
and it resulted in numerous conversions. He often attended the
noon-day prayer meetings of the class he was then instructing, and
spoke of them with much pleasure; and his own heart was deeply moved
by the heavenly influence.

Near the close of July he began to suffer much from a malady which,
though hidden, must have been long in progress. His sufferings were
most acute and severe, but never did he lose that sweet patience and
serenity of spirit he had always manifested, nor that calm submission
to his Heavenly Father's will. He died September 13, 1858.

In the words of one of his most esteemed associates: "The village
mourns, for it has lost an excellent citizen; the church mourns, for
it has lost an efficient officer; the college mourns, for it has lost
a revered teacher; the State mourns, for it has lost an exemplary
subject,--one who belonged to that class who are justly styled 'the
light of the world!'"

Few men in America have ever been called to teach the abstruse science
of Mathematics, who combined in such desirable proportions a thorough
knowledge of the science with a faculty of presenting it in a pleasing
manner in the recitation room. In the happy adjustment of Professor
Young's powers one could but observe a union of quick perception with
almost perfect self-control. Whatever the deficiencies of the student,
a hasty or unguarded or inappropriate or even an unscientific word was
seldom found in Professor Young's vocabulary. His most impressive
rebuke was silence.

In a commemorative "Discourse," President Lord says:

"During his college course he was an earnest and successful student.
He carried his work before him, finished it in its time, and did it
well. He studied his lessons and a few related books, and scattered
not his mind by light, promiscuous, and aimless reading. He gorged
not, but thought and digested, and never had a literary dyspepsia. Of
course he grew right along. He was resolved, prompt, exact, untiring,
and true as steel. Everybody knew where to find him. He studied no
popular arts. Though never rough or crusty, he was curt and sarcastic;
but no man ever took offense who knew the kindness of his heart. His
fellow-students loved him. His abilities and knowledge commanded their
respect; his moral excellence secured their confidence, and his
example gave him power over their minds and manners. He hated and
reproved vice, frowned upon all disorder, disdained artifice and
trick, and stood out manfully in support of virtue. Once, in the same
entry, a few noisy and vicious young men set up to be disturbers. They
particularly insulted a worthy but timid student, who was his
neighbor. He took that student to his own room, and gave him
countenance and protection. Then they committed outrage upon his room,
and threatened personal abuse. When his remonstrance availed nothing,
he protested that he would not see such evil perpetrated in college,
but would report them. They knew him, believed him, desisted, and gave
him then the honor of his disinterested virtue, as virtue always
receives its meed of honor when it stands erect on its own
prerogative, and is not moved by the contradictions of unreasonable
and wicked men. Yet he was no ascetic. He liked companionship, was not
fastidious or exacting, never petulant or vindictive, but gentle and
forbearing. He had especial tenderness for those 'good-hearted' young
men who can never refuse to do wrong when they are invited. A
distinguished officer of one of our professional institutions once
said to me,--'I was, at one time, when in college, thoughtless,
self-indulgent, fell among bad companions, and was nearly ruined. Mr.
Young pitied me, took hold of me, and saved me.' That excellent man
could not now speak of his benefactor without tears of gratitude.

"How he stood at college, that is, what rank he held, whether first,
second, or a lower figure in his class, I never inquired, and, if I
ever heard, I have forgotten. Probably he was not equally indifferent,
for if there be a more excellent way of judgment, it was not quite
evident to his calculating mind. I have often admired how his
professional bias led him in his measurement of men, almost as by
instinct, to arithmetic, as if figures must, of course, be true, and
as if insensible moral and physical causes did not often greatly
modify or neutralize numerical computation. But it was a generous
prejudice, and I have also admired how, in his practical judgment, he
would unconsciously neutralize or modify his professional idea. He
wanted nothing but realities. He went for scholarship and not the show
of it. He accepted no metal that would not ring. He was accordingly
judged by others in reference to his sterling qualities. There might
have been men about him who made a greater figure than himself. It is
very likely. For, as I remember, strangers sometimes undervalued him.
Soon after he left college, I was sent to offer him the place of
tutor. I had not previously known him, and my first impressions were
not agreeable. I hesitated to do my errand. After all it was rather
performed than done, more after a Roman than a Saxon fashion. But it
turned out better for his character and the public good, than for my
own discernment. So of another commission not only from the Trustees,
but the venerable Professor Adams, to assure him that he would, after
a while, be wanted to take the chair of that noble old man, one of the
princes of the earth. They who knew him best had marked him, even when
he took his parchment, for that high position. How well he filled it,
and every other office he sustained, everybody who knows the college
knows.

"Professor Young was a consummate teacher. During his college course
he taught school every successive winter, as he had done for years
preceding, and earned nearly enough to pay the expenses of his course,
for he had high wages, and never wasted them on his clothes or
pleasures. That discipline settled in his mind the elements of
knowledge. The principles of all true knowledge were already laid;
first, when he was born; and, secondly, when he was born again. He
had, of course, tools to work with, and facility to use them for the
good of others, enlarging all the while his own fabric till he became
the man of science that he was for his successive trusts. He loved, as
few men ever love, to teach, and as no man can love who begins not
early and makes not teaching his profession. He went to his last
recitation when he should have been upon his bed, to find relief from
the agonies he suffered, and take off his mind from the greater that
he feared. He was never more at home, or more at ease, than with his
class. He loved to enrich them out of his own stores, and thereby draw
out and sharpen their independent faculties. He was not disconcerted
when he sometimes drew to little purpose; though sure, by set
remonstrance, or by his peculiar, quaint, dry and caustic humor, to
rebuke indifference and neglect, or expose the artifice of a bold,
shrewd, or sly pretender. He was sure of what he knew, and never gave
way without a reason. I have sometimes thought him too sure before he
scanned a question. Yet he would never persist when he saw no
foothold. He was set but not dogmatic, or no more so than a sincere
man must be when he believes what he teaches and is in earnest. He
would never defend before his class a theory because it was new, or
because it was learned, or because it was his own, or because it was
popular, or because he would otherwise be ruled out of the synagogue,
till he had made it sure by calculus, or probable by analogy. When
convinced that an hypothesis could not be verified in the present
state of knowledge, or never in logical consistency with established
facts, or moral certainties, he abandoned it like an honest man. But
where he had his ground he stood, and would have it understood. Of
course his teaching was effectual. Those who would be made scholars he
made sound and good ones. He gave a strong character to his
departments, and his departments were an honor to the college.

"Professor Young was a ripe scholar in general. He was conversant with
the accredited branches of knowledge, and held an honorable place
among learned men. He was modest and retiring, content to know, and
unconcerned about the appearance of it. He liked not to open his mouth
in the gate, but he had wisdom to deliver the city. Nothing crude,
partial, superficial, or one-sided, ever came from him. His judgments
were clear, comprehensive, and decisive. He was slow, critical, and
cautious in forming his opinions, and where he settled there he
stayed. No man could cajole or browbeat him out of his convictions.

"When our professor lay dead before us, the thought arose that, now,
no longer plodding his way to yonder dome, with steps restrained and
painful from an unknown disease, no longer weary with watching,
through his telescope, the distant orbs, nor with numbers and diagrams
to find their measure, he could survey, without a glass, infinitely
greater wonders from a higher sphere; for he had profited by his
earthly discipline: the heavens had declared to him the glory of God,
and the firmament had showed his handiwork. The day had uttered to him
speech, and the night had showed to him knowledge. Next it occurred
how natural religion had been thus reproduced in his mind and
illustrated by a higher Revelation: 'The law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul; the testimonies of the Lord are sure, making wise
the simple; the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart;
the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.'"




CHAPTER XXV.

PROFESSOR STEPHEN CHASE.--PROFESSOR DAVID PEABODY.--PROFESSOR WILLIAM
COGSWELL.


Professor Stephen Chase, who succeeded Professor Young in the chair of
Mathematics, the latter retaining the department of Natural Philosophy
and Astronomy, was the son of Benjamin Pike and Mary (Chase) Chase,
and was born at Chester, N. H., August 30, 1813.

The following notice of this distinguished mathematician is from a
commemorative "Discourse" by President Lord:--

"In the first class that entered the college, after my connection with
it, nearly twenty-three years ago, a young man, spare, tall, as yet
unformed in manner, soon engaged the attention of his teachers. We
marked his mild, serene, yet quick and penetrating eye, his
independent, unaffected, yet modest and regulated movement, his
lively, versatile, earnest, and comprehensive mind, his cheerful and
honest diligence, his punctual attendance upon the exercises of the
college, his respectful, but unstudied and confiding deportment
towards his superiors, his frank and generous, but reserved
intercourse with his fellow students, his care in selecting his most
intimate associates, and his quiet, unpretending, yet exact and
intelligent performance of all the studies of the course. An
indifferent stranger would not have noticed him, except, perhaps, to
criticize his unique exterior; and his fellow students, as is natural
to young persons who are most impressed by æsthetical manner and
accomplishment, did not dignify him as a leader or an oracle. But a
deeper insight convinced his teachers that, whatever partial observers
might think wanting in respect to artistic excellence, was well
supplied by more substantial and enduring qualities. Their eye
followed him, while here, as a sound-minded, true-hearted young man,
and a thorough scholar; and, after he had graduated, as a teacher at
the South, and in two of the oldest academies of New England. In these
different relations he fully justified the good name which he had left
behind him at the college, till, the proper occasions serving, he was
called back to be first a tutor, and then professor of the
Mathematics. The subsequent course of Mr. Chase proved that his
instructors had not miscalculated his powers, nor over-estimated his
qualifications for one of the most difficult and trying positions in a
learned institution.

"Professor Chase performed the duties of his office without
interruption till the close of the last term, during a period of about
thirteen years; and died, after a short illness, in vacation, while
yet a young man. He was scarcely thirty-eight years of age. Yet he was
old, if we measure time, as scholars should, not by the motion of the
heavenly bodies, but the succession of ideas. He had made great
proficiency in knowledge. Well he might; for he had great
susceptibilities. His temperament was ardent, his instincts were
lively, his perceptions keen, his thoughts rapid, his reasoning
faculties sharp, his imagination fiery, and his will determined. No
man has all his active powers proportioned; for that would constitute
perfection, which exists not in this world any more in physical than
in moral natures. But his balance was less disturbed than most, and,
consequently, he was capable of various and large attainments. What he
could he did, for his spirit was earnest, and his industry untiring.
He had become well founded and extensively versed in most departments
of liberal study, and it would be difficult to say in what branch of
knowledge he would have been most competent to excel. He was not a
genius; that is, no one power of the mind absorbed the others, and his
culture was not unequal. Therefore he would not have glared for a
while, like a meteor, and then exploded, but he would have stood one
of the pillars of learning, and a true conservator of society.

"A man of excellent constitutional faculties, like Mr. Chase, must use
them, if Providence gives him opportunity. He has a self-moving power.
He cannot be still. Use of the faculties increases their facility and
productiveness; and the increase of products increases the love of
acquisition. His gains, and his consequent love of gain, will be
according to the Providential direction which he takes, whether to a
trade, an art, a profession, to the pursuit of wealth, or power, or
general knowledge. Mr. Chase's direction was to knowledge. He acquired
it easily, his stores rapidly increased, and the love of it became a
passion. He loved knowledge as some men love pleasure, and others
gold, for its own sake. Yet not exclusively, for he was genial,
warm-hearted, and humane. He appreciated the enjoyments of personal,
domestic, and social life. No man could be more affectionate, kind,
generous, or public-spirited. He was never a recluse or an ascetic. He
was ready to take anything in hand, and liked to have his hands full.
He desired an estate, he studied a profession, he amused himself with
useful arts, he loved a farm, a garden, an orchard, a fruitery, an
apiary; and occasionally, to do the work proper to them all himself;
and he did it well. But knowledge, science, in the largest sense, was
his _beau ideal_.

"Professor Chase, as might be expected, had great excellence as a
teacher and governor of college. His ideal of education may be
inferred from his personal culture. This had always been general and
liberal. He omitted no branch of important knowledge. He accepted
nothing partial. He believed in none of the romantic expedients which
are often hastily adopted, and successively abandoned, for making
scholars without materials, and forcing public institutions of
learning, for a present popular effect, off from the methods which
nature has prescribed, and experience has sanctioned. He regarded a
college as a place not so much of learning, as of preparation for
learning,--a school of discipline, to bring the student up to manhood
with ability to perform thenceforth the hard work of a man in his
particular profession. To that end no part of fundamental study could
be spared. He would as soon have judged that young men could be
trained to excellence in the mechanic arts, while they disused any
important organ of the body; or a sculptor elaborate a perfect model
by chiseling only the limbs. He would not expect such a mechanic, or
artist, or educators of the same school, to find either honorable or
lucrative employment, when society, though temporarily blinded by
ingenious but visionary projects of improvement, should learn the
practical difference between the whole of anything and its parts. He
would not have consented that any other department of college study
should be sacrificed even to the Mathematics.

"But he would have the Mathematics lie, physically, where God has
placed it, at the foundation. He would have the student early settled
and accustomed to the most approved methods and varieties of
demonstrative science. He would discipline the mind among the
certainties of numbers, that it might better search for truth among
the probabilities of things; just as we learn to swim where we can
touch bottom before it is safe to plunge into the deep. He judged
soundly that one must learn to use his reason before he can wisely
apply it to the purposes of life; and that without this preliminary
training nothing else can be learned well; and that whatever otherwise
seem to be accomplishments, turn out, at length, to be fantasies that
vanish in the turmoil and struggle of life, or mislead men into a
false and fickle management of affairs. Wherefore he felt the peculiar
responsibility of his position with all the intenseness of his earnest
and far-reaching mind. He knew that his department, though most
difficult to be commended to young men in general, was most
indispensable to their success, and he sought accordingly to magnify
his office. That he was a complete master of it is out of question. Of
this he has left enduring monuments; and not the least, I am happy to
say, in minds which he had trained.

"His own perception of relations was like intuition, and hence he was
sometimes uneasy at the embarrassments of students, even when
involuntary, and much more, when the result of indifference or
neglect, even though they might at times be increased by the rapidity
of his own illustrations. I should have dreaded to be taken by
Professor Chase to the blackboard, unless I had a good lesson, or a
good conscience; and I could not have been sure that the latter would
avail me without the former. But though I should have shrunk from the
criticism, I should have respected the man. If I feared him in the
lecture-room, I should honor him in his study; for there his warm
heart would open to the story of my mental trials, and he would lead
me, and help me to bear my burdens, with the kindness of an elder
brother. He was exacting, but he was humane; he was impatient, but
full of generous sympathies. These qualities might not always be
tempered in the hurry of an occasion, but found their balance in the
leisure and quiet intercourse of retirement. He was just and faithful.
He had strong likes, but he would yield a favorite when he must; and
strong dislikes, but he was incapable of hate. He stopped short of all
extremes. You could move him easily either way on the current of the
sympathies; but you could not tempt him to do wrong. As with the
judgment, so with the sensibilities; they were led by conscience. As
with the love of knowledge, so with the passions; they were subject to
the love of truth. Whatever the occasional excitement of the intellect
or the feelings, there was that in his mind which made it impossible
for him to be an enemy of God or man. The soul had been harmonized by
grace.

"Mr. Chase had a pious ancestry, and was brought up by Christian
parents in the fear of God. An excellent mother, an invalid in his
childhood, sat much in her arm-chair with the Bible on her knee. She
used it with her little boy as she would a primer. Before he was four
years old he had learned to read it, and read through the New
Testament; and that particular volume now remains the best part of his
estate. He was ever afterwards a diligent student of the Bible, and
never ceased to honor the father and mother who had led him in this
way of life. Filial reverence was one of his most beautiful and
characteristic traits. It was a natural step to the fear of God; and
the early fear of God is likely to be succeeded, according to the
covenant, by that love of God which, when perfected, casteth out fear.
During his third year at college he became, as he hoped, regenerate,
and professed his faith in Christ. It is said that his religious
awakening at that time was unusually deep; his awe of the Divine
government and his sense of sin profound; his acknowledgment of God's
justice and general sovereignty unreserved; and his trust in Christ
for justification free and unqualified. That sheet-anchor saved him.
It brought him up, subsequently, in the hour of danger. When the
fitful and rough winds of the spirit of the power of the air beat upon
him, and the swelling waters went over his soul, it dragged, but it
held. It was cast within the veil. That New Testament in his
childhood, that subjection to his parents, that conversion at
college,--they were blessings to him and to us that can be measured
only by eternity.

"It was a sorrowful day when, in the solitude and stillness of the
winter vacation, we laid him in the tomb. It was sorrowful in that
house where he had been the joy and hope of loving and trusting
hearts, and had found rest from the cares and vexations of official
life; where a sincere, unworldly, unartificial hospitality always
reigned; whence tokens of kindness went freely round to friends, and
compassionate charity to the poor. It was sorrowful to his colleagues,
for we trusted him, his knowledge and judgment, his integrity and
zeal, his faithfulness and efficiency, his independence and courage.
We knew that he was above pretense, artifice, and duplicity; that in
his keeping, righteous principle was safe, and over his application of
it wisdom, benevolence, and firmness would preside. It was sorrowful
to the village, for he was known to be a just man, a kind neighbor,
and a good citizen. He was always ready to do what he could for the
common welfare, and to bear his proportion of the common burdens.
Every man in the community felt that he had lost a friend."

The scientific world could have no better demonstration of Professor
Chase's rare mathematical talents than his text book on Algebra, which
is still used in one department of the college.

Professor Chase married Sarah Thompson, daughter of Ichabod Goodwin,
and granddaughter of General Ichabod Goodwin, of South Berwick, Me. He
died at Hanover, January 7, 1851.



In "Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit," we find the following
notice--furnished by the kindness of Rev. Daniel L. Furbur, D.D.--of a
gentleman of great worth, whose early death was a serious loss to the
college:

"David Peabody, the youngest son of John and Lydia (Balch) Peabody,
was born at Topsfield, Mass., April 16, 1805. He was employed more or
less upon his father's farm till he was fifteen or sixteen years of
age; but as his physical constitution was thought to be not well
suited to agricultural life, and as his early tastes were more than
ordinarily intellectual, and he had a strong desire for a collegiate
education, his father consented to gratify him; and, in the spring of
1821, he commenced the study of Latin at Dummer Academy, Byfield. The
same year his thoughts were earnestly directed to the great subject of
his own salvation, though he did not feel so much confidence in the
genuineness of his religious exercises as to make a public profession
of his faith until three years afterwards. In 1824, he united with the
Congregational Church in his native place, and in the autumn of the
same year joined the Freshman class in Dartmouth College.

"By severe labor during his collegiate course, he overtasked his
naturally feeble constitution, and thus prepared the way for much
future debility and suffering. He was graduated in 1828, on which
occasion he delivered the valedictory oration.

"After spending a few weeks in recruiting his health at his father's,
he became, for a short time, assistant editor of the 'New Hampshire
Observer,' at Portsmouth, but before the close of 1828 he entered the
Theological Seminary at Andover. In the spring of 1829, he accepted an
invitation to take charge of a Young Ladies' Select School at
Portsmouth; but in the autumn of 1830 his declining health obliged him
to relinquish it, and to seek a Southern residence. He went to Prince
Edward County, Virginia, and secured a situation as teacher in an
excellent family,--that of Dr. Morton, and at the same time entered
the Union Theological Seminary, of which the Rev. Dr. John H. Rice was
the founder and principal professor. He remained in the family of Dr.
Morton till he had completed the prescribed course of study, and was
licensed to preach by the West Hanover Presbytery in April, 1831;
after which he supplied the church at Scottsville for six months. So
acceptable were his services, that the congregation would gladly have
retained him as their pastor; but, as he preferred a Northern
residence, he declined all overtures for a settlement, and returned to
New England, with his health much improved, in 1832. In November of
the same year he was ordained pastor of the First Church in Lynn,
Mass. In September, 1834, he was married to Maria, daughter of Lincoln
Brigham, then of Cambridge, but formerly of Southborough, Mass. In
January, 1835, he was attacked with a severe hemorrhage, which greatly
reduced his strength, and obliged him for a season to intermit his
labors. Finding the climate unfavorable, he reluctantly came to the
determination to resign his pastoral charge, with a view of seeking an
inland home, when his health should be sufficiently recruited to
justify him in resuming the stated duties of the ministry.

"Accordingly, in the spring of 1835, he was dismissed, after which he
spent some time in traveling for the benefit of his health, at the
same time acting as an agent for the Massachusetts Sabbath-school
Society. His health now rapidly improved, and on the 15th of July
succeeding his dismission, he was installed as pastor of the Calvinist
Church in Worcester.

"The change of climate seemed, for a time, highly beneficial, and had
begun to induce the hope that his health might become fully
established; but, in the winter of 1835-36, he was prostrated by
another attack of hemorrhage, which again clouded his prospects of
ministerial usefulness. In the spring of 1836, his health had so far
improved that he resumed his ministerial labors and continued them
through the summer; but in September, his symptoms again became more
unfavorable, and he determined, in accordance with medical advice, to
try the effect of a sea voyage and a winter in the South. Accordingly,
he sailed in November for New Orleans; and, on arriving there, decided
on going to St. Francisville, a village on the Mississippi. Here he
remained during the winter, preaching to both the white and colored
population, as his strength would allow. In the spring, he returned to
his pastoral charge, with his health considerably invigorated. He
labored pretty constantly, though not without much debility, until the
succeeding spring (1838), when he found it necessary again to desist
from his labors, and take a season of rest. In company with a friend,
he journeyed through a part of Vermont and New Hampshire, and on
reaching Hanover, the day after Commencement, was surprised to learn
that he had been appointed professor of Rhetoric in Dartmouth College.
Conscious of his inability to meet any longer the claims of a pastoral
charge, and hoping that his health might be adequate to the lighter
duties of a professorship, he could not doubt that the indications of
Providence were in favor of his accepting the appointment. He did
accept it, and shortly after resigned his charge at Worcester, amidst
many expressions of affection and regret on the part of his people,
and, in October following, entered on the duties of his professorship.

"The change of labor proved highly beneficial, and during the winter
of 1838-39, he enjoyed a degree of health which he had not known for
many previous years. In March, he was so much encouraged in respect to
himself that he remarked to a friend that he thought God would indulge
the cherished wish of his heart, and permit him again to labor as a
minister. But another cloud quickly appeared in his horizon, which
proved ominous of the destruction of all his earthly hopes. In April
following, he suffered from an attack of pleurisy, which was followed
by lung fever; and, though he so far recovered as to be able to attend
to his college duties till the September following, it became manifest
to all that his disease was, on the whole, advancing towards a fatal
termination. He died at the age of thirty-four years and six months,
on the 17th of October, 1839. His last days were rendered eminently
tranquil by the blessed hopes and consolations of the gospel. His
funeral sermon was preached by the Rev. Dr. Lord, President of
Dartmouth College, and was published. He left no children.

"Mr. Peabody's published works are a brief 'Memoir of Horace Bassett
Morse,' 1830; a Discourse on 'The Conduct of Men Considered in
Contrast with the Law of God,' 1836; a 'Sermon on the Sin of
Covetousness, Considered in Respect to Intemperance, Indian
Oppression, Slavery,' etc., 1838; the 'Patriarch of Hebron, or the
History of Abraham' (posthumous), 1841."


FROM THE REV. SAMUEL G. BROWN, D.D.

    "Dartmouth College, July 25, 1856.

"My Dear Sir: It gives me great pleasure to send you my impressions of
Professor Peabody, though others could write with more authority. I
knew him in college, where he was my senior. He belonged to a class of
great excellence, and was honorably distinguished throughout his
college course for general scholarship, diligence, fidelity, and great
weight of personal influence, in favor of all things 'excellent and of
good report.' His character was mature and his mind already well
disciplined when he entered the class, and education had perhaps less
to accomplish for him in the matter of elegant culture than for almost
any one of his associates. Hence there was not the same conspicuous
progress in him as in some others. Yet at the time of graduation he
stood among the first, as is indicated by the fact that he was the
orator of one of the literary societies, and was selected by the
Faculty to deliver the valedictory oration at Commencement. In every
department of study he was a good scholar,--in the classical, moral,
and rhetorical departments, preëminent. As a preacher, he was
distinguished for a certain fullness and harmony of style, justness in
the exposition of doctrine, and weight of exhortation. He was prudent
without being timid, and zealous without being rash; eminently
practical, though possessing a love of ideal beauty, and a cultivated
and sensitive taste, and as far removed from formalism on the one side
as from fanaticism on the other. Dignified and courteous in manner, he
was highly respected by all his acquaintances, and while a pastor,
greatly esteemed and beloved by his people. His fine natural qualities
were marred by few blemishes, and his religious character was steadily
and constantly developed year by year. Grave, sincere, earnest, he
went about his labors as one mindful of his responsibility, and as
seen under his 'great Task-master's eye.' Indeed his anxieties outran
his strength, and he was obliged to leave undone much that was dearest
to his hopes. The disease to which he finally yielded had more than
once 'weakened his strength in the way,' before he was finally
prostrated by it. The consequent uncertainty of life had perhaps
imparted to him more than usual seriousness, and a deep solicitude to
work while the day lasted. He performed the duties of a professor in
college but a single year, and that with some interruptions. No better
account of the general impression of his life on those who knew him
best can be given than in the language of a sermon preached at his
funeral by the Rev. Dr. Lord.

"'What his private papers show him to have felt in the presence of his
God was made evident, also, in his social and official intercourse.
Intelligent, grave, dignified; conscientious in all his relations,
from the student upwards to the teacher, the pastor, the professor;
nothing empty as a scholar, nothing unsettled or inconsistent as a
divine, nothing vague or groundless as an instructor; sincere,
generous, honorable, devout; keenly sensitive in respect to the
proprieties and charities of life; warm in his affections, strong in
his attachments, stern in his integrity; above the arts of policy, the
jealousies of competition, the subserviency of party spirit, and
simply intent upon serving God, in his own house, and in all his
official ministrations, he was one of the few who are qualified to be
models for the young, ornaments to general society, and pillars in the
church of God.'

"Hoping, dear sir, that this hasty and imperfect sketch may be of some
trifling service in commemorating a good man, who deserves something
much better,

"I am very truly your obedient friend and servant,

    "S. G. Brown."


FROM THE REV. JOHN NELSON, D.D.

    "Leicester, July 23, 1856.

"My dear sir: My personal acquaintance with the Rev. Mr. Peabody was
limited to the period during which he was the pastor of the Central
Church, in Worcester. While he held that office, I had, I may say, an
intimate,--certainly a most happy, acquaintance with him. I often saw
him in his own house, and often received him as a welcome guest in
mine. I often met him in the association to which we both belonged and
in ecclesiastical councils.

"I remember him as having a rather tall and commanding figure, and a
benign countenance, beaming with intelligence, especially when engaged
in conversation. This appearance, however, was modified by constant
ill health. No one could be with him without receiving the impression
that he was a scholar, as well as a deep and accurate thinker.

"The few sermons which I heard him read, or deliver from the pulpit,
were of a high order, distinguished for both accuracy of style and
power of thought. They were clear, methodical, and highly eloquent. It
was my own impression, and I know it was the impression of some of his
most distinguished hearers, that he was among the best preachers of
his time. In ecclesiastical councils he was shrewd, discerning, and
wise. As a friend, he was always reliable. His moral character was not
only high, but well balanced, and marred by no inconsistencies.

"It is presumed that no one will dissent from the statement that,
during the few years he was in Worcester, by his intelligence, his
manly virtues, his kindness of heart, his active labors for the
advancement of Christ's kingdom, and his ability as well as
faithfulness as a preacher, he greatly commended himself, not only to
the people of his immediate charge, but to the whole community in
which he labored.

    "Affectionately yours,
    "John Nelson."

We are indebted to "Sprague's Annals of the American Pulpit" for yet
another notice--furnished by the kindness of Rev. Daniel Lancaster--of
a gentleman widely known to the friends of education and religion.

"William Cogswell, the son of Dr. William and Judith (Badger)
Cogswell, was born in Atkinson, N. H., June 5, 1787. He was a
descendant from John Cogswell, of Westbury, Wiltshire, England, who,
with his family, sailed from Bristol in a vessel called the 'Angel
Gabriel,' June 4, 1635, and was wrecked at Pemaquid (now Bristol),
Maine. He settled at Chebacco, now Essex, then a part of Ipswich,
Mass., where he died November 29, 1669, about fifty-eight years old.
His father was distinguished as a physician and a magistrate, and held
the office of hospital surgeon in the army during the war that gave
us our Independence. His mother was a daughter of the Hon. Joseph
Badger, of Gilmanton, a gentleman of great respectability and for a
long time in public life.

"Under the influence of good parental instruction, his mind was early
formed to a deep sense of the importance of religion; but it was not
till he was fitting for college at Atkinson, that he received those
particular religious impressions which he considered as marking the
commencement of his Christian life. He did not make a public
profession of religion until the close of his Junior year, September,
1810; at that time he, with both his parents, and all his brothers and
sisters, nine in number, received baptism, and were admitted to the
church on the same day, in his native place, by the Rev. Stephen
Peabody.

"He became a member of Dartmouth College in 1807. Having maintained a
highly respectable standing in a class that has since numbered an
unusual proportion of distinguished men, he graduated in 1811. For two
years after leaving college, he was occupied in teaching in the
Atkinson and Hampton Academies. But, during this time, having resolved
to enter the ministry, he commenced the study of Theology under the
direction of the Rev. Mr. Webster of Hampton, and subsequently
continued it under Dr. Dana of Newburyport, and Dr. Worcester of
Salem,--chiefly the latter. Having received license to preach from the
Piscataqua Association, September 29, 1813, he performed a tour of
missionary service in New Hampshire, and at the close of December,
1813, returned to Massachusetts, and accepted an invitation to preach
as a candidate for settlement, in the south parish in Dedham. After
laboring there a few weeks, he received a unanimous call, which, in
due time, he accepted, and on the 20th of April, 1815, he was duly set
apart to the pastoral office. Here he continued laboriously and
usefully employed about fourteen years, during which time the church
under his care was doubled in numbers, and enjoyed a high degree of
spiritual prosperity.

"In June, 1829, he was appointed general agent of the American
Education Society, and he accordingly resigned his pastoral charge
with a view to an acceptance of the place. He entered upon the duties
of his new office in August following, and so acceptable were his
services, and so well adapted was he found to be to such a field of
labor, that in January, 1832, he was elected secretary and director of
the Society. His duties now became exceedingly arduous, and his
situation one of vast responsibility. In addition to all the other
labors incident to his situation, he had an important agency in
conducting the 'Quarterly Journal and Register of the American
Education Society,'--a work that required great research, and that has
preserved much for the benefit of posterity which would otherwise have
been irrecoverably lost.

"In 1833, he was honored with the degree of Doctor of Divinity, by
Williams College.

"It became manifest, after a few years, that Dr. Cogswell's physical
constitution was gradually yielding to the immense pressure to which
it was subjected. He accordingly signified to the Board of Directors
of the Education Society his intention to resign his office as
secretary, as soon as a successor could be found. He was induced,
however, by their urgent solicitation, to withhold his resignation for
a short time; though in April, 1841, his purpose was carried out, and
his resignation accepted. The Board with which he had been connected,
rendered, on his taking leave of them, the most honorable testimony to
the ability and fidelity with which he had discharged the duties of
his office.

"On the same month that he determined on resigning his place in the
Education Society, he was appointed by the Trustees of Dartmouth
College, professor of History and National Education. Here again his
labors were very oppressive, as he was obliged not only to prepare a
course of lectures on a subject comparatively new, but to perform much
other service, especially in the way of collecting funds to endow his
professorship. He was chiefly instrumental, at this time, in
establishing the Northern Academy of Arts and Sciences, and of
gathering for it a library of about two thousand volumes.

"But while he was thus actively and usefully engaged, he was invited
to the presidency of the Theological Seminary at Gilmanton, in
connection also with the professorship of Theology, and a general
agency in collecting funds. There were many circumstances that led
him to think favorably of the proposal, and finally to accept it. He
accordingly removed his family to Gilmanton, in January, 1844.

"His expectations in this last field of labor seem scarcely to have
been realized. The removal of one of the professors to another
institution, devolved upon him an amount of labor which he had not
anticipated, and he found it impossible to attend to the business of
instruction, and at the same time to be abroad among the churches
soliciting pecuniary aid. At length, finding that the public mind was
greatly divided as to the expediency of making any further efforts to
sustain the institution, he recommended that its operations should,
for the time being, be suspended; though he considered it as only a
suspension, and confidently believed that it had yet an important work
to perform. He held himself ready after this to give private
instruction in Theology, whenever it was desired.

"In 1848, Dr. Cogswell suffered a severe domestic affliction in the
death of his only son,--a young man of rare promise, at the age of
twenty. This seemed to give a shock to his constitution from which he
never afterwards fully recovered. He acted as a stated supply to the
First Church in Gilmanton until the early part of January, 1850, when
he was suddenly overtaken with a disease of the heart that eventually
terminated his life. He preached on the succeeding Sabbath (January
13), but it was for the last time. He performed some literary labor
after this, and read the concluding proof sheet of a work that he was
carrying through the press for the New Hampshire Historical Society.
When he found that death was approaching, though at first he seemed to
wish to live, that he might carry out some of his plans of usefulness,
not yet accomplished, he soon became perfectly reconciled to the
prospect of his departure. He died in serene triumph,--connecting all
his hopes of salvation with the truths he had preached,--April 18,
1850. His funeral sermon was preached by the Rev. Daniel Lancaster of
Gilmanton, and was published.

"Dr. Cogswell was a member of the Massachusetts Historical Society, of
the American Antiquarian Society, and of the New England Historic and
Genealogical Society. He was also an Honorary Member of the Historical
Societies of New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Georgia, and a Corresponding Member of the
National Institution for the Promotion of Science at Washington.

"The following is a list of Dr. Cogswell's publications 'A Sermon on
the Nature and Extent of the Atonement,' 1816. 'A Sermon containing
the History of the South Parish, Dedham,' 1816. 'A Sermon on the
Suppression of Intemperance,' 1818. 'A Catechism on the Doctrines and
Duties of Religion,' 1818. 'A Sermon on the Nature and Evidences of
the Inspiration of the Sacred Scriptures,' 1819. 'A Sermon before the
Auxiliary Education Society of Norfolk County,' 1826. 'Assistant to
Family Religion,' 1826. 'A Sermon on Religious Liberty,' 1828. 'A
Valedictory Discourse to the South Parish, Dedham,' 1829. 'Theological
Class Book,' 1831. 'Harbinger of the Millennium,' 1833. 'Letters to
Young Men Preparing for the Ministry,' 1837. In addition to the above,
Dr. Cogswell wrote the 'Reports of the American Education Society' for
eight years--from 1833 to 1840; and two 'Reports of the Northern
Academy.' He was the principal editor of the 'American Quarterly
Register' for several years; was editor also of the 'New Hampshire
Repository,' published at Gilmanton, N. H.; of the first volume of the
'New England, Historical and Genealogical Register;' of a paper in
Georgetown, Mass., called the 'Massachusetts Observer,' for a short
time; and of the sixth volume of the 'New Hampshire Historical
Collections.'

"Dr. Cogswell was married on the 11th of November, 1818, to Joanna,
daughter of the Rev. Jonathan Strong, D.D., of Randolph, Mass. They
had three children,--one son and two daughters.


FROM THE REV. SAMUEL G. BROWN, D.D.,

PROFESSOR IN DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.

    "Hanover, April 10, 1856.

"My Dear Sir: I had the pleasure of considerable acquaintance with the
Rev. Dr. Cogswell, though only during the later years of his life. He
was not then accustomed to preach, except occasionally to supply a
vacant pulpit, or as a part of his duty as secretary of the Education
Society, or in connection with his professorship in Dartmouth College,
or the Theological Seminary at Gilmanton. He had formed his style on
the model of the older preachers and theologians, and if he had
something of their formality, he had much of their Scriptural
simplicity of statement and devoutness of feeling. His sermons, so far
as I remember them, though showing a careful adherence to the
doctrinal opinions of the fathers of New England, were not of a
polemic character, but were marked by good sense, earnestness, a
Biblical mode of address, and warm Christian sympathies.

"From natural kindness of heart, he avoided unnecessary controversy,
and was especially solicitous to harmonize and unite by charity,
rather than by acuteness to discriminate differences among brethren,
or to separate them by severity of judgment. Not ambitious, he was yet
gratified by the approbation and good opinion of others, and loved a
position where he might be prominent in labors of charity. Neglect or
contumely wounded but did not embitter him. No feeling of ill-nature
was suffered to disturb his peace or check his liberality.

"Among the prominent traits of his character was a sincere and
unwearied benevolence. He was interested in young men, and his labors
as secretary of the American Education Society were stimulated even
more by love of the work than by a sense of official responsibility.
He was thoroughly devoted to the objects which interested him, and
though one might differ from him in judgment with respect to measures,
none doubted his sincerity or refused him the praise of unsparing
fidelity.

"His tastes led him to antiquarian pursuits, and he was prominent in
founding and conducting several learned societies which have done much
to rescue valuable knowledge from oblivion, and thus to secure the
materials for future history.

"He bore adversity with meekness and patience. What might have crushed
a harder spirit, but gave his greater symmetry. The latter years of
his life, though darkened with many disappointments, were illustrated
by the exhibition of admirable and noble traits of character, such as
few, except his most intimate friends, supposed him so fully to
possess. The death of an only and very promising son while in college,
and the failure of some favorite plans, seemed only to develop a
touching and beautiful Christian resignation and a high magnanimity.
Not a murmur was heard from his lips under his irreparable loss, nor
an unkind or reproachful word at the disappointment of his
expectations; nor did an unsubmissive or harsh thought seem to find a
place in his heart. Those especially who witnessed his last sickness
were deeply impressed with the Christian virtues and graces which
found a free expression in the hour of trial.

"Dr. Cogswell was portly in appearance, grave and dignified in his
bearing, and eminently courteous in manner. He will be remembered with
kindness by all who knew him, and by many with a feeling of strong
gratitude and affection.

"With great regard, your obliged friend and servant,

    "S. G. Brown."




CHAPTER XXVI.

PROF. JOHN NEWTON PUTNAM.--PROF. JOHN S. WOODMAN. PROF. CLEMENT
LONG.--OTHER TEACHERS.


The following notice of the eminent scholar who succeeded Professor
Crosby in the chair of Greek, is from a Commemorative "Discourse" by
Professor Brown.

John Newton Putnam was the son of Simeon and Abigail Brigham (Fay)
Putnam, and was born December 26, 1822, in what was then the north
parish of the beautiful town of Andover, Massachusetts. His father, a
graduate of Harvard in the Class of 1811, was for many years teacher
of a classical school of high character in North Andover, in which the
son received his elementary training and discipline. His mother was a
lady of exquisite refinement and beauty of character, of great
gentleness and tender grace. Soon after the death of his father, in
1833, he entered Phillips Academy in Andover, then under the charge of
that excellent scholar, Mr. Osgood Johnson, where he successfully
completed the usual course of study preparatory to entering college.

Being still quite young, and already showing uncommon aptitude for
study, he went with his instructor and friend, Rev. Thatcher Thayer,
to the town of Dennis, upon Cape Cod, where he spent four years in
quiet and delightful application.

Dr. Thayer says of his classical studies:

"He recited each day, in review, the whole of the past lesson from
memory, without book, first the Latin or Greek and then the English.
At each lesson questions were asked which, if he could not answer, he
was required to answer at the next recitation, from various helps
furnished him. This often led to long and varied investigations. He
wrote as much as he read,--perhaps more.

"If those studying with him might smile a little at his want of
athletic zeal and vigor, there was no room for smiling when it came to
Greek, or indeed any mental exercise. Besides, his wit, though gentle,
could gleam, and then they all respected him for his character, and
loved him for his winning spirit."

In the autumn of 1840, he entered the Sophomore class of this college,
ready to make full use of the ample opportunities granted him. With
what modesty and beauty he bore himself here, with what fidelity in
every relation, with what admirable scholarship, with what generous
aims, with what simplicity and purity of motive, with what love of
learning, and desire not merely of meeting the claims of the
recitation-room, but of perfecting himself in every branch of liberal
culture, how constantly this noble desire possessed him from his first
day among us down to the closing hour when he discoursed so fitly and
with such maturity on "Poetry--an instinctive philosophy," those know
best who were most familiar with his college life. One testimony to
this is so full and generous, and of such weighty authority, that I
cannot forbear to give it. It is from the accomplished scholar who
filled the chair of Greek for many years before Professor Putnam.[46]

      [46] Professor Alpheus Crosby.

"I could not hope," he says, "to express, by any words at my command,
the peculiar charm which Professor Putnam's scholarship and character
had for me. I never heard him recite without being impressed with the
wonderful perfection of his scholarship. His translation was so
faultlessly accurate, and yet in such exquisite taste, his analysis
and parsing were so philosophical and minutely exact, and his
information upon illustrative points of history, biography,
antiquities, and literature, was so full and ready, that I listened
with admiration, and to become myself a learner. How often I had the
feeling that we ought to change places I and when I had decided to
resign my situation in the college, my mind immediately turned to him
as a successor, assured that the college would be most fortunate if it
could secure his services." It need not be said how fully Professor
Putnam reciprocated this esteem, nor what value he attached to the
exact and thorough discipline of his instructor.

Nor was it in the department of languages alone that he was
distinguished, but almost equally in every other, as much in those
studies which demand the independent and original action of the mind
as those which mainly require close attention, and the faculty of
acquisition. His modesty was then, as always, so marked, and his ideal
of excellence so high, that it required some sense of duty to bring
his powers to a public test. He never thrust himself into a place of
responsibility, or sought distinction for distinction's sake.

He had in college the desire and purpose which he always retained,--to
complete himself in every art and every manly exercise. Hence his
study of music, not only as a recreation, but as a discipline; not
merely to gratify the ear, though exquisitely fond of the art, and
receiving from it a refined and exalted pleasure, but also that he
might become acquainted with the thoughts and conceptions of men great
in musical genius. The Handel Society, which, from the constant
changes of its members, must necessarily fluctuate,--the annual losses
not always being met by corresponding gains,--was then in a high state
of efficiency. For the sake of study and musical acquisition, it
boldly grappled with the difficult works of eminent masters, and with
whatever necessary imperfectness of actual performance, it was with
sure and lasting results of musical ability and taste and knowledge.
It was in this society, I suppose, that Professor Putnam first became
practically acquainted with some of the great works of Handel and
Haydn, Beethoven and Mozart, and with the lighter but yet substantial
excellencies of some of the English masters. Here he cultivated and
disciplined his nice ear to the instinctive perception of the hidden
harmonies of poetry, to the _feeling_ of those finer beauties which
hardly admit of expression in anything so clumsy as our actual speech.

The desire for physical accomplishment led him to join a military
company then existing in college, although he had no love for such
things, but rather a native repugnance to them, and there was then no
special demand for the discipline.

The six years following his graduation were divided between
instruction in Leicester, Massachusetts, and Newport, Rhode Island,
and pursuing his professional studies in the Theological Seminary at
Andover. During this time he reviewed and consolidated his knowledge.
He brought himself into nearer contact with practical and common life.
He enlarged his sphere of observation and the circle of his studies,
and was looking forward with great satisfaction to the actual
performance of the duties of his profession, when he was invited to
the chair of Greek in this college. It was a position entirely suited
to his tastes, his capacities, his studies. He brought to it not only
ample learning and tastes delicate and cultivated, but the enlarged
and generous spirit of a true scholar, and the aptness of an
accomplished instructor. His ideal of attainment and of duty was very
high, and he aimed at once to fit himself, by the most generous
courses of study, to illustrate the more perfectly to his classes the
poetry, the eloquence, the philosophy, of the wisest and most refined
people of the whole ancient world.

It was with no narrow or exclusive spirit, nor with a merely technical
purpose, that Professor Putnam pursued his studies, or directed those
of others. Every true book was a nucleus around which all thought and
knowledge of similar kind were grouped,--a central point from which
his mind radiated in all directions within the sphere of the subject.
Could he read Plato and Aristotle without studying the course of
ancient philosophy and its influence on the modern? or Demosthenes,
without an investigation of the virtues and failings of Athenian
statesmen? or Thucydides, without meditation on the causes of the
desolation of empires and states? or Homer and Sophocles, without a
quick comparison with Dante and Milton and Shakespeare? It was indeed
a characteristic of Professor Putnam, and one cause why his knowledge
was becoming, had indeed become, at once so ample and so serviceable,
that it was not an accumulation of facts disconnected or bound
together by mere accidental associations, but an organic growth, every
fibre of the most distant branch tracing itself back to the one trunk,
and the sap from the living root feeding and nourishing the whole.

In his special profession, Professor Putnam would be allowed to hold
rank among the very best. The most kind and winning of teachers, he
was the most exacting and stimulating. By questions sharp, pertinent,
and various, thoroughly testing the knowledge of the student, he at
once made him feel his deficiencies, and inspired him to supply them.
Even the dull and careless felt the singular fascination of his look
and tone, caught something of the life of his spirit, and were
gradually lifted above themselves. Gentle, affable, ready to
communicate, dignified, thorough, patient, and learned, never harsh,
never repulsive, he was earnest to meet every want of the student. His
whole course was marked by unwearied fidelity.

To instruct was an occupation and a duty, to which he made everything
else yield. He was thoroughly desirous to help those who came under
his care, so revealing to them their own deficiencies, and so placing
before them the methods and results of a better scholarship, as to
incite them to new exertions, and aid them to independent and vigorous
activity. No one, unless very groveling and earthy, could be long
under his training, without insensibly catching something of the finer
spirit of a beautiful discipline. His own philosophic thought imparted
its movement to their minds, and many are they who have gone from
these halls, within the last fourteen years, who can trace back to him
some of their best methods of study.

Language was, in his view, no dead product, but the finer breath and
effluence of the national life, as subtle, as many sided in its
aspects, as the national spirit itself,--into the knowledge of which
one must grow by slow degrees, bending his pliant mind till it
gradually yields to the new channels of thought and expression.

"An unfaithful scholar," says one of his pupils, "was gently yet
unmistakably reminded of his delinquency, perhaps by assistance being
omitted upon a point which he might easily have ascertained for
himself. One whom he saw struggling to learn he invariably helped, and
this help was given so kindly that many a one would try to make a good
recitation if only to gratify one so much beloved. The best scholars
were quickened by his most delicately expressed appreciation of their
victories, and even sluggish souls felt an unwonted light and warmth
stirring in them when they came into his presence. I remember well our
last recitation in Greek. It was from Plato. He started with an idea
of the noble philosopher, Christianized it, and gave it to us in a few
simple, sublime words, with an attitude and _look_ that melted the
hearts of all.

"It has sometimes occurred to me that he could not seem constantly to
others as he did to me, like one who had dropped from a higher sphere,
to remain a little while in order to draw the hearts that should love
him to a purer, higher, and better life. But conversation with others
has shown me that it has long been a general impression that he moved
in a realm above the common level of even the best men."

There was still another aspect in which Professor Putnam presented
himself, which should not be passed over without at least an allusion.
Having completed his professional studies, his own tastes and higher
aims, no less than the wishes of his friends, induced him occasionally
to exercise the functions of the Christian ministry. Hence he sought
and received ordination according to the usages of the Congregational
churches, and in that relation stood in his lot. With what earnestness
and pureness of motive, with what loftiness of purpose and fidelity in
his high calling, and acceptance to those who heard him, I need not
try to express. But I may say that it was not for want of solicitation
that he did not exchange his professorship for places of considerable
public importance in the other calling. It was his duty, a belief of
his fitness for his post, that kept him from some inviting fields of
labor elsewhere.

Having referred in fitting terms to his call to the Andover
Theological Seminary, to the closing scenes in his life, and to his
death at sea, Professor Brown says in conclusion:

"Few lives were more perfect than his, whose youth gave so fair a
promise, whose riper years so fully redeemed the pledge. His presence
shall still go with us all, to excite us to new fidelity, to enkindle
within us nobler affections, to inspire us with holier purposes."

His classmate Rev. Dr. Furber says:

"The ripe and rare scholarship of my beloved classmate and friend,
John Newton Putnam, was the fruit of diligence and the love of study
in one whose acquisitions were easily and rapidly made. Mr. Putnam
never seemed to be a hard worker, but knowledge was continually
flowing to him as by a process of absorption from his early childhood
until he became the accomplished and brilliant scholar that he was as
professor of Greek. His books were his constant companions, their
society was his pleasure and pastime, he preferred it, even in his
boyhood, to the sports and recreations for which most boys neglect
their studies. When in college he sat up at night after other students
were in bed to pursue the study of German and other modern languages
not then required by the college course. This he did from the pure
love of these studies, without the aid of a teacher, and without the
social stimulus of any companionship in such pursuits. And he probably
for the sake of study neglected needful bodily exercise every year of
his life.

"In the study of languages he found a fascination. The marvelous Greek
tongue was of course the richest field for him, the language of a
people of the finest and subtlest intellect, and of the highest
culture in the art of speech. He seemed at home in that wonderful
language as much almost as if it had been his mother tongue. The
elegance and vivacity, the felicity and energy of his translations
from Thucydides or Plato showed that he not only comprehended his
author and saw the subject as he saw it, but that he had fairly caught
the glow of the author's mind from the page which he had written.

"So accomplished a student of language could not have been ignorant of
his rank among his fellow students; but in all my intimacy with him,
boarding at the same table, occupying for a few months the same room,
and spending with him more or less time every day either in social
intercourse or in the enjoyment of vocal or instrumental music, I
never knew him to betray, by word or act or look, a consciousness of
his superiority to the poorest scholar in the class.

"Oblivious as he was, apparently, of the deficiencies of others, he
was quick enough to perceive their merits. A fine recitation or an
eminently creditable performance of any college exercise, no matter by
whom, gave him positive enjoyment, which in his nervous and emphatic
way he was very apt to express. It is really not too much to say that
he appeared to enjoy the successes of others as much as though they
had been his own.

"What a help to any college class is the influence of one such man!
His connection with the class of 1843, was, no doubt, the presentation
to some of its members of an ideal such as they had not formed before;
an ideal, not only of enthusiasm for the largest acquisitions and the
finest culture, but of that enthusiasm sustained by the love of
excellence for its own sake, and not alloyed by any merely selfish
ambition to surpass others.

"A spirit of scholarship so high, so broad, so generous as this could
be no mark for envy. None of us grudged our classmate his position or
his honors. He was the beloved associate, and is now the warmly
remembered friend of some of us, and no doubt many of us were more
indebted to his example than we were aware of at the time for anything
that was well and worthily done by us in our college days.

"I ought not to close this notice without speaking of Mr. Putnam's
love of music. Music was born in him as much as Greek was, and he
learned one as rapidly as he did the other. When in college he was a
valuable member of the Handel Society, his influence being always in
favor of the introduction for practice of the standard and classic
authors. Haydn's 'Creation' and other works of that great composer
were an unfailing source of delight to him. Their naturalness and
spontaneity, their brightness and cheerfulness, their artistic finish
and exquisite grace, met precisely the corresponding qualities in his
own mind. As we often choose those authors who are most unlike
ourselves, so he knew how to enjoy the rugged grandeur of less
polished writers. He could listen to a mountain chain of choruses in
'Israel in Egypt,' or to a dark and mazy labyrinth of mingled harmony
and discord in Beethoven, and wherever he saw the perfection of art or
the power of genius, his soul was like a harp of a thousand strings
every one of which was alive with vibration. I well remember with what
elevation of feeling and intensity of utterance he used in the Handel
Society to sing 'The Hallelujah Chorus,' and the concluding chorus of
the Messiah, 'Worthy is the Lamb that was slain.' His deeply religious
sympathies were touched by the sentiment of these great choruses, and
on this account his enjoyment of them was more profound than his
enjoyment even of the finished models of Haydn. He knew and felt that
he was on a grander theme, and that Redemption was greater than
Creation. And it is pleasant to think of him now as saying with a
deeper meaning and a more rapturous devotion than he knew on earth,
and may we add, a more thrilling musical delight, 'Worthy is the
Lamb.'"

We append some of the closing lines of the venerable Dr. Thayer's most
touching and eloquent tribute to the character of his beloved and
honored pupil: "He did in quality, more than in quantity, beyond any I
ever had to do with. He was under more stimulus than mere quiet
pleasure in study. He had a most delicate sense of beauty to be
gratified, a fine power of discrimination which sought objects for its
exercise. Then his love for his mother was a very powerful motive;
then too I think he thought of gratifying and honoring his teacher,
who loved him and tried to make him a scholar. But better, he loved
his Saviour and increasingly studied with humble loyalty to him. Still
we must not put Putnam in a wrong place. He was preëminently made for
a classical scholar."

Rev. Dr. Leeds adds:

"I became acquainted with Professor Putnam in the winter of 1860-61,
and was on intimate terms with him up to the time of his death, more
than two years later....

"Of his scholarship, others can speak more fitly than I. All remarked
that he was pervaded by that which is beautiful in the wonderful
language and literature he taught, as ever a vase by the perfume of
its flowers.

"But it is his character on which I love to dwell. Ever after I had
become well acquainted with him, he was a delightful illustration to
me of the power of love to foster diverse and even opposite elements
of character. He had feminine traits, and yet he was thoroughly
manly; the gentleness and tenderness of a true woman were his, and so
were the dignity and courage of a true man. He could speak, and was
wont to speak, and preferred to speak words of kindness the most
winning; but he could administer a rebuke longer to be remembered than
most men's; though _more_, perhaps, because it came from him than for
any other reason. The union in him of fastidious taste and of
uncritical temper was very marked. No man was more sensitive than he
to all the proprieties of the occasion; and one might at first fear
lest himself should say or do what would jar upon that delicately
attuned spirit, for whatever _he_ said or did was perfect in its
manner. And yet no one--no one--would listen with more simple
enjoyment to the plainest, crudest utterances of others. He had not
one word of criticism to offer. He seemed to see--I am confident he
did see--only what was good and attractive in them. But one thing
could offend him, that which indicated a want of sympathy.

"More than any man I ever knew, he saw the good in every person, and
the bright in everything. It was wonderful, it was delightful, it
rebuked one, and it quickened one, to note the manifestations of this
temper. Nothing, seemingly, could occur that did not present some
occasion for gratitude. After the fearful disaster which hurried his
life to its close, his message home was--how characteristic of him all
who knew him will at once recognize,--'Tell them to thank God for our
deliverance!'

"I must not say much more. His friends need no reminders of his
innocent, sunny playfulness, or his abounding, sparkling--but never
trenchant--wit. As one of them has said of another, 'What bright,
graceful conceits often fell from his lips, his soft, dark eye smiling
at his own unexpected thought!' And yet, such was his gracious nature
that he was the delight of the house of prayer as much as of the
friendly circle, the one who would be chosen alike to share our hours
of gayety, and to extend to us the sacramental cup. In fine, his
qualities were refined, blended, and crowned by love--love which often
suggested to others the name of St. John.

"No notice of him would be adequate that did not at least refer to
his wife,--fitting companion to such a man. A daughter of Prof.
William and Mrs. Sarah Chamberlain, she inherited both the attractive
and the sterling traits of her parents. 'Lovely and pleasant in their
lives, in their death they were not divided.'"

Esthetic and solid culture have very rarely had a more nearly perfect
union in any American scholar than in Professor Putnam. Whether in the
privacy of his home, in the recitation room, or before a large
audience, his words were always chosen with a marked regard for
fitness and beauty. His knowledge of the minutest points of every
theme which he discussed was so exhaustive and complete that any
attempt to improve would have been almost like carrying light to the
sun.

The graces of his heart corresponded with those of his person and
mind. His earnest piety was marked and felt by all who came within the
sphere of his influence. Few Christian teachers have passed away, at
the age of forty, more highly esteemed than Professor Putnam. He died
on the return voyage from Europe, near Halifax, October 22, 1863.



In 1851, the chair of Mathematics was rendered vacant by the death of
Professor Chase, and he was succeeded by John Smith Woodman, a member
of the Rockingham County Bar. He was the son of Nathan and Abigail H.
(Chesley) Woodman, and was born at Durham, N. H., September 6, 1819.

Extended experience as a teacher in the South, and foreign travel, had
given valuable expansion to Professor Woodman's naturally capacious
mind. He was a careful, patient, laborious teacher of the Mathematics.
He did not exact excellence from every student, for he fully realized
that a lack of native fondness for the studies of this department
rendered it impossible for some to appear in the recitation-room, with
as full preparation as others. But he strove to have each do the best
in his power, and his kindness induced many to put forth earnest
effort, who would have been less inclined to do so under a different
teacher.

One well qualified to appreciate him says:

"As an instructor in Mathematics, a field proverbially difficult,
Professor Woodman had but few equals. Such was his superiority when a
student in this department, that there was little difficulty in
choosing a successor to the post made vacant by the sudden and
untimely death of Professor Chase. The action of the Trustees was most
completely justified by the ease and thoroughness with which Professor
Woodman took up and carried forward the work of his honored and
lamented predecessor.

"In the class-room, however subtle or complicated the subject, or
however dull the student lucklessly 'called up,' his demeanor was
always evenly calm, without a shade of impatience; he carried a firm,
steady hand, master alike of himself and the subject in hand.

"Under his direction the field of Mathematics was not left to mere
theoretical cultivation. At an early date, the first class under his
care was marshaled in squads under self-chosen captains who were first
trained by the professor in practical handling of compass, theodolite,
and sextant; and then each led his division to out-door work, taking
the various instruments in turn. He was also able to invest even
Analytical Geometry and Integral Calculus with charms for some of the
class. One student came from a private interview in a high state of
enthusiasm over the eloquent suggestiveness of formulæ in the
vocabulary of Calculus.

"Written examinations, now so common, were among the methods
introduced into his department by Professor Woodman, and that class
still remembers the spectacles quietly adjusted, that his
near-sightedness might not encourage an illicit use of + and -, and
the rigid silence which shut them up to the simple problems written
upon the blackboard, notwithstanding adroit questions, ostensibly
innocent and necessary.

"In the Chandler Scientific School, to which Professor Woodman was
afterwards assigned, he was specially qualified to do good work,
because of his thorough mastery of Mathematics by perceptions almost
intuitive. Thoroughly at home in its principles, loving them, and
honestly loving his pupils, he could luminously and patiently teach
the application of those principles in practice, however minute and
detailed.

"Mention of Professor Woodman as an instructor would be incomplete,
were there no allusion to the force and influence of his character as
a man, transparently honest, and grandly true. He taught well from
text-books, but his life, so unaffectedly simple and just, gave
better, deeper, and more lasting instruction."

An associate in the Faculty says:

"Professor Woodman becoming somewhat weary of the continuous and
laborious drill of young men in a department not generally
appreciated, and feeling a renewed desire to return to the practice of
law, resigned his professorship, and removed to Boston for that
purpose. After a year's experience of the practice, or desire of
practice, of law, the professor was ready to return to his field of
labor in the college. His former department was no longer open, the
place having been filled, on his resignation, by the appointment of
Professor Patterson. He was, therefore, appointed Professor of Civil
Engineering in the Chandler Scientific School. On entering upon his
duties, he was made the chief executive officer, under the president,
of the department, and continued to hold that relation to the school
till his death. Professor Woodman proved himself a thorough, able, and
zealous teacher in his new chair, and by degrees became deeply
interested in the Scientific Department, and devoted his time and
energies to building it up and making it a success. He early became
sensible of the importance of the free-hand drawing, and gave it a
prominent place in the curriculum of the School, which it has
continued to hold. The depth of Professor Woodman's love for the
School, and the strength of his desire for its continued prosperity,
were made manifest in his will by a generous donation to its funds.
Those who graduated from the Chandler Department while it was under
the administration of Professor Woodman, will never cease to love and
revere his memory."

A classmate, distinguished for his interest in general education,
says:

"Professor Woodman was county commissioner of schools, and secretary
of the New Hampshire Board of Education, during the year 1850. He was
again county commissioner during the years 1852 and 1853. In 1854 he
was commissioner and chairman of the board which was composed of the
commissioners of the several counties. In the opinion of the most
competent judges, Professor Woodman was one of the wisest and most
efficient state school officers New Hampshire has ever had. He was
admirably qualified for the work of an educator, not only by the cast
of his methodical, organizing mind, but by his varied experience and
scholastic attainments. He was eminently practical in all his plans
for the improvement of the schools, and he knew well how to adapt
means to ends. His reports, both as commissioner and secretary, were
of a high order of excellence, and they were highly beneficial in
promoting the cause of education in the State."

Professor Woodman married Mary Ann, daughter of Stephen Perkins
Chesley, of Durham, and adopted daughter of Edward Pendexter. He died
at Durham, N. H., May 9, 1871.



In 1853, Professor Clement Long, who was the son of Samuel and Mary
(Clement) Long, and was born at Hopkinton, N. H., December, 31, 1806,
was called to the chair of Intellectual Philosophy which had been
vacated by the resignation of Professor Haddock. He was a thorough
teacher. Being himself a most profound thinker, he deemed it his duty
to exact a thorough knowledge of every day's lesson by the student. If
he had not made himself master of the subject, by learning all that
was to be learned from the text-book, any attempt to supply the
deficiency, by drawing upon his own resources, would be sure to be
followed by the plainest marks of dissatisfaction or merited rebuke on
the part of Professor Long. Never indulging in the diffuse or the
discursive himself, he never tolerated such a course on the part of
the student. A mere glance at the man was sufficient to indicate the
richest and most solid type of mind. Those who sat under his
instruction, and were capable of appreciating it, will ever remember
his efforts in their behalf with the liveliest gratitude.

In a commemorative "Discourse," President Lord says: "He was graduated
at this college in 1828, a classmate and intimate friend of the late
and lamented Professor Young, and a worthy associate of the many
honorable men by whom the class of that year has been distinguished.

"It was here, in a time of unusual religious awakening among the
students, that he became a Christian, and, with several of his
classmates, made profession of his faith,--a profession ever
afterwards honored by a singular devotedness to his Saviour. That he
was a regenerate man, and true to his Christian calling, no one who
knew him ever doubted. It was manifested by the perhaps best of all
evidences, as construed by experienced observers,--the uniform
prevalence of an unworldly and super-worldly spirit. He affected
nothing, he pretended nothing; but whatever he said or did significant
of religious character was traceable, and traceable only, to a
believing and loving mind. If any thought him severely religious, that
may have been the fault of his critics rather than his own.

"After leaving college, he was for three years a preceptor,
principally at Randolph, Vt.; then, for two years, a theological
student at Andover. Before completing his term at that institution, he
was called, in 1833, to the professorship of Intellectual Philosophy
in Western Reserve College, at Hudson, Ohio. After a short term of
service he was elected to the professorship of Theology, in the same
institution, and received ordination as a minister of the gospel.
These changes are all significant of early and distinguished worth.

"In 1851 he received and accepted the appointment of professor of
Theology in the Seminary at Auburn, N. Y."

His classmate Professor Folsom says:

"Professor Long was like a precious stone kept long in the lapidary's
hands before its brilliancy met the public gaze. I had my home under
his father's roof, and sat daily at table with him, during my Junior
year. We were colleagues afterwards, together with our classmate
Jarvis Gregg, in the Western Reserve College; and they both were
members of my family there. We had been Handelians at Dartmouth (as
also Peabody), and almost every evening we sang together, at our
fireside, from Zeuner's "Harp." How precious the memory of those
hours! How often has the uplifting power of all our intercourse been
felt! Professor Long, like Professor Young, joined the love of
Mathematics with that of Metaphysics, but the bent of his genius was
strongly in the direction of the latter, and not least in theological
and moral science. He had the enthusiastic regard both of the Faculty
and students of the Western Reserve College. He was also a very
suggestive and quickening preacher, often at my request taking my
place in the pulpit of the chapel. His great modesty, and not easily
satisfied ideal, kept him from publishing much in his lifetime; but I
have wondered that some of his writings did not find their way into
print after his death. He once told me, when urging him to this step,
that he hoped, in the course of ten years or so, to be able to prepare
something which the ear of the public might not be careless to hear.
He had the same clear-cut features that marked Professor Peabody,
though of a different pattern,--the latter with outward, the former
with inward, gaze."

"In 1853," President Lord continues, "he was transferred to the
position which he held in this college till his death, leaving the
honorable office which he had so lately assumed, at Auburn, partly out
of his great love for his Alma Mater, and partly, to minister to his
revered parents in their advanced years.

"In all these relations the qualities which I have suggested laid the
foundation of his acknowledged excellence. In all the departments
which he successively occupied he was regarded, as among the most
learned, able, and effective teachers and preachers of the country. He
was competent to every service required of him, and gave to every
position dignity and honor. He was distinctively Christian in them
all, and made them subservient to no school or party, but to the
gospel through which he had been saved.

"Wherein Professor Long was like other men, he was above the
generality, and, though he aspired not to lead, was fitted to precede
them. Wherein he was unlike them, the difference was more conspicuous.
His peculiarities were striking, and in them we perceive his most
observable traits, whether of the intellect or the heart.

"I know not whether it were most of nature, or habit, that our friend
was so distinguished for acuteness, directness, and singleness of the
mind,--a mind not especially intuitive and rapid, not noticeably free
in its conceptions, wide in its survey, or comprehensive in its
generalizations, moving rather on an extended line than an enlarged
area, but subtle and clear as light; sharp, piercing and
discriminating as electricity; pointed, direct, and exact as the
magnet; conclusive, positive, and decisive as the bolt of heaven. His
processes were simple, natural, easy, and continuous, not stiffly
regulated by scholastic laws, but strictly conformable, and his
results inevitable. Give him his definitions and his postulates which,
though not given, he would, like other resolved reasoners after his
method, sometimes take, at his own risk, and he would go round or
through the circle, or make his traverses in darkness and storm, and
never lose his meridian, or be confused in his reckoning; and he would
come back precisely to his starting-point laden with success, his
points all proved. It was well said of him by a curious and critical
observer of scholars, that, as a logician, he was not exceeded in the
country.

"Our professor had made large attainments in the science to which he
was especially devoted,--the Metaphysics. He read whatever was worth
the reading, of which, however, he chose to be an independent judge,
but he thought more, so that his attainments were emphatically his
own. He was not like what so many now become in this department of
study,--a mere follower, imitator, panegyrist,--but a searching critic
and judicious commentator. He had a higher range of speculative
inquiry than most of the more ambitious men who have exceeded him in
popular effect, and he corrected his inquiries by a better logic, and
a more simple faith. But I have sometimes thought him too much of a
recluse for his greatest profiting in this respect. He loved best the
retirement of his own study, and was rarely seen outside of it, except
when required by his official duties. He abjured the artificial forms
and fashions of social life, the bustling confusions of trade and
commerce, and the whirl and finesse of political agitations. He never
would stand on a platform, nor be seen at an anniversary, nor harangue
a popular assembly. He was happiest in solitude where, undisturbed, he
could solve the abstruse problems of ethics, or be a delighted critic
of metaphysical theories, or seek to penetrate the mysteries of
theology. He was consequently in danger of contemplating his
subjects, like so many others of his time, both in Church and State,
too much in their refined essence, and too little in their
comprehensive practical relations; rather as things, in his judgment,
ought to be, than as they are; too much in the light of a fictitious
principle, and too little in that of experience, history, and analogy;
rather according to God's original constitution than the actual
necessities of a fallen state; too much as they may be in the ultimate
development of God's moral providence, and too little as they are in
its administrative course. Hence, but for the greatest care which, in
the main, he exercised, he would have been likely to crowd into his
definitions and postulates more than they naturally admitted, or to
make them less than they naturally required; to mistake, for the basis
of his fulcrum, a speculative subtlety instead of a practical reality;
and, consequently, to make his inexorable logic draw too much, or to
little, for legitimate practical effect. If, occasionally tempted by
the excitement of our present types of speculative and conjectural
science, he seemed to overstep the limits which God has prescribed to
us in our present probationary state, and to make the human a measure
of the Divine, it was done not presumptuously, from a spirit of
conceited and ambitious intermeddling with things forbidden, but
unconsciously, from an honest desire for knowledge. When he perceived,
as he was not slow to perceive, that many of the objects which now so
much allure the learned men of the world, who are falsely so called,
were not real, but ideal and conceptional only, not actual knowledge
verifiable by a day-light test, but shadows and chimeras chasing one
another over the moonlit sky, then he retreated. He chose to stop,
reverentially, as taught by Scripture, when he must, rather than to be
driven back by the cherubim and the flaming sword. Not even Kant, or
Coleridge, or any of their living imitators, however congenial their
respective tastes for speculative subtleties, could tempt him so to
disregard the boundary between reason and faith as to lose sight of
Calvary, or mistake an _ignis fatuus_ for the Sun of Righteousness.
His college experience, and, I have sometimes thought the _genius
collegii_, with a father's and mother's teachings and prayers, all
favored by the Spirit who only searcheth the deep things of God, kept
him near and true to the everlasting Word.

"But we forgot all his speculative trials and temptations, we forgot
almost that he was not perfect but in part, when, in his sacred
character, and in this sacred place, he laid aside his weapons of
intellectual warfare, and, with his peculiar meekness of wisdom,
simplicity of statement, power of argument, and cogency of appeal,
testified to us the great things of the kingdom of God, so far as he
had learned them out of the Holy Scripture. Very instructive and
affecting it was, when, as sometimes, the aspiring philosopher, the
uncompromising logician, the astute economist, the grave and learned
dogmatist, renounced these and all other accomplishments of nature, or
rather made them subservient to the greater accomplishments of grace.
Then we admired, even to tears of thankfulness, how the wise man, in
becoming a fool, becomes truly wise; how he who could be great among
his fellows on Mars Hill,--great after the fashion of the
Areopagus,--could be greater, after a higher fashion, in declaring the
God there Unknown; in repeating simply the lessons of that heavenly
wisdom which none of the princes of this world knew; and, with a
child-like sincerity and earnestness, from his own sense of the
sufficiency of redeeming mercy, inviting us to 'The Lamb of God who
taketh away the sin of the world.'

"It might seem that one so abstract and speculative, so contemplative
and reserved, would naturally be wanting in those sensibilities and
affections which are justly reckoned indispensable to the highest
excellence of character, and to the happiness, or the relief, of our
present state. But appearances do not necessarily represent, but more
frequently conceal, realities. I have been permitted to read some of
his most familiar letters, which reveal a sunny and cheery side of his
character which I had not learned from personal observation. That he
had a susceptible and generous heart no man ever doubted. But one must
know what he has written to his friends, out of its unperceived
fullness, to appreciate those hidden sympathies of his nature which
brought him into harmony as well with the outer as the inner world.
Few would have a better relish for innocent festivities, or the
pleasures of travel, or the grander and finer works of nature or art.
Few would be more excited by the sparkle or roar of ocean, the
magnificent scenery of Centre Harbor, the sublime panorama of the
White Mountains, or the quiet beauties of the Connecticut valley.
True, such objects engaged him but for a time. They were not his chief
good. He wanted the higher satisfactions of enlarged knowledge, of
speculative insight, of reasoning activity, of professional
engagement. They were not his work, but his pastime. Yet, when he
played, it was with as great enjoyment as any man can have who plays
alone, and far greater than they have, or can have, who do naught but
play in company, who care for little but sights and sounds, at length
sickened and enfeebled by their very tastes, incapable of grave and
dignified pursuits, disgusted by their own vanities, remorseful at
their own intemperate hilarities, saying, at last, of laughter, 'It is
mad, and of mirth, what doth it?' Stoical he may have been, for that
belongs, almost of course, to natural magnanimity, and familiarity
with large and elevated themes; but ascetic and cynical he was not,
and could not have been, with his appreciation of Christian truth, and
experience of a Saviour's love.

"The scholar, teacher, preacher, learned, profound, effective,
venerable in all relations, has passed away; the good man, regenerate
by the grace of God, trusting in the righteousness of Christ, and
hoping for salvation only through redeeming blood; the righteous man,
stern and inflexible in his integrity, who never dissembled, never
professed what he did not feel, never hated, never spoke evil of his
neighbor, and could and did say that he was never angry at his
brother; the faithful man, who was true to his engagements, kept his
post, and, in weariness and painfulness, performed his appointed work
till he was struck with death; the husband, father, friend, of whom,
in these relations, it were impertinent to speak particularly, while
wounded spirits are already telling, too much, how great his value,
and how great their loss. He has passed away, dying as he had lived,
and taught, and preached,--in faith; peaceful as a little child, and
hopeful of that better state where that which is perfect will come,
and that which is in part shall be done away."

Professor Long published a sermon before the W. R. Synod in 1847, a
discourse on "The Literary Merits of Immoral Books," in the same year,
"Inaugural Address at Auburn," in 1858, a sermon in Dartmouth College
Church, "Jesus Exalted yet Divine," in 1859, and a memorial sermon on
Professor Roswell Shurtleff, in 1861. In 1836, with Professor Gregg,
he assumed the editorship of the "Ohio Observer" published at Hudson.
In their first address to their readers is this passage: "In relation
to the subject of slavery we shall take the high ground that man is
man and cannot therefore be treated and used as property without sin,
that immediate emancipation is a duty, and that it is therefore the
duty of every man to pray and strive in every virtuous way for the
abolition of slavery." The last date of an editorial is June, 1837.

Professor Long married Rhoda Ensign, daughter of Alpha Rockwell, of
Winsted, Connecticut. He died at Hanover, October 14, 1861.



Propriety forbids more than the briefest reference to a large number
of the worthy living, who have been, or who still are numbered among
Dartmouth's professors, in the Academical department. Otherwise we
might dwell, with profit, upon the name of the able theologian, George
Howe; of the eminent linguist, Calvin E. Stowe; of that strong and
graceful master of the English, the Latin, and the Greek, Edwin D.
Sanborn, who is now just passing the threshold of the "three score and
ten," and completing nearly a half century of various and valuable
connection with his Alma Mater; of Oliver P. Hubbard, who is still
patiently and skillfully unfolding the secrets of science in halls
which have echoed his voice for more than forty years; of Samuel G.
Brown, the music of whose chaste and charming lectures on Rhetoric
still lingers in the ears of a long line of pupils; of Daniel J.
Noyes, whose fidelity, courtesy, and kindness in the chairs of
Theology and Philosophy have given him a warm place in the hearts of
nearly thirty classes; of James W. Patterson, whose pupils have
watched the turning of the thoughts of an admired and honored teacher
from Natural to Political Science, with unceasing interest, and
followed him through the vicissitudes of public service, with
undiminished affection; of Charles A. Aiken, the critical and
accomplished linguist, whose loss by the college was deemed almost
irreparable; of William A. Packard, who, in a kindred department gave
early promise of his later success; of Charles A. Young, whose
scientific researches have added to the fame of his family, his
college, and his country. Nor should the service rendered to the cause
of science by Henry Fairbanks and John R. Varney, while professors at
Dartmouth, escape our notice.

A proper estimate of the value of the services of those who are now
manfully and successfully bearing "the burden and heat of the day,"
and bidding fair to do so for years to come, in this important field,
with its slender pecuniary rewards, of Samuel C. Bartlett, Henry E.
Parker, Elihu T. Quimby, Charles H. Hitchcock, John C. Proctor,
Charles F. Emerson, and John K. Lord, must be left to a future
historian.

The tutor's chair at Dartmouth has been filled by many men of high
promise, some going to premature graves, others to what they deemed
more inviting fields. Among them we find such names as Calvin Crane,
Moses Fiske, Asa McFarland, John Noyes, the value of whose instruction
was gratefully acknowledged by Dartmouth's most illustrious son a
quarter of a century after his graduation, Thomas A. Merrill,
Frederick Hall, Josiah Noyes, Andrew Mack, John Brown, Henry Bond,
William White, Rufus W. Bailey, James Marsh, Nathan Welby Fiske, Rufus
Choate, Oramel S. Hinckley, John D. Willard, Henry Wood, Ebenezer C.
Tracy, Ira Perley, Silas Aiken, Evarts Worcester, Jarvis Gregg, and
Samuel H. Taylor. We cannot dwell upon individual merit, nor give even
the names of all who have rendered valuable service in this sphere.

The "Indian Charity School," also has had many teachers of
distinguished worth. Among them we find such names as Benjamin
Trumbull, the historian, to whom we have referred heretofore; Ralph
Wheelock, the favorite son of the honored founder, who would doubtless
have left to him his official mantle, but for the early failure of his
health; James Dean, whose name is indelibly engraven upon the earlier
periods of our national history, Jacob Fowler, who well illustrated
the value of Christian civilization to the Indian; Caleb Bingham and
Elisha Ticknor, whose names are closely interwoven with the
educational history of New England's metropolis, Josiah Dunham, Judah
Dana, Caleb Butler, William A. Hayes, the intimate and honored friend
of Francis Brown, Joseph Perry, John S. Emerson, and Osgood Johnson.




CHAPTER XXVII.

MEDICAL DEPARTMENT.--PROFESSORS NATHAN SMITH, REUBEN D. MUSSEY, DIXI
CROSBY, EDMUND R. PEASLEE, ALBERT SMITH, AND ALPHEUS B. CROSBY.--OTHER
TEACHERS.


In "A Contribution to the Medical History of New Hampshire," by Prof.
A. B. Crosby, we find a condensed history of the Medical Department of
the College.

"Soon after its formation, the impression became general that the
State Society, excellent as it was both in design and execution, did
not fully answer the medical wants of New Hampshire. There were those
who felt that the young men of the State should have systematic,
didactic instruction, and that this could be accomplished only by the
foundation of a regularly chartered medical college. This plan was
eventually reduced to a demonstration through the energy and talents
of one man. It is with profound veneration that I write the name of
Nathan Smith. Himself a member of the society, I know not but he here
gained inspiration and encouragement for the enterprise from his
associates. At the annual meeting of the Board of Trustees of
Dartmouth College, in August, 1796, being then a Bachelor of Medicine,
not having received the degree of M.D., he made an application to the
Board, asking their encouragement and approbation of a plan he had
devised to establish a professorship of the Theory and Practice of
Medicine in connection with Dartmouth College. After considerable
discussion, the Board voted to postpone their final action upon the
proposition for a year, but in the meantime a resolution was passed
complimentary to the character and energy of Mr. Smith, and promising
such encouragement and assistance in the future as the plan might
merit and the circumstances of the college admit.

"The records of the college are extremely barren of details respecting
the preliminary steps towards a medical establishment, and there are
no means of knowing what the action of the Board was the following
year. It is evident, however, that some measures must have been taken
in relation to the future welfare of the school, for in the year 1798
we find that 'the fee for conferring the degree of Bachelor of
Medicine _pro meritis_ be twenty dollars.' The honorary degree of
Master of Arts was the same year conferred on Mr. Smith, while it
remained for a subsequent Board to discover that his professional
attainments merited the rank and title of Doctor.

"Later in the same session it was voted 'That a professor be
appointed, whose duty it shall be to deliver public lectures upon
Anatomy, Surgery, Chemistry, Materia Medica, and the Theory and
Practice of Physic, and that said professor be entitled to receive
payment for instruction in those branches, as hereafter mentioned, as
compensation for his services in that office.' Mr. Smith was at once
chosen to fulfill the laborious, and to us almost incredible duties of
this professorship, while the compensation alluded to was for a long
time held in abeyance. We also find that in this year the Board
adopted the following code of Medical Statutes:

"1. Lectures shall begin the first of October, annually, and continue
ten weeks, during which the professor shall deliver three lectures
daily, Saturday and Sunday excepted.

"2. In the lectures on the Theory and Practice of Physic, shall be
explained the nature of diseases and method of cure.

"3. The lectures on Chemistry and Materia Medica shall be accompanied
by actual experiments, tending to explain and demonstrate the
principles of Chemistry, and an exhibition shall be made of the
principal medicines used in curing disease, with an explanation of
their medicinal qualities, and effect on the human body.

"4. In the lectures on Anatomy and Surgery, shall be demonstrated the
parts of the human body by dissecting a recent subject, _if such
subject can be legally obtained_; otherwise, by exhibiting anatomical
preparations, which shall be attended by the performance of the
principal capital operations in surgery. [The lower animals were used
to some extent.]

"5. The medical professor shall be entitled to the use of the college
library and apparatus gratis.

"6. The medical students shall be entitled to the use of the college
library under the discretionary restrictions of the president.

"7. Medical students shall be subject to the same rules of morality
and decorum as Bachelors in Art residing at the college.

"8. No graduate of any college shall be admitted to an examination for
the degree of Bachelor of Medicine, unless he shall have studied two
full years with some respectable physician, or surgeon, and attended
two full courses of lectures at some university.

"9. No person _not_ a graduate shall be admitted to such an
examination unless he shall have studied _three_ full years, as above,
attended two full courses of lectures, and shall, upon a preparatory
examination before the president and professors, be able to parse the
English and Latin languages, to construe Virgil and Cicero's orations,
and possess a good knowledge of common Arithmetic, Geometry,
Geography, and Natural and Moral Philosophy.

"10. Examinations shall be holden in public before the executive
authority of the college by the medical professor, and candidates
shall read and defend a dissertation, etc.

"11. Every person receiving a degree in Medicine shall cause his
thesis to be printed, and sixteen copies thereof to be delivered to
the president, for the use of the college and Trustees.

"12. The fee for attending a full course of lectures shall be fifty
dollars; that is, for Anatomy and Surgery, twenty-five dollars; for
Chemistry and Materia Medica, fifteen dollars, and for Theory and
Practice, ten dollars.

"13. The members of the two senior classes in college may attend the
medical lectures by paying twenty dollars for the full course.

"Besides these statutes, the Trustees voted that Mr. Smith might
employ assistance in any of his departments, at _his own expense_,
and that one half part of the fees for conferring the degree of
Bachelor of Medicine be his perquisite, and the other half a
perquisite to the president of the college.

"The first course of lectures was delivered in the fall of 1797,
although Mr. Smith was not elected to his professorship until after
his return from Europe, the following year. In the year 1798, two
young men were graduated with the degree of Bachelor of Medicine. The
next year the Trustees voted to appropriate a room in the northeast
corner of Dartmouth Hall to the use of Professor Smith, and it was
repaired and furnished for that purpose. The room was a small one,
scarcely as large as a common parlor, but still it served for a
lecture hall, dissecting-room, chemical laboratory and library, for
several years, when another room adjoining was appropriated to the
same purpose.

"In 1801, the degree of Doctor of Medicine was conferred upon Mr.
Smith, and a committee was appointed to confer with him in relation to
a salary. A grant of fifty dollars per annum was voted him, upon which
he was to allow a debt he owed the college for money loaned. I presume
that this latter was furnished him in order to enable him to visit
Europe.

"The Trustees about this time made a change in the term of study
required for a degree. The new statute fixed the period of three years
for academical graduates, and five years for non-graduates."

In 1803 the New Hampshire Legislature granted $600 to Dr. Smith for
the purchase of apparatus, and in 1809 $3,450 for "a building of brick
or stone for a medical school, sixty-five feet in length, thirty-two
feet in width, and two stories in height," Dr. Smith furnishing land
for the purpose. He furnished one acre, on which a brick building
seventy-five feet in length, two stories in the middle, with wings of
three stories, was erected, at a cost of over $4,600, Dr. Smith
becoming responsible for the balance. By the terms of the above grants
the building and anatomical and chemical apparatus became the property
of the State upon the removal of Dr. Smith from the institution, which
is with propriety styled the "New Hampshire Medical College."

In 1810 Dr. Cyrus Perkins (created a Doctor upon that occasion) was
elected professor of Anatomy. Some trouble having occurred about this
time between the college officers and the Medical students, the
following articles were added to the laws.



"'1. That each person, previous to becoming a member of the Medical
institution, shall be required to give satisfactory evidence that he
possesses a good moral character.

"'2. That it be required of medical students that they conduct
themselves respectfully towards the executive officers of the college,
and if any of them should be guilty of immoral or ungentlemanly
conduct the executive may expel them, and no professor shall receive
or continue to receive as his private pupil any such expelled person,
or recommend him to any other medical man or institution.

"'3. That the executive officers of the college be, and hereby are
authorized to visit the rooms of the medical students whenever they
think proper.'



"In the year 1812, some important changes were made in the economy of
the institution. Up to this time the degree of Bachelor of Medicine
only was conferred upon recent graduates, while the degree of M.D. was
only allowed in course three years after graduation. This was now
changed, and the degree of Doctor of Medicine was conferred upon all
medical graduates. The term of study was again changed, and fixed at
the present standard. Another of the new regulations and perhaps the
least agreeable one to the students, compelled candidates to read
their theses publicly in the chapel.

"The Faculty was also strengthened by the appointment of Rufus Graves,
Esq., as lecturer on Chemistry, making this department, for the first
time, a separate branch. Colonel Graves, although a good lecturer, was
an unsuccessful manipulator, which caused his dismission in 1815,
three years later. During the same year [1812, at Dartmouth] we find
that Mr. Reuben D. Mussey, a name thoroughly identified with the
success of the school, and with medical progress in New Hampshire, was
created a Doctor of Medicine.

"In 1814, Dr. Smith having been absent for a year, it was voted that
the salary and emoluments pertaining to the chair of Medicine, be paid
to Dr. Perkins, and at an adjourned meeting the resignation of Dr.
Smith was received and accepted. The Board then proceeded to elect Dr.
Mussey professor of Theory and Practice and Materia Medica. In 1816,
Dr. Perkins was excused from lecturing on Surgery, and Obstetrics was
added to his chair, instead, while Dr. Mussey assumed the department
of Chemistry, in addition to his other labors. In the meanwhile Dr.
Smith was reëlected professor of Surgery, but declining to accept, Dr.
Massey added a course of lectures on this branch to his already
laborious duties. The following year he was somewhat relieved by the
choice of Dr. James F. Dana, as lecturer on Chemistry, which office he
continued to hold until 1820, when he was elected to a full
professorship. In August, 1819, Dr. Perkins resigned his chair.

"By vote of the Board of Trustees, in 1820, they accepted the
proffered fraternization of the New Hampshire Medical Society, by
sending delegates to attend the annual examinations. The statutes were
also altered very materially. By these amendments the Medical Faculty
were allowed the sole control of the discipline, etc., of their
department. Students coming to attend lectures were not required to
give evidence of the possession of a good moral character, as under
the old laws. The invidious have alleged that this latter amendment
enabled a larger number to avail themselves of the advantages of a
medical education than might otherwise do so. The requirements for
graduation were at the same time lessened, being now limited to a
knowledge of Latin and Natural and Experimental Philosophy, while the
examinations were to be private, instead of public, as heretofore.

"It was determined that the Medical Faculty should henceforth consist
of:

"1. The president of the College.

"2. A professor of Surgery, Obstetrics, and Medical Jurisprudence.

"3. A professor of Theory and Practice and Materia Medica.

"4. A professor of Chemistry and Mineralogy.

"5. A professor of Anatomy and Physiology.

"Dr. Mussey was elected to the first of the professorial chairs; Dr.
Daniel Oliver, of Salem, Mass., to the second; Dr. James F. Dana, to
the third, and Dr. Usher Parsons to the fourth. Dr. Parsons remained
but two years, when Dr. Mussey was appointed professor of Anatomy, in
addition to his other branches. No further change occurred until 1826,
when Dr. Dana resigned the chair of Chemistry, which was filled by the
election of Professor Hale, who continued to lecture until 1835, when
his connection with the college ceased. The following year Dr. John
Delamater was chosen professor of the Theory and Practice of Physic,
and the present incumbent, Dr. O. P. Hubbard, professor of Chemistry,
while in 1838 a great change was made in the Medical Faculty by the
resignation of all the lecturers except Professor Hubbard. By the
election of the Trustees, the Faculty now consisted of Elisha
Bartlett, Oliver Wendell Holmes, John Delamater, Oliver Payson
Hubbard, Dixi Crosby, and Stephen W. Williams. Dr. Bartlett resigned
in 1840, and was succeeded by Dr. Joseph Roby. Dr. Delamater also
left, and Dr. Holmes tendered his resignation. The next year, 1841,
Dr. Phelps and Dr. Peaslee commenced their long and useful connection
with the school. No farther change was made until 1849, when Dr. Roby
resigned and Dr. Albert Smith was elected. In 1867 Dixi Crosby
resigned the chair of Surgery, and A. B. Crosby, who had served as
adjunct professor of Surgery since 1862, was elected to fill the
vacancy. In 1869, Dr. Peaslee, having resigned the chair of Anatomy
and Physiology, was transferred to a new chair of the Diseases of
Women, while Lyman Bartlett How, M.D., was elected to fill the
vacancy. And finally Dr. Dixi Crosby has sent in his resignation of
the chair of Obstetrics, to take effect at the ensuing commencement
(1870), thus terminating an active connection of thirty-two years with
the school.

"Nathan Smith, the founder of the school, was without dispute a great
man. He was born at Rehoboth, Massachusetts, September 30, 1762.
Incited to enter the profession by witnessing an amputation in
Vermont, he devoted himself to acquiring the best preliminary
education his means afforded, and eventually entered his profession
full of zeal and ambition, resolved to act no secondary part in his
chosen vocation. To found a medical college at Dartmouth was the chief
desire of his early manhood. Regardless of his own pecuniary
interests, he borrowed money to buy the necessary apparatus and
appliances with which to commence his course of instruction. When the
increasing demands of the institution required a building for its
accommodation, it was through his personal efforts that it was
secured. The means were raised and the project carried out by Dr.
Smith, who, himself, on his own responsibility, furnished a large part
of the money. A part, as shown by the records, was also secured by the
same gentleman from the Legislature of New Hampshire.

"Dr. Smith was a man of genius. I hazard nothing in saying that he was
fifty years in advance of his profession. He was one of those
characters who was not only an observing man, but, rarest of all, he
was a _good observer_. Nothing escaped him, and when he had seized on
all the salient points of a given subject, he astounded his listeners
with the full, symmetrical character of his generalizations.

"As intances in point, let me briefly advert to one or two
illustrations. When Dr. Smith entered the profession, everything in
the way of continued fever in the valley of the Connecticut was termed
typhus. Dr. S. soon became convinced that while true typhus did
prevail, there was yet a continued fever essentially different in its
character, and so he came to differentiate between typhus and typhoid.
Noting carefully the symptoms in these cases, making autopsies
whenever a chance occurred, and observing the morbid changes thus
revealed, he soon found himself master of the situation. Then he wrote
an unpretending little tract, in which he embodied his observations
and his inferences. This brochure was undoubtedly the first
comprehensive description of typhoid fever written, and covered in a
wonderfully exhaustive way not only the clinical history, but the
pathology, of this most interesting disease. This noble record of
results, obtained by observations made mainly at Norwich, Vermont, and
Cornish, New Hampshire, was almost the '_Vox clamantis in deserto_.'

"Many years later, in the great hospitals of Paris, Louis made and
published his own observations in regard to the same disease, and the
whole medical world rang with plaudits of admiration at his genius and
learning. But in the modest little tract of Nathan Smith, the gist and
germ of all the magnificent discoveries of Louis are anticipated. And
thus it is again demonstrated that men of genius are confined to no
age and to no country, but whether in the wilds of New Hampshire or in
the world's gayest capital, they form a fraternity as cosmopolitan as
useful.

"I have recently learned an incident that still further illustrates
Dr. Smith's sagacity. While residing in Cornish he had a friend who
was a sea-captain, and who, on his return from foreign voyages, was
wont to relate to him whatever of interest in a medical way he might
have chanced to observe while abroad. On one occasion he told Dr.
Smith that on his previous voyage one of the sailors dislocated his
hip; there being no surgeon on board, the captain tried but in vain to
reduce it. The man was accordingly placed in a hammock with the
dislocation unreduced. During a great storm the sufferer was thrown
from the hammock to the floor, striking violently on the knee of the
affected side. On examination, it was found that in the fall the hip
had somehow been set. This greatly interested Dr. Smith, and he
questioned the narrator again and again as to the exact position of
the thigh, the knee and the leg, at the time of the fall.

"From this apparently insignificant circumstance, Dr. Smith eventually
educed and reduced to successful practice the method of reducing
dislocations by the manoeuvre, a system as useful as it is simple,
and as scientific as the principle of flexion and leverage on which it
depends. Had this incident been related to a stupid man, he would have
seen nothing in it, or to a skeptic, he would have discredited the
whole account, but to a man of genius it furnished a clue by which
another of Nature's labyrinths was traced out. This system is by far
the best ever devised, symplifying and rendering easy the work of the
surgeon, while reducing human suffering to its minimum.

"I do not propose to recall to your minds how much he did for
Medicine and Surgery; that were the work of days, not a single hour.

"Time would fail me to relate the well authenticated traditions of his
skill, his benevolence and his practical greatness. But almost from
the inception of his professional life until he left for New Haven, he
was the acknowledged leader of his profession in the State, and his
reputation came soon to cover the whole of New England. He was the
father of several sons, who have since been distinguished in the same
profession. The venerable Professor N. R. Smith, of Baltimore, is the
eldest, and perhaps the most celebrated, of the survivors."

The venerable Dr. A. T. Lowe adds the following valuable paragraphs:

"In the organization and early history of the Medical department of
Dartmouth College Dr. Nathan Smith occupied a preëminent position. For
ten or twelve years he was the actual manager and the only professor
in the institution, giving three lectures each day, for five days in
the week, through the term of ten to twelve weeks. He lectured with
great acceptance in all the branches of the profession then taught in
the few kindred institutions existing in the country, and he
contributed liberally to the pecuniary support of the institution,
frequently to his great personal inconvenience. With these accumulated
duties to discharge, he faithfully attended to a large practice in
Medicine and Surgery, which was daily increasing, and severely tasking
his physical as well as his intellectual powers, and his fame, in the
line of his profession, soon placed him at its head; and his skill and
the history of his remarkable success, so frequently announced, and so
well attested, was early recognized and acknowledged, not only
throughout his State, but was scarcely limited to New England. By a
seeming universal consent Dr. Smith's name stood among the highest in
the medical temple of fame.

"Dr. Smith was not what the world would now call a learned man. We may
say of him, in this respect, what Ben Jonson said of Shakespeare: 'He
knew little Latin and less Greek,' but he had a mind and a power of
intellect which as eminently fitted him for a physician, as
Shakespeare's genius qualified him to become a dramatist of the
highest character; and whatever the occasion, whether it related to
the lecturer or teacher, to the surgeon or physician, Dr. Smith could
readily exercise his whole moral force for the enlightenment of his
pupil, or the health of his patient.

"The writer of these lines became his pupil in 1816; attending him
almost daily in his professional visits, to witness his practice and
listen to his clinical instruction."

After giving one or two instances of his quick diagnostic ability and
his highly successful practice, he continues:

"Dr. Smith was a great and good man. He never appeared to toil for
professional fame, but to do good to his fellow-man: and in view of
his virtues as a citizen and his justly preëminent skill as a
physician, one of his surviving pupils of those early days, who now
counts more than four-score years, feels impelled to exclaim,--Honored
be the memory of Nathan Smith, the founder, father, and for many years
the sustainer of the Medical Department of Dartmouth College; ever
recognized by all his friends and acquaintances--and their name was
legion--as an honest man and most useful citizen."

Professor Smith married successively, Elizabeth and Sarah, daughters
of Gen. Jonathan Chase, of Cornish, N. H. He died at New Haven, Conn.,
where he had been some years a professor in the Medical Department of
Yale College, January 26, 1829.



A commemorative "Address," by Professor A. B. Crosby, contains the
following account of Professor Smith's successor:

"Reuben Dimond Mussey was born in Pelham, N. H., June 23, 1780. His
father, Dr. John Mussey, was a respectable physician and an excellent
man.

"Determined to have an education, although too poor to immediately
attain it, he labored on a farm in summer and taught a school during
the winter. This he continued to do until, at the age of twenty-one,
he entered the Junior class in Dartmouth College, in the year 1801. He
continued to teach for his support while in college, and acquitted
himself creditably as a scholar, being reckoned in the first third of
his class.

"He was graduated in August, 1803, and immediately became a pupil of
Dr. Nathan Smith, the founder of Dartmouth Medical College. The
following summer young Mussey taught an academy at Peterborough, and
studied with Dr. Howe of Jaffrey.

"He completed his studies with Dr. Smith, sustained a public
examination, and read and defended a thesis on Dysentery. The degree
of Bachelor of Medicine having been conferred upon him in 1806, he
commenced practice in Ipswich, now Essex, Mass. Here he practiced
successfully for three years, when he settled his business and went to
Philadelphia, where he engaged in medical study for a period of nine
months. While at Chebacco, now Essex, Mass., he married Miss Mary
Sewall, who survived the marriage only three years. He subsequently
married Miss Hetty Osgood, a daughter of Dr. Osgood of Salem, who
served as a surgeon in the army during the Revolution. Under the
instruction of Benjamin Smith Barton, he attended a full course of
lectures in the University of Pennsylvania, and was graduated as a
Doctor in Medicine in the year 1809. The professors at that time were
Rush, Wistar, Physic, Dorsey, Barton, and Woodhouse.

"Drs. Chapman and James gave the course in Obstetrics. Dr. Mussey here
distinguished himself by a series of experiments tending to rebut some
of the generally received physiological doctrines of the time.

"On his return from Philadelphia he settled in Salem, Mass., and soon
afterward formed a partnership with Dr. Daniel Oliver, subsequently a
professor in the Dartmouth Medical College.

"These gentlemen gave popular courses of lectures on Chemistry, in
Salem, with great acceptance. Dr. Mussey remained in this field
between five and six years, and attained a large practice during the
last three years, averaging, it is said, a fraction over three
obstetric cases a week. He had already distinguished himself as a
surgeon, and in the autumn of 1814 he was called to the chair of
Theory and Practice at Dartmouth. He gave in addition a course on
Chemistry, most acceptably to the students, and engaged in an extended
and a laborious practice.

"In 1822, Dr. Mussey was appointed professor of Anatomy and Surgery.
Until the close of the session of 1838, he held this chair, and also
lectured on Materia Medica and Obstetrics, to meet occasional
exigencies in the college.

"In the summer of 1818 he lectured on Chemistry in the college at
Middlebury, Vt. In December, 1829, Dr. Mussey left Hanover for Paris,
where he remained several months. He passed several weeks in London,
visited the great hospitals and museums, both there and in the
provinces, and became acquainted with many distinguished men.

"Not far from this time he was invited to fill the chair of Anatomy
and Surgery at Bowdoin College, which he did for four years in
succession. In 1836 and 1837, Dr. Mussey went to Fairfield, New York,
and gave lectures on surgery at the Medical College in that place.
During the year 1837 a professorship was tendered him in New York
city, Cincinnati, and Nashville, Tennessee. He decided to accept the
call to Cincinnati, and for fourteen years was the leading man in the
Ohio Medical College. He then founded the Miami Medical College,
labored assiduously for its good six years, and then retired from
active professional life, though still retaining all his ardor and
enthusiasm for his chosen profession. At the close of his professorial
duties in 1858, Dr. Mussey removed to Boston, where he spent the
remainder of his life, and died from the infirmities of age, June 21,
1866.

"He had ever been from his youth a consistent, devout Christian, and
his record is without spot or blemish.

"It was as a surgeon that Dr. Mussey came to be most extensively
known. Both as an operative and a scientific surgeon he attained a
national reputation.

"He cared not to make a figure, but to benefit his patient; not to
gain _éclat_, but to save human life. He believed much in skilled
surgery, something in nature, but most of all in God. So it transpired
that on the eve of a great operation he frequently knelt at the
bedside, and sought skill and strength and success from the great
Source of all vitality. We are told that the moral effect upon the
patient, and the peaceful composure that followed, were not the least
of the agencies that so often rendered his surgery successful.

"But he was not content blindly to accept the dictum of those who had
gone before. Every principle was carefully scrutinized, and whatever
he believed to be false he did not hesitate to attack, and so his name
came to be associated with surgical progress. As illustrative of this
point, some instances may be adduced.

"In the year 1830, and before that period, Sir Astley Cooper had
taught the doctrine of non-union in cases of intra-capsular fracture,
and it was generally accepted as an established principle at that
time. Dr. Mussey carried a specimen to England which he believed
showed the possibility of such union taking place. Sir Astley on first
seeing it said, "This was never broken," but on seeing a section of
the same specimen remarked, 'This does look a little more like it, to
be sure, but I do not think the fracture was entirely within the
capsular ligament.' John Thompson of Edinburgh, on seeing it, declared
'upon his troth and honor' that it had never been broken. This eminent
surgeon, like the disputatious Massachusetts Scotchman, 'always
positive and sometimes right,' was in this instance mistaken, as the
principle advocated by Dr. Mussey is now established.

"As a surgeon he was bold and fearless, ever willing to assume any
legitimate responsibility, even though it took him into the
undiscovered country of experiment. He did not do this rashly, but
only when the stake was worthy of the risk. There is still living in
Hanover a monument of Dr. Mussey's pluck and skill. This man had a
large, ulcerated and bleeding nævus on the vertex of his head, which
threatened a speedy death. There seemed no way to relieve the patient
except by tying both carotids, which was regarded as an operation
inevitably fatal. The danger was imminent, and as Dr. Mussey could see
no way to untie the knot, he determined to cut it. He tied one
carotid, and in twelve days tied the other, following both operations
in a few weeks with a removal of the tumor. The recovery was perfect,
and the case was, we believe, the first recorded instance where both
carotids were successfully tied. This operation gave him great fame
both at home and abroad.

"It is not my purpose to attempt an account of the surgery done by
this eminent man, only to touch on some of its salient points. Thus he
successfully removed an ovarian tumor, at a time when the operation
had been done only a few times in the world. He removed a boy's tongue
which measured eight inches in circumference, and projected five
inches beyond the jaws, and the patient recovered.

"He removed the scapula and a large part of the clavicle at one
operation, from a patient on whom he had amputated previously at the
shoulder-joint. Dr. Mussey supposed that this was the first operation
of the kind [as it was in some respects] in the history of Surgery.

"He several times removed the upper, and portions of the lower, jaw.
Dr. Mussey kept no extended records of his operations, but I subjoin a
few statements alike interesting to us and creditable to him.

"He performed the operation of lithotomy forty-nine times, and all the
patients recovered but four. He operated for strangulated hernia forty
times, and with a fatal result in only eight cases. He practiced
subcutaneous deligation in forty cases of varicocele, and all were
successful. Dr. Mussey operated four times for perineal fistula, twice
for impermeable stricture of the urethra, and did a large number of
plastic operations with the best results. He also successfully treated
a recto-vaginal fistula.

"These are only a fraction of the innumerable operations which he did,
yet they show results such as the greatest surgeons in the world would
be proud to declare.

"But it is not alone as a surgeon that Dr. Mussey attained excellence.
It was as an accurate observer that he early made himself known to the
medical world. The habit of his mind was positive; he respected
authority, and to the latest period of his life was assiduous in
acquiring professional knowledge from books no less than from
observation. He delighted to fortify himself in any given position by
citing authorities, and always showed that he had informed himself
exhaustively in the bibliography of the subject. Yet it was his habit
to subject every medical statement to the most rigid tests. While
pursuing his studies in Philadelphia, he joined issue with Dr. Rush on
some of the physiological doctrines which were generally received at
that time. This distinguished man had taught the doctrine of
non-absorption by the skin. This was supposed to have been proved by
an experiment in which a young man, confined in a small room, breathed
through a tube running through the wall into the open air, the surface
of the skin being rubbed at the same time with turpentine, asparagus,
etc. As no odor of these substances was perceptible in the secretions,
it was inferred that no absorption had taken place through the skin,
and that it was impossible. Dr. Mussey, believing this doctrine to be
fallacious, immersed himself in a strong solution of madder for three
hours. He had the satisfaction of getting unmistakable evidence of the
presence of madder in the secretions for two days, the addition of an
alkali always rendering them red. He repeated this experiment with the
same result, and made it the theme of a thesis on his graduation. Some
of the Faculty who differed with Dr. Rush on the subject were much
pleased with these experiments, and predicted even then for our friend
a distinguished career."

Professor Mussey died at Boston June 21, 1866.



We quote from Dr. J. W. Barstow's obituary notice in the "New York
Medical Journal," November, 1873, of Professor Mussey's successor.

"Dr. Dixi Crosby, for thirty-two years professor of Surgery in
Dartmouth College, died at his residence in Hanover, N. H., September
26, 1873. Dr. Crosby was born February 7, 1800, at Sandwich, N. H., of
pure New England stock,--strong in the best Puritan element, where
self-reliance, love of justice, and unbending will, formed the basis
of character and the mainspring of action. His father's father was a
captain in the Revolutionary army, and served with two of his sons at
the battle of Bunker Hill. His maternal grandfather (Hoit) was one of
Washington's body-guard, and later in life a judge of some
distinction. His father, Dr. Asa Crosby, who married Betsey Hoit, was
a surgeon of eminence in eastern New Hampshire. At the age of twenty,
he entered upon the study of Medicine in the office of his father.

"The practice of a country doctor in New Hampshire of course embraced
every department and variety of professional work. But Surgery offered
to young Crosby a special charm, and the ardor with which he threw
himself into this branch of the profession showed early fruits. From
the day when he commenced his Anatomy, his practice and his study went
hand in hand. Fearless and original, ready in expedients and ingenious
in their use, he observed, he resolved, and he acted.

"In the first year of his study he accompanied his father to a
consultation in the case of a man whose leg had been frozen, and whose
condition was most critical. It was agreed by the older physicians
that amputation at an earlier stage might have saved the patient's
life, but that it was now too late to attempt it. Young Crosby urged
that the operation be performed, but the elders shook their heads. He
even proposed to attempt it himself; but this was received with a
storm of disapproval, in which even his father joined, and the thing
was pronounced impossible. The doctors then departed, leaving the
student to watch with the patient during the few hours which
apparently remained of life. During the night young Crosby succeeded
in reviving the courage of the man to make a last effort for life. The
limb was removed, and the man recovered.

"His second year of study developed still further the growing
resources of the young surgeon. Upon one occasion both father and son,
while visiting a patient at night, in a distant village, were suddenly
called to a case of extensive laceration of the leg, with profuse
hemorrhage. The case was urgent, and the patient was sinking. No
instruments were at hand. He called for a carving-knife, which he
sharpened on a grindstone and finished on a razor-strap, filed a
hand-saw, amputated the limb, dressed the stump, left the patient in
safety, and drove home with his father to breakfast. The man
recovered.

"Before a nature so fearless, and so fertile in expedients, obstacles
speedily vanish, and young Crosby found himself in possession of a
large and responsible practice, even before taking his medical degree,
and at the early age of twenty-three years. The following year (1824)
he graduated in Medicine at Dartmouth (having passed his examination
in November preceding), and for ten years remained in Gilmanton, in
practice with his father. He then removed to Meredith Bridge, now
Laconia, N. H., where he practiced for three years; and in 1838 was
called to the chair of Surgery in Dartmouth College, then recently
made vacant by the resignation of the late Dr. Mussey. In this field
Dr. Crosby found at once full exercise for all his large resources of
head and heart and hand. As an instructor he was clear, direct, and
definite,--imparting, to his pupils his own zeal, and teaching them
his own self-reliance. 'Depend upon yourselves, young gentlemen,' he
invariably said. 'Take no man's diagnosis, but see with your own eyes,
feel with your own fingers, judge with your own judgment, and be the
disciple of no man.'

"In his class, he was courteous without familiarity, patient with
dulness, but quick to punish impertinence; always kind, always
dignified, always genial. The practical view of a subject was the view
which he delighted to take; and the dry humor with which he never
failed to emphasize his point, at once fixed it in the memory of the
class, and made it available for future use. With his office-students,
Dr. Crosby was the very soul of geniality and confidence. He saw and
measured men at a glance, and was rarely wrong in his estimate of
character. Strong in his own convictions, he was yet tender of the
infirmities and the prejudices of others, and his generous instincts
lost no opportunity for their daily exercise.

"His love of nature was as instinctive and as thorough as his
knowledge of men. He transferred the treasures of the woods to his own
garden. He studied the habits of birds and insects, and his parlors
were adorned with a cabinet of American birds more complete than is
often found in the museum of a professed naturalist. He reveled in the
'pomp of groves and garniture of fields,' and his daily drives through
the picturesque scenery of the Connecticut valley fed his æsthetic
taste, and proved a compensation for fatigue.

"Dr. Crosby, though a surgeon by nature and by preference, was in no
modern sense a _specialist_. His professional labors covered the whole
range of Medicine. His professorship included Obstetrics as well as
Surgery, and his practice in this department was exceptionally large.
His surgical diocese extended from Lake Champlain to Boston. Distance
seemed no bar to his influence, and his professional journeys were
often made by night as well as by day. Of the special operations of
Dr. Crosby we do not propose here to speak in detail. It is sufficient
to mention that, in 1824, he devised a new and ingenious mode of
reducing metacarpo-phalangeal dislocation. In 1836 he removed the arm,
scapula, and three quarters of the clavicle at a single operation, for
the first time in the history of Surgery. He was the first to open
abscess of the hip-joint. He performed his operations, without ever
having seen them performed, almost without exception. Dr. Crosby was
not what may be called a _rapid_ operator. 'An operation, gentlemen,'
he often said to his clinical students, 'is soon enough done when it
is _well_ enough done.' And, with him, it was never done otherwise
than _well_.

"At the outbreak of the rebellion, Dr. Crosby served in the
provost-marshal's office at a great sacrifice for many months,
attending to his practice chiefly at night. As years and honors
accumulated, Dr. Crosby still continued his work, though his
constitutional vigor was impaired by the severity of the New Hampshire
winters, and by his unremitting labor. At length, having reached man's
limit of three-score years and ten, he withdrew from active practice,
and in 1870 resigned his chair in the college, to which his son
succeeded. From that time it was plain that Dr. Crosby's life-work was
nearly done. In his well-ordered and delightful home he found that
rest to which his long service in behalf of humanity entitled him. His
end was perfect dignity and perfect peace.

"To those of us who had been most intimately associated with our
departed friend, who had enjoyed his teachings, his counsels, and his
generous kindness, the news of his death came as a heavy shock. But he
still lives in the remembrance of his distinguished services, in the
unfading affection and gratitude of his pupils, and in the many hearts
whose burdens he has lifted. Verily, '_Extinctus amabitur idem!_'"

Professor Crosby married Mary Jane, daughter of Stephen Moody, of
Gilmanton, N. H.

The following paragraphs relating to one of Dartmouth's most eminent
professors, the esteemed classmate of President Bartlett, who says:
"Outside of my own family circle, I had no better friend," are from
the pen of Dr. T. A. Emmet, of New York.

"Edmund Randolph Peaslee was born at Newton, New Hampshire, January
22, 1814. We have no record of his boyhood, or of his life previous to
graduating from Dartmouth College, with the class of 1836. In this
institution he occupied the position of tutor from 1837 to 1839, when
he entered the Medical Department of Yale College and took his degree
in 1840.

"The following year he settled in Hanover, N. H., and commenced the
practice of his profession. Without waiting in expectation, he began
his busy life by delivering a popular course of lectures on Anatomy
and Physiology.

"These lectures indicated so clearly his talents that, in 1842, but
two years after entering the profession, he was appointed professor of
Anatomy and Physiology in the Medical Department of Dartmouth College,
and retained the office until his death. Within a year afterwards, in
1843, he was appointed lecturer, and shortly afterwards professor of
Anatomy and Surgery in the Medical School in Maine, connected with
Bowdoin College. He filled those two professorships until 1857, when
he gave up Anatomy, but continued to lecture on Surgery until 1860.
Dr. Peaslee first came to the city of New York in 1851, on receiving
the professorship of Physiology and General Pathology in the New York
Medical College, then just being established.

"This position he held for four years, when he was transferred to the
chair of Obstetrics, and continued to lecture on this branch until the
institution was closed about 1860. He, however, did not settle in New
York, to the practice of his profession, until 1858. After 1860, he
mainly devoted himself to his practice, lecturing little except during
the summer or autumn course in Dartmouth College. But to do justice to
his subject and compress the whole subject into the space of some six
weeks, this being his time of recreation from business, he always
delivered at least two lectures a day and frequently more. In 1870,
he was elected one of the Trustees of his Alma Mater, which had in
1859 conferred on him the degree of Doctor of Laws. From 1872, he
delivered a course of lectures in the Medical Department on the
Diseases of Women. Two years afterwards, the course on Obstetrics and
the Diseases of Women in the Bellevue Hospital Medical College was
divided, when Dr. Peaslee was offered and accepted the chair of
Gynæcology. At about this date he also occupied for a short time a
professorship in the Albany Medical School. On the reorganization of
the Medical Department of the Woman's Hospital of the State of New
York, in 1872, he was made one of the Attending Surgeons, and held
this position, together with his professorship in the Bellevue
Hospital Medical College, at the time of his death.

"In 1857, he published in Philadelphia, 'Human Histology, in its
Relations to Descriptive Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology,' in which
were given for the first time, by translation, the experiments of
Robin and Verdell on Anatomical Chemistry. But the one great work
which will identify him with his generation is that on 'Ovarian
Tumors, their Pathology, Diagnosis, and Treatment, especially by
Ovariotomy,' published in New York, 1872. To this work he contributed
but little original matter, beyond his personal experience, which had
been large at that time. He, however, presented a digest of the whole
subject in so thorough and masterly a manner that this work is
destined to be a classic and a landmark as it were. It will be the
future starting-point for the literature of this subject, as an
original patent is in the searching of a title. There will be no need
to go beyond his researches on this subject, as they are exhaustive.

"For one feature in his work he has often expressed the greatest
satisfaction, that he had been able to establish for Dr. Ephraim
McDowell the credit of being the first ovariotomist. In consequence of
his labors, the world has at length given us credit for this great
discovery, of no less value than many others which we can claim to
have originated in our country, for the prolongation of life and for
the mitigation of suffering.

"Dr. Peaslee, at some time in his life, had lectured on every branch
of Medical science. With the exception of Dr. Physic, we have not
another instance where the lecturer was equally proficient in the
practice. But if we compare the extent of professional knowledge in
Dr. Physic's generation and the acquirements of the present day, Dr.
Peaslee will stand alone. Notwithstanding the incessant claims of his
profession, he kept up through life his collegiate training in the
classics, his taste for mathematics, and had acquired the knowledge of
one or more modern languages. Few men in the profession were more
familiar with the literature of our own language."

Dr. W. M. Chamberlain, who had rare opportunities for appreciating the
character and worth of Dr. Peaslee, says:

"The call for a sketch of Dr. Peaslee's professional life and work
will be abundantly satisfied by the recorded tributes of his more
immediate colleagues and associates, Drs. Barker, Thomas, Emmet,
Flint, and others. These are but a part of the testimony which after
his death came from far and near. Wherever men were gathered for the
study and discussion of medical subjects it was felt that a fountain
of knowledge was closed, a leader of opinion was gone, and they made
haste to acknowledge their obligations and their loss. He was a member
of many such organizations, and almost uniformly advanced to the front
rank in position.

"President of the New Hampshire Medical Society; of the New York
County Medical Society; the American Gynæcological Society; the New
York Academy of Medicine; the New York Pathological Society; the New
York Obstetrical Society; the New York Medical Journal Association,
etc., etc., he reaped all the honors. Yet no one ever thought of him
as a seeker of office. The tribute was always spontaneous, necessary:
'Palmam qui meruit ferat!'

"And these honors were not awarded for any great effort or success in
some partial field. He was decorated for service in each specific
line, as Physician, Surgeon, Pathologist, Gynæcologist, Bibliographer.
His attainments were comprehensive and symmetrical.

"He had the very great advantage of a liberal general education. This
gave him his broad outlook upon all departments of science. He had by
nature a mathematical and logical habit of mind. This made him the
accurate and complete student that he was, both in original
investigations and literary research. At the outset of his career he
sought the best schools. Just then (1840) reigned a new enthusiasm in
the physical and experimental study of the Medical Sciences at Paris.
Laennec, Andral, Louis, Malgaigne, Velpeau, and Bernard, were the
worthy models and masters of the young American.

"Thus well-endowed, well-grounded, and well-guided, he entered upon a
life of professional study, which he pursued with unremitting ardor
and diligence even to the end of life.

"It would seem to be a great thing to say of any man that he was never
idle, and never unprofitably employed; but it might be more justly
said of Dr. Peaslee than of any other person known to the writer. He
wasted no work. His conclusions were not reached by intuition or
guess, but slowly and surely elaborated, exactly formulated and
classified, so as to be always at his command.

"More than any other member of the profession known to the writer did
he illustrate each clause of Bacon's category, that 'Reading maketh
the full man; writing the exact man; and conversation the ready man.'

"From the first he was an agreeable and satisfactory teacher, year by
year, increasingly so; this work he did for thirty-six years; in six
Medical Colleges, in five different departments of the curriculum,
before nearly a hundred different classes of students. Such training,
such practice, made him a teacher in every professional circle. In
societies he was wont to be a silent and often apparently an
abstracted listener until near the close of the debate; then he would
rise and review the whole subject with a memory so comprehensive, a
knowledge so complete, and an appreciation so judicial, that nothing
more remained to be said. His books and monographs for the time and
era of their publication were standard, and will always remain
exceptionally valuable. Only the lapse of many years may antiquate but
never stale his elegant work on 'Ovarian Tumors,' of which one of his
most famous compeers has said that he would 'rather have written it
than any other medical work of any time or in any language.'

"In his personal relations to the members of the profession, Dr.
Peaslee was genial, charitable, and just. His patients looked to him
in perfect confidence and respect, personally as well as
professionally. He was as remarkable for the diligent care as for the
thorough study of his cases; and at every visit he dispensed with
gentle humor the best medicines, faith and hope.

"From youth through middle life he passed in the light of growing
knowledge; in the serenity of accomplished duty; in the prestige of
gathering fame and fortune; and he died before age or decay had
limited his scope of life."

Prof. Peaslee married Martha Thankful, daughter of Hon. Stephen
Kendrick, of Lebanon, N. H. He died in New York City, January 21,
1878.



Reliable sources furnish some facts regarding another gentleman long
and honorably connected with this Department.

Prof. Albert Smith, M.D., LL. D., was born in Peterborough, N. H. He
graduated at Dartmouth College, in 1825, and took his medical degree
there, in 1833. He was early successful as a practitioner, and before
middle age acquired a high reputation as a medical scholar and
thinker.

In 1849, he was appointed professor of Materia Medica and Therapeutics
in the Dartmouth Medical College, where he continued to lecture till
his resignation, in 1870, from which time until his death he was
professor Emeritus. In 1857, he delivered his course of lectures at
the Vermont Medical College, and also the course at the Bowdoin
Medical School, in 1859.

The honorary degree of LL. D. was conferred on him by Dartmouth
College, in 1870, and also an honorary degree of M.D. by the Rush
Medical College, Chicago, in 1875. He was also an honorary member of
the New York Medical Society. As a medical instructor he was included
in the first rank of New England professors. His writings also gained
him a wide and enviable reputation. Among his publications were a
lecture on Hippocrates; also one on Paracelsus, and a commemorative
Discourse on the death of Dr. Amos Twitchell, besides various articles
in the medical journals and in the transactions of the New Hampshire
Medical Society.

With high professional attainments and distinctions Prof. Smith united
a personal character of the highest purity, integrity, and nobility.
He had been for a long time a member and constant attendant upon the
Unitarian Church, and for thirty years a Sunday-school teacher. He was
a strong advocate of temperance, and took a deep interest in the cause
of education. He represented Peterborough, his place of residence, in
the Legislature several times. He devoted the spare hours of his
latest years to the preparation of a "History of the Town of
Peterborough," which was published in a large octavo volume in 1876.
He married Fidelia Stearns, February 26, 1828. Prof. Smith died at
Peterborough, February 22, 1878.



The following paragraphs relating to one of Dartmouth's most largely
endowed, highly cultivated, and warmly beloved teachers, Prof. Alpheus
B. Crosby, who was born at Gilmanton, N. H., February 22, 1832, and
was the son of Dr. Dixi and Mary Jane (Moody) Crosby, are from a
Memorial "Discourse" by Dr. J. W. Barstow:

"Seven generations of tough New England fibre, combining sturdy
physique, thorough individuality and undiluted common sense, form a
groundwork on which no modern youth need hesitate to build, while the
mellow background of a virtuous lineage well prepares the canvas for
whatever of high aim and noble deed shall fill up the fresher
foreground of his own life's picture.

"The native temperament of the boy, as I remember him, showed some
rare combinations and counterpoises. With an exuberance of animal
spirits he had, also, a natural balance of _caution_. He was ardent,
but not hasty; he was self reliant and fearless, but never
precipitate; frank and affable, though not easily won by a stranger;
fond of experiment, but also intensely practical. He was prompt to
decide, but always took time for detail, and pursued perseveringly to
the end whatever engaged his attention and his effort.

"His constant association with his father, and with his father's
friends, made the boy perfectly at home in the office and in the
society of professional men; and almost from his cradle he was
accustomed to assist in minor operations and in the general detail of
a student's service. Being a discreet lad, he often accompanied the
elder Crosby in professional visits; and thus the face of the 'parvus
Iülus,' became, early, as _familiar_ as that of the 'pater Æneas,' and
grew, later, to be as welcome.

"When chloroform in Surgery was first introduced, Dr. Dixi Crosby went
to Boston to study its effects, and was one of the first surgeons in
New Hampshire to employ it in his practice. Young Ben was then a
school-boy of fifteen. His father, with full confidence in the
coolness and self possession of his son, at once commenced training
him as an assistant for the administration of the anæsthetic; teaching
him to watch the pulse and respiration, and to note all the necessary
conditions for its safe employment. And from this time, even long
before our friend commenced the systematic study of his profession, he
assisted his father, and administered the chloroform in many important
operations, sometimes even making long journeys for the purpose. It is
interesting to add, also, that in all the years of their practice
together, and in all their operations, performed under the use of
chloroform, there never occurred a single accident from its
administration.

"On graduating at Dartmouth, in 1853, our young friend pursued his
medical studies in the office of his father. He attended lectures both
at Dartmouth and at the College of Physicians in New York City, and
served for one year as interne in the U. S. Marine Hospital at
Chelsea, Massachusetts. With the exception of these necessary absences
from home, he gave every day of these preparatory years to the
assistance of his father in his wide and laborious practice. To this
course he was stimulated no less by filial ardor than by his growing
professional zeal.

"His medical degree was taken at Dartmouth, in 1856, and instead of
_beginning_ to practice, we may say that he _continued_ to practice
with his father in Hanover, going in and out as a favorite, both with
patients and in society.

"Immediately on receiving his medical degree, Dr. Crosby was appointed
demonstrator of Pathological Anatomy in the Dartmouth Medical College,
an office which he ably filled for five years.

"At the outbreak of the rebellion, in 1861, he was appointed surgeon
of the first regiment New Hampshire Volunteers, for three months'
service. This being concluded, he was at once commissioned as Brigade
Surgeon of U. S. Volunteers, and soon after promoted to the rank of
Medical Director, serving as such on the staffs, successively, of
Generale Stone, Casey, Sedgwick, and Peck. His army service was marked
by the same strong individuality, the same resolute activity, the same
executive talent, which we have seen stamped upon the boy and the
youth. Added to all those other qualities, was that same genial
humanity which made friends of every one. His brother officers trusted
him, depended upon him, and loved him. The private soldiers idolized
him, for they saw his quick and constant sympathy for them, and knew
that his large and loving heart embraced them all in its tender care.

"In the noble record of his army service, let us not forget, that to
our lamented friend belongs the credit of having originated and
erected the first complete military hospital on the modern 'pavilion
plan' that was built during the war of the rebellion.

"This hospital was visited and admired by surgeons throughout the
army, as a model of complete ventilation and drainage. Its plans were
extensively copied, and the record of its usefulness is preserved in
the archives of the War Department.

"In all his widening range of work and of social activities says
Professor Parker, 'his large heart seemed as incapable of being
overloaded with friendships as it was inexhaustible in its overflowing
friendliness. His personal magnetism held fast old friends, while the
keen points of his magnetic nature constantly caught new affinities
and drew to him fresh intimacies.'

"In the autumn of 1862, he was appointed adjunct professor of Surgery
in Dartmouth, and from that time forward his _honors_, literally,
outran his _years_.

"The number of his appointments to professional chairs in different
institutions, is something beyond precedent in the history of any
young American practitioner.

"In 1865, he was invited to the chair of Surgery in the University of
Vermont, and in the same year to a similar chair in the University of
Michigan.

"Both these positions he accepted, and ably filled for several years.

"In 1870, on the resignation of his honored father at the age of
threescore and ten, Dr. Ben was at once called to the chair of Surgery
in Dartmouth, and entered upon its duties, still continuing to perform
full duty in both his other professorships. He also delivered a course
of surgical lectures in Bowdoin College, Maine, during the same year.

"In 1871, he received the appointment of Surgical professor in the
_Long Island Medical College_, in the city of Brooklyn, which he
accepted, together with the post of visiting surgeon in the hospital
to which the college was attached. His work during this period was
extremely arduous, but was performed with the utmost ability and
credit.

"In 1872, he was invited to a professorship in the New York
University, and also to another (that of Surgical Anatomy) in Bellevue
Hospital Medical College in New York City. The former of these he
declined, but he accepted the latter and retained it until his death.

"In 1873, Dr. Crosby was invited by the Trustees of Jefferson Medical
College, Philadelphia, to accept the chair of Anatomy, on the
resignation of the distinguished Dr. Pancoast.

"This, though not accepted, may be reckoned the crowning honor in his
wreath of professional laurels."

For all the qualities which distinguish the model physician, surgeon,
teacher, and companion, few names, in all the annals of Medicine,
stand higher than that of Alpheus Benning Crosby.

Professor Crosby married at Baltimore, Md., Mildred Glassell, daughter
of Dr. Wm. R. Smith. He died at Hanover, August 9, 1877.



In closing this record the valuable services of Parsons, Delamater,
Bartlett, Holmes, Hubbard, Roby, Williams, Phelps, Field, How, and
Frost should not escape our notice.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE CHANDLER SCIENTIFIC DEPARTMENT.--THE AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT.--THE
THAYER DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING.


The following account of the Chandler Scientific Department of the
college is from the pen of Professor Ruggles and other authentic
sources.

The building formerly occupied by Moor's Charity School is now
occupied by this Department.

Extracts from Mr. Chandler's will give us an idea of the department of
instruction which he wished to establish.

"I give and devise the sum of fifty thousand dollars ... for the
establishment and support of a permanent department or school of
instruction in the college, in the practical and useful arts of life,
comprised chiefly in the branches of Mechanics and Civil Engineering,
the Invention and Manufacture of Machinery, Carpentry, Masonry,
Architecture and Drawing, the Investigation of the properties and uses
of the Materials employed in the Arts, the Modern Languages and
English Literature, together with Book-keeping, and such other
branches of knowledge as may best qualify young persons for the duties
and employments of active life; but, first of all and above all, I
would enjoin in connection with the above branches, the careful
inculcation of the principles of pure morality, piety, and religion,
without introducing topics of controversial theology, that the
benefits of said department or school may be equally enjoyed by all
religious denominations without distinction....

"To the end that my wishes in respect to the foregoing legacy may be
observed, I do hereby constitute a perpetual Board of Visitors,
consisting of two persons, who shall, during the term of their
respective lives, visit the said department or school as often as they
shall deem it necessary and advisable to do so, and at least once in
each year one or both of said Visitors shall examine the condition of
its funds, and the management and disposition of the same, as well as
the management of the said department or school generally....

"The said Board of Visitors shall have full power to determine,
interpret, and explain my wishes in respect to this foundation; to
redress grievances, both with respect to professors and students; to
hear appeals from the decisions of the Board of Trustees, and to
provide remedy upon complaint duly exhibited in behalf of the
professors or students; to review and reverse any censure passed by
said Trustees upon any professor or student on this foundation; to
declare void all rules and regulations made by said Trustees relative
to this foundation, which in their opinion may be inconsistent with my
wishes as herein expressed, or improper or injudicious; to take care
that the duties of every professor or other officer on this foundation
be intelligently and faithfully discharged, and to admonish or remove
such professor or officer either for misbehavior, incapacity, or
neglect of the duties of his office; to examine into the proficiency
of the students, and to admonish, dismiss, or suspend any student for
negligence, contumacy or crime, or disobedience to the rules hereafter
to be established for the government of said school or department; and
to see that my true intentions in regard to this foundation be
faithfully executed.

"And in order that said Board of Visitors may not be limited in their
powers by the foregoing recital, I further confer upon the said Board
of Visitors all the visitatorial powers and privileges, which, by the
law of the land, belong and are intrusted to any Visitor of any
eleemosynary corporation....

"As I have perfect confidence in the integrity and ability of my two
esteemed friends, John J. Dixwell and Francis B. Hayes, both of
Boston, aforesaid, and as I know their capacity to perform what I
desire they should do under this proviso of my will, I constitute and
appoint them to be the first Board of Visitors."

The committee appointed to draw up the plan for the organization of
the school consisted of Rev. Dr. Nathan Lord, Hon. Joel Parker, and
Edmund Parker, Esq.

No special meeting of the Trustees was called, as had been
contemplated, and the committee made their report at the regular
meeting, July 26, 1852, and on the next day the following statutes
were adopted:

"Article I. In accordance with the will of the late Abiel Chandler,
Esq., "the Trustees of Dartmouth College by this and the following
statutes, constitute and organize a school of instruction in
connection with the college and as a department thereof, and the said
school is denominated 'The Chandler School of Science and the Arts.'

"Article II. The school shall consist of two departments, Junior and
Senior. These departments shall be conducted respectively by such
officers and according to such rules and regulations as the Trustees
shall from time to time appoint and ordain, with the advice and
approval of the Board of Visitors, and in subjection always to the
will of the Founder.

"Article III. In the Junior department of the school, instruction
shall be given in the English language, in Arithmetic and Algebra, in
Book-keeping, Physical Geography, Linear Drawing, Geometry,
Physiology, Botany, Graphics and use of Instruments, and in such other
elementary studies as may be necessary to qualify students for the
Senior department.

"Article IV. The Senior department shall comprise the branches of
Mechanics and Civil Engineering, the Invention and Manufacture of
Machinery, Carpentry, Masonry, Architecture and Drawing; the
Investigation of the Properties and Uses of the Materials employed in
the Arts, the Modern Languages and English Literature, together with
Book-keeping and such other branches of knowledge as may best qualify
young persons for the duties and employments of active life, according
to the will and injunction of the Founder.

"Article VII. The term of study in the Junior department shall be one
year, and in the Senior department two years.

"Article VIII. All students who shall have been admitted to the
Senior department and sustained a satisfactory examination at the end
of the course before a committee of gentlemen from abroad appointed by
the Faculty, shall be entitled to the degree of Bachelor of Science."

Hon. John Kelley and Samuel Fletcher, Esq., having been appointed a
committee to consider the question of opening the school, made the
following report:

"The Chandler Fund appears to be safely invested and productive. It is
therefore recommended, the school shall be opened for instruction at
the commencement of the next College Term, and more fully organized as
soon as a sufficient number of students shall offer themselves for
admission. But as an experiment is to be made, it is not expedient to
appoint professors and other teachers, until experience shall prove
what teachers shall be required. In the mean time it is recommended
that examination of students presenting themselves for admission to
the school be made by some member, or members of the Faculty, by the
direction of the President, and that the Faculty be a committee to
make suitable provision for rooms and instruction until further orders
of this Board."

The following resolution was then passed:

"_Resolved_, That the Chandler School be opened at the commencement of
the next College Term."

We give the following extracts from the By-laws which were drawn up by
Hon. Joel Parker, and Rev. Silas Aiken, D.D., of Rutland, Vt.:

"Vacations.--In the Senior department the terms and vacations shall be
coincident with the terms and vacations in the academical department
of the college. In the Junior department there shall be four
vacations, one of four weeks, from Commencement, one of two weeks in
the winter, and one in the spring and autumn of one week each.

"Tuition.--Every student in the Senior department shall be charged ten
dollars each term, or thirty dollars for the year, including all
necessary incidentals. In the Junior department the tuition shall be
twenty dollars for the year, or five dollars for each term. The bill
of every term shall be paid in advance, and no student shall be
permitted to go on with his class without an exact compliance with
this statute.

"Government.--In other respects the government of the Chandler School
shall be administered according to the By-laws of the college, as now
established, so far as those laws may be applicable; and until the
wants of the School may be more definitely ascertained, the regulation
thereof in things not otherwise provided for is submitted to the
discretion of the College Faculty."

In the autumn of 1852, the school was organized, and seventeen
students admitted, two to the Senior and fifteen to the Junior class.
James W. Patterson, who was a student in the theological school at New
Haven, was elected tutor, and the new institution placed in his
charge. In July, 1854, Mr. Patterson was elected Chandler Professor of
Mathematics, and during the college years 1852-53, and 1853-54, in
addition to the general management, gave nearly all the instruction in
the Chandler School, at the same time discharged the duties of a tutor
of Latin in the college proper. In 1854, the first class, consisting
of four members, was graduated.

On the death of Professor Stephen Chase, in 1851, John S. Woodman had
succeeded to the chair of Mathematics. In 1855, Professor Woodman
resigned, to enter on the practice of law in Boston, and Mr. Patterson
was elected in his place. During the next year he continued at the
head of the Chandler School, and gave the instruction in Mathematics,
and allied branches, in addition to his duties as professor of
Mathematics in the Academic Department.

In 1856, Professor Woodman was appointed professor of Civil
Engineering, and succeeded Professor Patterson in the care of the
Chandler School, in which from its opening he had given some
instruction. This position he held until 1870, when he was forced to
resign on account of failing health, and was succeeded by Professor
Edward R. Ruggles, who had occupied the chair of Modern Languages and
English Literature since 1866. At the annual meeting of the Board of
Trustees in 1857, it was voted that, "The regular course of study in
the Chandler School of Science and the Arts, from the present time,
shall comprise a term of four years."

In 1862 the name Chandler School of Science and the Art was changed to
Chandler Scientific Department of Dartmouth College.

The character and usefulness of the Scientific Department from its
foundation to the present time, may best be learned by studying the
career of its graduates in successive classes. It will be observed,
that the first class of this school graduated less than twenty-five
years since, and yet in that brief period, its sons have made for it
an honorable record; a record which should bring to it patronage and
impart to its students a spirit of scholarly pride and emulation. It
might not be deemed proper to go into a detailed account of the labors
and successes of individuals among its living graduates but it is only
fair to this comparatively youthful department of the college, to say
that as lawyers, teachers, scientists, engineers, architects, and in
other spheres of practical science, its sons have made for themselves
a wide and enviable reputation. The age demands that its institutions
of learning shall impart a scholarship that will bring the forces of
nature under the control of man, and render the student more efficient
in all the industries and business enterprises of the time.

Experience has shown that the Scientific Department of Dartmouth is
organized to meet this demand, and is in full and intelligent sympathy
with the wants of modern society. From the first its teachers have
been able and untiring in their devotion to its permanent prosperity
and welfare, and its success has justified their efforts and zeal.


AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT.

The New Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts was
established by an act of the State Legislature in 1866. We give the
act as recorded in the Revised Statutes.

"Section 1. A college is established and made a body politic and
corporate, by the name of the New Hampshire College of Agriculture and
the Mechanic Arts, whose leading object is, without excluding other
scientific and classical studies, and including military tactics, to
teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the
mechanic arts, in conformity to an act of Congress entitled 'An act
donating land to the several States and Territories, which may provide
colleges for the benefit of agriculture and the mechanic arts,
approved July 2, 1862;' and by that name may sue and be sued,
prosecute and defend to final judgment and execution, and is vested
with all the powers and privileges, and subject to all the
liabilities, incident to corporations of a similar nature.

"Sect. 2. The general government of the college is vested in nine
Trustees, five of whom shall be appointed, one from each councillor
district, and commissioned by the Governor, with advice of the
council, and four-by the Trustees of Dartmouth College, so classified
and commissioned that the offices of three shall become vacant
annually; any vacancy occurring shall be filled by the authority which
made the original appointment.

"Sect. 3. The Trustees shall appoint a secretary, who shall be sworn,
and keep a fair and full record of their proceedings; and a treasurer,
who shall give bond for the faithful discharge of his duties, in such
sum as the Trustees may require, and shall receive such compensation
for his services as they may deem reasonable. They shall also appoint
a Faculty of instruction, prescribe their duties, and invest them with
such powers for the immediate government and management of the
institution as they may deem most conducive to its best interests.

"Sect. 4. No Trustee shall receive any compensation for his services;
but expenses reasonably incurred by him shall be paid by the college.

"Sect. 5. The Trustees shall, on or before the twentieth day of May,
annually, make report to the legislature of the financial condition,
operations, and progress of the college, recording such improvements
and experiments made, with their cost and results, including State,
industrial, and economical statistics, as may be supposed useful one
copy of which shall be transmitted to each college endowed under the
provisions of the aforesaid act of Congress, and one copy to the
Secretary of the Interior.

"Sect. 6. The Trustees are authorized and empowered to locate and
establish the college at Hanover, in connection with Dartmouth
College, and, with that Corporation, to make all necessary contracts
relative to the terms of connection, subject to be terminated upon a
notice of one year, given at any time after fourteen years, and in
relation to its furnishing to the college the free use of an
experimental farm, all requisite buildings, the libraries,
laboratories, apparatus, and museums of said Dartmouth College, and
for supplying such instruction, in addition to that furnished by its
professors and teachers, as the best interests of its students may
require; and also as to any legacy said Dartmouth College may receive
from the estate of David Culver. Said Trustees are also directed to
furnish, so far as may be practicable, free tuition to indigent
students, and to make provision for the delivery of free lectures in
different parts of the State upon subjects pertaining to agriculture
and the mechanic arts.

"Sect. 7. All funds derived from the sale of land scrip issued to the
State by the United States, in pursuance of the act of Congress
aforesaid, shall be invested in registered bonds of the State or of
the United States, which shall be delivered to the State treasurer,
who shall have the custody of the same, and pay over the income
thereof, as it may accrue, to the treasurer of the college."

The great work of securing the requisite funds, and laying foundations
for this by no means unimportant Department, was committed to the late
Professor Ezekiel W. Dimond. His early experience in affairs gave him
peculiar fitness for this service. Whether occupied in interviewing
legislators and capitalists, or in the planning and erection of
edifices, he labored in season and out of season for the
accomplishment of his task, and with large success. When the
Department went into operation he was one of its principal teachers,
and in this sphere he left upon his pupils the impress of a well-read
chemist and a devotee to his profession. To his efforts, probably more
than to those of any other single individual, is New Hampshire
indebted for whatever of success has been attained in this department.
Indeed, should the Agricultural College leave its stamp upon the
"steep and sterile hillsides," or the more prolific valleys of the
Granite State, as it is devoutly to be hoped that in process of time
it may, no name probably will be so familiarly associated with the
history of its early struggles for existence as that of Dimond.

Nor were Professor Dimond's services to science limited to this
department of the College.

In the Academical and Scientific departments his name appears in the
list of zealous, painstaking teachers.

Professor Dimond's death in 1876, while yet apparently upon the
threshold of a work to which he gave _his life_, was a public loss.

Of Professor Thomas R. Crosby, Professor Quimby says:

"Entering college in 1839, in the Sophomore class, he bestowed
faithful labor on the whole course, while at the same time he did not
forget his favorite studies of Medicine and Natural History. Pursuing
these in his leisure hours, he was fitted to take the degrees of A. B.
and M.D. at the same time, in 1841. With this preparation he entered
at once upon the practice of medicine as his life-work, first at
Campton, afterward at Hartford, Vt., Meriden, and Manchester. He was
one of the active men in originating the Hillsborough Agricultural
Society. He had a hand in organizing the State Society, and in
preparing the first volume of the Society's Transactions. Nearly at
the same time the above society was originated, the publication of the
"Granite Farmer" was commenced, and Dr. Crosby was employed to edit
it, in which position he did well. He was for a time city physician of
Manchester, and came near being elected its mayor. His health having
failed in some measure, he removed to Norwich, Vt., the home of his
wife's family. For ten years he lived in Norwich and Hanover, engaged
in such teaching and practice and study as his health would permit.
When our country called for aid in the war of the rebellion he
believed it his duty to consecrate his knowledge of Medicine and skill
in Surgery to her, and to the noble men who exposed themselves to
sickness and wounds in her cause. Upon entering the service he was
immediately put in charge of the Columbian College Hospital, in
Washington. He assumed the responsibilities of the position with the
determination that the men who came under his charge 'should have
their rights,' and faithfully did he carry into execution his purpose.
He remained in charge of this Hospital until after the close of the
war and the sick and wounded were able to be transferred to their
homes. The next year he was appointed professor of General and
Military Surgery and Hygiene in the National Medical College, it being
the Medical Department of Columbian College, which position he filled
until 1870. On the opening of the State Agricultural College here, an
institution in which he was particularly interested, he was appointed
professor of Animal and Vegetable Physiology, in which, and in Natural
History in the Academic Department, he taught almost literally till
the day of his decease. When unable to meet his classes in their
recitation-room he received them in his own study, and there heard
their recitations, the last less than forty-eight hours before his
death. Thus he fell 'with the harness on.'"


THAYER SCHOOL OF CIVIL ENGINEERING.

Of this department Professor Fletcher says:

"Between the years 1867 and 1871, General Sylvanus Thayer, of
Braintree, Massachusetts, by donations amounting in the aggregate to
seventy thousand dollars, made provision for establishing in
connection with the college a special course of instruction in Civil
Engineering. 'The venerable donor, himself a distinguished officer of
the U. S. Corps of Engineers, was moved to this munificence, not only
by a regard for his Alma Mater, but also by a desire to provide for
young men possessing requisite ability a thorough and exclusively
professional training.'

"The school was organized during the winter and spring of 1871, by
Professor Robert Fletcher, under the immediate direction of General
Thayer. The general character and aim of the course are indicated by
the following quotation from the Instrument of Gift: 'The requisites
for admission to the school shall be of a high order, embracing such
studies, at least, as are specified in a paper to be hereto appended,
called 'Programme A,' bearing my signature, which programme shall be
regarded as an absolute minimum, and which may, in the discretion of
the Board of Overseers, created by the 5th article of this
Instrument, be extended, but not diminished or contracted in the least
degree.'

"'2. The course of study shall extend through at least two years, and
the duration of the course may be further extended so as to include
another half year, should three or more members of the Board of
Overseers judge, after a fair trial of the two years' course, such
further extension to be expedient. The studies and instruction of each
year shall extend continuously from September first to July first
following.'"

"Instruction was begun to a regular class of the engineering course,
September, 1871. During the preceding months of the year preparatory
instruction had been given. From 1871 to 1873, a preparatory course of
two years was contemplated, and during the year 1872-3 was maintained
in connection with the higher course. Meanwhile the detailed statement
of requisites for admission, styled 'Programme A,' was prepared by
Professor Fletcher, under supervision of General Thayer, and with the
aid of several professors eminent in the various subjects which it
includes. These requirements embrace all the branches of a common
school education, a full course of pure Mathematics and a thorough
course in Physics, including theoretical Chemistry and Astronomy. The
high standard thus established justified the following announcement in
the College 'Catalogue.' 'The department is to be essentially, though
not formally, post-graduate. The course of study is to be of the
highest order, passing beyond what is possible in institutions for
general culture, and is designed to prepare the capable and faithful
student for responsible positions and difficult service.' It was
intended that the Preparatory Department should provide instruction in
the subjects embraced in 'Programme A.'

"The decease of General Thayer in October, 1872, deprived the School
of his personal supervision. The general direction of its affairs then
devolved on the Board of Overseers constituted by his Instrument of
Gift and appointed by himself. At that time the Board consisted of
Rev. A. D. Smith, D.D., LL. D., president of Dartmouth College, Prof.
O. P. Hubbard of New Haven, formerly at Dartmouth College, Prof.
George L. Andrews, of the U. S. Military Academy, Gen. John C.
Palfrey, C. E., of Lowell, Massachusetts, and Prof. P. S. Michie, of
the U. S. Military Academy. The last three gentlemen had been officers
in the U. S. Corps of Engineers.

"At its first meeting in May, 1873, the Board decided that it would
not be expedient for some time to come to maintain such an auxiliary
as a Preparatory Department. It was found that the limited means
provided by the founder would allow the attainment of his high ideal
only by working within comparatively narrow limits. Without attempting
to cover too broad a field, a high standard and thorough work were to
be essential features of the course.

"The Board of Overseers holds a meeting at Dartmouth College annually,
when it examines carefully into the working of the school, its
financial condition, etc., and adopts any measures promising to effect
improvement and secure greater efficiency, according to the powers
conferred upon it by the Instrument of Gift. The Board also examines
the students and recommends such members of the first class as it
finds to be qualified, to the Trustees of Dartmouth College for the
degree of Civil Engineer.

"The first class which completed the two years' course graduated in
1873. The class of 1877 was the fifth sent out by the school. At that
time the whole number of graduates was thirteen. There had been,
besides, two who left for professional engagements after the first
year of study. The graduates have nearly all obtained honorable
positions in the line of the profession soon after graduation, with
fair prospects for distinction.

"The nature of the course is such that a large corps of instructors is
not required. Careful training and drill in essential and fundamental
branches is the aim. Considerable time is devoted to out-door practice
but without attempt to make experts in any direction. Accordingly,
temporary employment in a professional line is allowed at proper
times, such as will conduce to the student's improvement and be more
or less remunerative. Thus it is expected that the student will be
fitted to advance rapidly and successfully in any 'specialty' to which
he may subsequently devote his efforts.

"The school is now hardly in full operation, as some features about
the course are still experimental. It has its history yet to make."




CHAPTER XXIX.

BENEFACTORS.--TRUSTEES.


From various authentic sources we have the following sketches of
Dartmouth's leading benefactors, always excepting the last Royal
Governor of New Hampshire, John Wentworth, whose care for all the
interests of the Province is a matter of enduring record. Of the
distinguished person in honor of whom the College was named, the
following account, published in 1779, is from "Collins' Peerage":

"William, _the present and Second Earl of Dartmouth_, for his more
polite education, traveled through France, Italy, and Germany; and, on
his return to England, took the oaths, and his seat in the House of
Peers, on May 31, 1754. His Lordship was sworn of His Majesty's Privy
Council on July 26, 1765; in August following he was appointed first
Commissioner of Trade and Plantations, which he resigned in 1766; in
August, 1772, he was appointed Secretary of State for the Colonies;
and on November 10, 1775, Keeper of the Privy Seal.

"His Lordship married, on January 11, 1755, Frances Catharine, only
daughter and heir of Sir Charles Gunter Nicholl, Knight of the Bath;
and by her had issue eight sons and one daughter.

"His Lordship is also President of the London Dispensary;
Vice-President of the Foundling and Lock Hospitals; Recorder of
Litchfield; LL. D., and F. R. S."

The armorial inscription is:

"GAUDET TENTAMINE VIRTUS."

Forbes' Life of Dr. Beattie gives the following interesting paragraph:

"His Majesty (George III.) asked what I thought of my new
acquaintance, Lord Dartmouth. I said, there was something in his air
and manner which seemed to me not only agreeable, but very enchanting,
and that he seemed to me to be one of the best of men; a sentiment in
which both their majesties heartily joined. 'They say that Lord
Dartmouth is an enthusiast,' said the king, 'but surely he says
nothing on the subject of religion but what every one may and ought to
say on the subject of religion.'"

Of John Thornton, the devout Episcopalian, the kinsman of Wilberforce,
and the most munificent of Dartmouth's early benefactors, almost the
sole supporter of the founder for several years, Rev. Thomas Scott, in
a memorial "Discourse" says:

"It is worthy of observation, that this friend of mankind, in the
exercise of his beneficence, not only contributed his money (which
often is done to very little purpose) but he devoted his time and
thoughts very much to the same object; doing good was the great
business of his life, and may more properly be said to have been his
occupation, than even his mercantile engagements, which were uniformly
considered as subservient to that nobler design.

"To form and execute plans of usefulness; to superintend, arrange, and
improve upon those plans; to lay aside such as did not answer, and to
substitute others; to form acquaintance, and collect intelligence for
this purpose; to select proper agents, and to carry on correspondence,
in order to ascertain that his bounties were well applied: These and
similar concerns were the hourly occupations of his life, and the ends
of living, which he proposed to himself; nor did he think that any
part of his time was spent either happily or innocently, if it were
not some way instrumental, directly or indirectly, to the furtherance
of useful designs."

"Abiel Chandler was a native of Concord, N. H. In his childhood his
parents removed to Fryeburg, Maine, where he labored on a farm till he
was twenty-one years of age. He was graduated at Harvard College in
1806, and spent the next eleven years in teaching at Salem and
Newburyport, Mass. To the good reputation which he had previously
gained as a student, he added that of an excellent preceptor. A
little later he commenced a mercantile life at Boston. He was of the
house of Chandler and Howard, and afterwards Chandler, Howard, and
Company, for more than a quarter of a century, when he retired with a
fortune. To numerous relatives he made liberal bequests, with great
delicacy and judgment. After his legacy to the college, the residue of
his property was bequeathed to the New Hampshire Asylum for the
Insane.

"The origin of Mr. Chandler's endowment of the Scientific School is
referable to an incident that occurred to him when a young man at
Fryeburg. He fell in company with some students of Dartmouth College,
and he was impressed by their superiority to himself. He conceived the
purpose of being himself a scholar, and he fulfilled it. When, after a
few years of honorable industry as a teacher he became a merchant, he
saw himself, though now a scholar, ignorant, to a great extent, of the
principles and methods of mercantile life. Whereupon he set himself to
a new variety of learning. He gained it, and with it gained a fortune.
But he saw other men around him, in different spheres, suffering as he
had done from a similar want of knowledge,--merchants, traders,
ship-masters, artisans, farmers, laborers.

"The Chandler School is the ripened fruit of a well-considered purpose
to benefit mankind. He had confidence in the importance of his object,
the integrity of his aims, and the wisdom of his advisers. He bestowed
his charity with a hearty good-will, and left the event with God."

"_John Conant_ was born in Stowe, Mass., in 1790. His family descended
from the French Huguenots who were driven into England by Louis XIV.
His father was an industrious and successful farmer. In the district
school he was taught the merest rudiments of an English education. In
after years, by the aid and sympathy of an intelligent and
well-educated wife, he fitted himself to write for the public
journals, to lecture on temperance and agriculture, and to perform
with credit and honor the duties of important official stations, in
town and State. His leisure hours were devoted to study. He collected
a small private library of choice books in history, biography, and
science, and made them the companions of rainy days and winter
evenings.

"At the age of twenty-six, he purchased a farm in Jaffrey, under the
shadow of 'the great Monadnock,' on which he labored for thirty-five
years, and gathered 'a plentiful estate.' This was accumulated by
means of those home-bred virtues, industry, prudence, and economy; for
he never, in a single instance, increased his wealth by speculation.

"When the New Hampshire Insane Asylum was occupying the public
attention, he contributed liberally to its endowment, and was at one
time president of its Board of Trustees, being sole superintendent of
the first buildings that were reared.

"Turning his thoughts toward the rising academy at New London, Mr.
Conant proposed to add to its literary and scientific departments an
agricultural school. He ascertained, however, that his whole estate
would be inadequate to the work, and, after making generous donations
to the academy, he turned his attention to the Agricultural College at
Hanover.

"In his endowment of this institution, along with other things, he has
provided a model farm for the college, and founded a scholarship for
each town in Cheshire County, twenty-two in all, with an additional
one for Jaffrey.

"Mr. Conant was through life a liberal contributor to public
enterprises, and a supporter of the gospel, and for twenty years was
an active member of the Baptist Church."

Boynton's History of West Point gives the following valuable
paragraphs relating to Sylvanus Thayer, by whose munificence to the
cause of education he has laid his Alma Mater and his native town
under lasting obligations:

"Brevet-major Sylvanus Thayer, of the Corps of Engineers, on July 28,
1817, assumed command as superintendent of the West Point Military
Academy, and from this period the commencement of whatever success as
an educational institution, and whatever reputation the Academy may
possess, at home or abroad, for its strict, impartial, salutary,
elevating, and disciplinary government, must be dated. Major Thayer
was an early graduate of the academy. He had served with distinction
in the War of 1812, and had studied the military schools of France,
and profited by the opportunity to acquire more complete and just
views concerning the management of such an institution than were
generally entertained by educational and military men of that day. The
field before him was uncultivated; the period was one when rare
qualifications for position were not considered valueless; and,
blessed with health, devotion to the cause, and firmness of purpose,
he was permitted to organize a system, and remain sixteen years to
perfect its operation.

"Immediately after entering upon his duties, the Cadets were organized
into a battalion of two companies, with a colonel of Cadets, an
adjutant, and a sergeant-major, for its staff; and within the year he
created a 'Commandant of Cadets,' to be an instructor of tactics.

"The division of classes into sections, the weekly rendering of class
reports, showing the daily progress, the system and scale of daily
marks, the establishment of relative class rank among the members, the
publication of the Annual Register, the introduction of the Board of
Visitors, the check-book system, the preponderating influence of the
'blackboard,' and the essential parts of the Regulations for the
Military Academy, as they stand to this day, are some of the evidences
of the indefatigable efforts of Major Thayer to insure method, order,
and prosperity to the institution. When relieved, at his own request,
the upward impetus given to the institution had attracted general
observation."

General Thayer evidently believed that "peace hath her victories" as
well as war, and nobly acted in accordance with his intelligent,
earnest convictions.

"Joel Parker was born at Jaffrey, N. H. After studying in the academy
at Groton, where the late President James Walker was one of his
schoolmates, he entered the Sophomore class at Dartmouth College in
February, 1809, at the early age of thirteen, and graduated in 1811,
not yet seventeen years of age. After his graduation he studied law at
Keene, and with his brother Edmund at Amherst, and entered the bar of
Cheshire County, at the October term in 1817, at the former place,
where he at once engaged in practice.

In the year 1821, contemplating a change of residence, he visited the
West, and was admitted to practice in the Circuit Court of the United
States at Columbus, Ohio, in January, 1822; but, fortunately for his
native State, returned in the latter year, and devoted himself
assiduously to his chosen pursuit.

Free from domestic cares, affianced only to his profession, he early
gained an honorable position by the steady exercise of natural
abilities well adapted to its pursuit. He was industrious, thorough,
minute, painstaking, cautious, persistent, and untiring. "Judge
Parker's mode of practice in the trial of cases," writes an early
professional associate, who still enjoys a ripe and honored age, "to
take down the testimony in full of the witnesses in writing, and to
cross-examine them at great length as to all the circumstances they
might know relative to the case, contributed greatly to change the
previous practice of the witness' first telling his story of what he
knew, followed by a brief cross-examination, with only a few notes,
made by the counsel, of the leading points of the testimony."

Of Judge Parker's judicial life in New Hampshire, Charles Sumner, in
1844, wrote: "It will not be unjust to his associates to distinguish.
Mr. Chief Justice Parker as entitled to peculiar honor for his
services on the bench. He may be justly regarded as one of the ablest
judges of the country."

The event which brought Judge Parker more conspicuously before the
public, and undoubtedly contributed justly and largely to give him a
wide and established reputation for vigor, independence, learning, and
capacity, was his controversy with 14 Mr. Justice Story of the Supreme
Court of the United States in regard to the proper construction of a
clause--it might even be said the meaning of a word [lien]--in the
Bankrupt Law of 1841; a controversy which became political in other
hands, and threatened to reach the magnitude of a conflict between the
United States and New Hampshire.

After the experiences of this generation, such a collision seems
trifling; but it involved subjects of grave importance, and was a
contest between no insignificant combatants,--not without interest at
this day to a student of common or constitutional law.

It began in 1842, when Story and Parker were each in the full vigor of
judicial life, and enthusiastic crowds of young men were learning the
science of the law from Story's lips. It ended seven years after, when
Story had passed away, and Parker was lecturing where Story taught, to
young men who now revere the memory of both. He had laid aside the
honor and labors of the office which required him to engage in the
struggle; and, in the first year of his service as a professor in the
school to whose success and reputation Story had so largely
contributed, the court which Story had adorned declared the survivor
victorious. Like Entellus, he might say,--

    "Hic victor cestus artemque repono."

The eminent service rendered to the country and the age, by Judge
Parker, while Royall professor of Law at Cambridge, forms a material
part of our national history.

Richard Fletcher was a native of Cavendish, Vt. Having graduated at
Dartmouth, in 1806, he studied law with Daniel Webster, and commenced
practice in Salisbury, N. H. In 1819 he removed to Boston, where he
shortly took rank with the very first of legal advocates.

His biographer says: "While in practice before the courts his presence
ever commanded the utmost respect. Of good form, of handsome and
expressive features, and of most gentlemanly and pleasing address,
with his great learning and untiring industry, it is not strange that
he should have succeeded at the bar and on the bench.

"He was an orator of great power,--fluent and elegant in diction,
bright and sparkling in thought, keen and quick in repartee.

"His care not to be engaged in unworthy causes was a matter of note.

"In political life he found little that suited his tastes, although at
different times a member of both the State and National Legislatures.

"Mr. Fletcher was a sincere Christian. His religion was not so much of
the aggressive kind, nor did he often urge his views upon others; but
it pervaded his entire character, and shone out in all his actions. In
his will he made a provision for publishing biennially, a prize essay
adapted to impress 'on the minds of all Christians a solemn sense of
their duty to exhibit in their godly lives and conversation the
beneficent effects of the religion they profess, and thus increase the
efficiency of Christianity in Christian countries, and recommend its
acceptance to the heathen portions of the world.'"

Few of Dartmouth's alumni have manifested a more affectionate,
steadfast devotion to their Alma Mater, than Mr. Fletcher.

Tappan Wentworth was the son of Isaac Wentworth, of Dover, N. H., and
was born there February 24, 1802, and died in Lowell, June 12, 1875.
His father was a poor man, a boatman running a freight-boat between
Dover and Portsmouth.

He was sent first to common schools till he reached the classical
school where he studied Latin in a class with the late John K. Young,
D.D., Dr. George W. Kittredge, and Hon. John H. White, but was taken
from school after having read two books of Virgil. Judge White says:
"Tappan was a good scholar, energetic and self-reliant. I was in the
Latin class with him, and was told by the father that he was too poor
to keep him in school." He then spent about three years in Portsmouth,
in a North End grocery store.

From Portsmouth he went to South Berwick, Me., into the stores of the
late Benjamin Nason and Alphonso Gerrish, successively, as clerk. He
there attracted the attention of Hon. William Burleigh, a then member
of Congress from York district, by a spirited article he had written
in favor of Mr. Burleigh's reëlection. Mr. Burleigh now offered to
take him as a law student, and the young clerk entered upon the study
of law, and was admitted to the bar in York County in 1826. After
seven years' successful practice in his profession in South Berwick
and Great Falls, he came to Lowell, bringing some seven thousand
dollars with him.

He now seemed to form his life plan of work, professionally and
financially,--diligence in his profession and all possible investments
in real estate. At his death his $7,000 had swollen into nearly
$300,000, during his forty-five years of Lowell life.

During these years he became a leading member of his profession, was
often in offices of trust in city affairs, at different times in both
houses of the Legislature, and a member of Congress from 1853 to 1855.

After assigning "pride of ancestry and name" as one reason for Mr.
Wentworth's munificence to Dartmouth, Judge Crosby says:

"Another reason for the gift to the college is found in his
appreciation of the value, the power, and the beauty of education. He
had had hard experience in relation to it. He had hungered for it when
he could not get it. He had obtained it in limited departments, by
hard work, at great odds and under great embarrassments, when other
claims must be postponed in its behalf. And as he looked over our
college studies he found many branches he had never pursued and could
not approach."

"The fund is not given for scholarships, professorships, libraries, or
buildings. It is given for the support of the institution, to make
instruction independent, learned and cheap; given to invite the youth
to come here, and to give them the best opportunities of cultivation
at lessened expense, to lay foundations of learning and mental
enlargement for any department in life. It will maintain ten learned
professors or twenty tutors, or give 20,000 volumes of books annually,
as the honorable Trustees shall think the demands of the college
require.

"It may enlarge, repair, or ornament these grounds; it may be turned
into laboratories, museums of natural history, or art; it may raise
the curriculum to higher studies and extended courses. It is not
restrained by his personal judgment and direction in the future, but
left to the better judgment of living mind."

Should Dartmouth ever lose her maiden name, she would not hesitate in
regard to the new one.

William Reed was born at Marblehead, Mass. Compelled to abandon the
hope of a public education, he afterwards engaged in mercantile
pursuits, which he followed with great energy and activity and with a
good degree of success.

Having by his untiring energy and perseverance, and by his strict
habits of economy come into possession of a considerable amount of
property, he devoted the latter part of his life to philanthropic and
benevolent purposes.

As a citizen he was distinguished for activity, public spirit and true
patriotism. The many marks of attention and respect which he received
from his fellow-citizens evinced the high estimation in which he was
held by the community.

In 1811 he was elected to a seat in the Congress of the United States,
a station which he filled for four years with honor to himself, with
satisfaction to his constituents, and with advantage to his country.

While the cause of Foreign Missions received the largest share of his
Christian sympathies and the largest amount of his charitable
donations, yet he was deeply interested in all the benevolent
operations of the day. His sound judgment was sought in the management
of various public institutions. In 1826 he was elected a member of the
Board of Visitors of the Theological Seminary at Andover, and occupied
that station until his death. He was for several years a Trustee of
Dartmouth; also of Amherst.

Dr. George Cheyne Shattuck was born in Templeton, Mass., in the year
1783, in the sixth generation from William Shattuck, who was born in
England in the year 1621, and died in Watertown, Mass., in the year
1672, Dr. Benjamin Shattuck graduated at Harvard College in 1765, and
having studied medicine, settled in Templeton. His youngest son
inherited thirteen hundred dollars, and this sufficed for his support,
fitting for college, and college and Medical education, commenced at
Hanover and continued in Philadelphia and Boston, with such addition
as he was able to make by school-keeping. There were no public
conveyances when he went from Templeton to Hanover, and he bought a
horse on which he rode to Hanover and then sold it, taking the pay in
board. He received four degrees from his Alma Mater; the first in the
year 1803 and the last, of Doctor of Laws, in 1853. He settled in
Boston in the year 1807, and for the space of forty-seven years
devoted himself to the practice of his profession. He secured the
esteem, respect and affection of his patients, and gathered a handsome
estate. He gave liberally to his Alma Mater for an Observatory, for
books, and for portraits of distinguished alumni. He founded a
professorship in the Medical Department of Harvard University and
endowed scholarships in the Academical Department. He gave liberally
to various charities during his lifetime, as well as to public
institutions, and the poor and needy never appealed to him in vain. He
died in Boston in the year 1854, in the profession of the faith in
which he had been educated both at home and at college.

George H. Bissell was born at Hanover, N. H. He is descended from a
family of Norman-French origin, which came from Somersetshire,
England. His mother came of Belgic and Holland descent. One of his
ancestors was the first settler at Windsor, Ct., in 1628. The late
Gov. Clark Bissell, of Connecticut, and Gov. William H. Bissell, of
Illinois, were relatives. In 1846, after successful teaching
elsewhere, on the organization of the High School in New Orleans Mr.
Bissell was elected its first principal over many competitors.
Subsequently he was chosen superintendent of the public schools in
that city. His remarkable administrative abilities and high
qualifications as a scholar were of great service in his onerous
position. The schools reached a discipline and prosperity before
unknown. He is also a member of the legal profession.

In the development of petroleum Mr. Bissell was a leading pioneer;
perhaps he justly deserves the preëminence in this great work. Mr.
Bissell is a self-made man. We quote a portion of his letter to
President Smith, announcing his munificent donation for a gymnasium:

"In acceding to your wishes, my dear sir, I can but recall that day,
now twenty years since, when, leaving Dartmouth, alone and unaided, I
felt that 'Tentanda via est, quâ me quoque possim tollere humo.'

"It affords me unqualified pleasure now to be able to gratify a wish
then cherished, to aid in some degree my Alma Mater, and in that
manner which you assure me is the most effectual."

"Gen. David Culver was born in Lyme, N. H. In the year 1832 he left
the parental roof, and after a residence in Hartford, Conn., and New
York City, for some years, where in both cities he was actively
engaged in lucrative business pursuits, he returned to his beautiful
ancestral home in Lyme, in 1855. The residue of his years he spent in
pleasant agricultural life, on the old farm of his strongly-endeared
childhood, memory, and attachment. In the rural district of this home
he was ever apparently content and happy, and, much to his praise,
seemed greatly beloved by his neighbors. His townsmen many times by
their united suffrage gave him important offices of public trust and
confidence. Of the Congregational Church of Christ, in Lyme, he was
for many years a highly valued helping member, and for the gospel
ministry was a liberal supporter, giving of his means in so quiet a
manner that he appeared not to wish his good deeds blazoned to the
world.

"For the needy, suffering poor of his personal acquaintance,
especially the helpless poor, he had a sympathizing heart, and so
deeply pitied them, in many instances, as to greatly alleviate their
sufferings by ministering pecuniarily to their relief.

"To the cause of general education in the community,--elementary,
common, agricultural, and collegiate,--he was always a warm-hearted,
deeply-interested friend. In many instances, to aspiring youth in
indigent circumstances, who were striving after the acquisition of the
needful knowledge to prepare themselves and others for usefulness, he
has been known to bestow pecuniary assistance to aid them on their
way.

"And so agreeably bland was he in his mode of conferring his favors,
as to greatly augment the value of them, and at the same time heighten
the esteem of the recipients for the donor." Outside of her alumni
Dartmouth had few warmer friends than General Culver.

Samuel Appleton was a native of New Ipswich, N. H.

His enterprise and his liberality have given his name a conspicuous
place in New England history. We append a portion of one of his
letters to President Lord, which shows his generous appreciation of
liberal culture.

"It affords me much pleasure to have it in my power to do something
for the only college in my native State which has done so much to
establish a sound literary character in the country. Dartmouth has
done her full proportion in educating for the pulpit, the bar, the
healing art, and the senate, good and great men who have done honor to
their names, to the college, and to the country."

In closing this record, we can only allude to other leading
benefactors, among whom are John D. Willard, who gave to Dartmouth
some of the fruits of his busy, earnest life. Salmon P. Chase, loyal
to his Alma Mater to the last. John Wentworth, who still lives to
witness her work. Henry Bond, loving her scarcely less than his
kindred, "according to the flesh." Frederick Hall, who gave his money,
and what he valued more. John Phillips, whose name will live as long
as Dartmouth, or Andover, or Exeter, shall exist. Israel Evans, the
patriot divine, who cherished for Washington and Wheelock similar
affection. Aaron Lawrence, the conscientious Christian merchant.
Jeremiah Kingman, the busy agriculturist, who cultivated his mind as
well as his fields. Mrs. Betsey Whitehouse, the parishioner of Abraham
Burnham, by whose labors her valuable Christian and general character
was largely moulded, and E. W. Stoughton, who fully realizes the close
connection between a healthy body and a sound mind.

The services of Dartmouth's Trustees should not be passed over in
silence.

We give a statement of the character of the Board half a century ago,
when the College was in "middle life," from Mr. William H. Duncan.

"Of the members of that Board, there was Elijah Paine, of Vermont, who
had received his appointment as District Judge of the United States
for the District of Vermont from Washington, a graduate from Harvard,
'a Roman of the Romans,' one who would have done honor to Rome in her
noblest and best days for the purity, integrity, and elevation of his
character. Charles Marsh, who held for many years the unchallenged
position of the leader of the bar in Vermont, a cousin of that giant
in the law, Jeremiah Mason, whom he greatly resembled in many of his
intellectual characteristics,--a high-toned gentleman, and a devout
and reverend believer in Christianity. Moses P. Payson, a graduate of
the College, of the class of 1793, a lawyer of courteous and elegant
demeanor, and of high social position. Judge Edmund Parker, a sound
lawyer, a man of good sense, and excellent judgment, and above all a
man of unspotted character, a brother of the distinguished ex-Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of New Hampshire. Israel W. Putnam, D.D.,
a graduate of the class of 1809, so long and so favorably known in New
Hampshire as a clergyman. John H. Church, D.D., a graduate from
Harvard, a man of apostolic solemnity and dignity of character, whose
praise is in all the churches. John Wheeler, D.D., an accomplished
scholar, afterwards President of the University of Vermont. Bennett
Tyler, who was still a Trustee, although he had resigned his position
as president, a man of commanding dignity of presence, an unrivaled
logician, and one of the best pulpit orators it has ever been the good
fortune of the writer to listen to. Judge Samuel Hubbard, of Boston,
one of the best lawyers of New England, who for many years was the
rival and the peer of the leaders of the Suffolk Bar. When on the
bench of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts, he was numbered among her
most eminent jurists, and was ranked with Fletcher and Shaw. He was a
man of the finest sensibilities, and a devout and reverent Christian.
Mills Olcott, of the class of 1790, who had been the Secretary and
Treasurer of the College before he was a Trustee, whose father had
served before him for twenty years in the same capacity, a man of
remarkable sagacity and enterprise in business affairs, of assured
social position, and of great elegance and dignity of manner.

"And of this body of men was Ezekiel Webster, the elder brother of
Daniel, a man of remarkable intellectual endowments; in sagacity and
judgment, in the opinion of those who knew them both, fully equal to
his distinguished brother, well read, as all the gentlemen of the old
school were, in the old English authors; a profound lawyer, and, at
times when he could be prevailed upon to speak, as eloquent as his
brother; of commanding personal presence, which in no way can be so
well described as by borrowing a Homeric epithet, for he was truly a
'king' among 'men.'

"Such was the body of men whose grave and majestic air used to impress
the writer of this sketch, when the Commencements came round, in his
college days, with the same feeling of awe and reverence with which
the barbarians' were inspired when they first looked in upon the Roman
Senate, supposing that they were looking upon an assembly of kings."

If to these we add the names of the eminent men who were the
colleagues of the founder, and of Nathaniel Niles, Jonathan Freeman,
Thomas W. Thompson, Stephen Jacob, Timothy Farrar, Samuel Bell, Asa
McFarland, Seth Payson, Samuel Prentiss, George Sullivan, John Aiken,
William Reed, Samuel Delano, Samuel Fletcher, Nathaniel Bouton, Silas
Aiken, Joel Parker, Richard Fletcher, and the honored Governors of the
State, we are fully impressed with the fact that the interests of the
college have been in the keeping of wise and prudent guardians.




CHAPTER XXX.

LABORS OF DARTMOUTH ALUMNI.--CONCLUSION.


As Dartmouth was founded as an evangelizing agency, and every stone
was laid in firm reliance upon Him to whom all was consecrated, there
was good ground of hope that it would be a strong and durable pillar
in the great temple of Christian learning. Its record is a realization
of the hopes of its noble and devoted founders.

In his "Narrative" for 1771 (p. 29) Dr. Wheelock, alluding to the
period immediately following his removal to Hanover, says: "there were
evident impressions upon the minds of a number of my family and school
which soon became universal, insomuch that scarcely one remained who
did not feel a greater or less degree of it, till the whole lump
seemed to be leavened by it, and love, peace, joy; satisfaction and
contentment reigned through the whole. The 23d day of January (1771)
was kept as a day of solemn fasting and prayer, on which I gathered a
church in this college and school, which consisted of twenty-seven
members."

His biographer, writing early in the present century, says: "The
college has been repeatedly favored with remarkable religious
impressions on the minds of the students. These showers of divine
grace have produced streams which have refreshed the garden of the
Lord, and made glad the city of our God. The young men in this school
of the prophets have, at these seasons, been powerfully and lastingly
affected; they have gone forth as 'angels of the churches;' the work
of God has prospered in their hands; many of their people have been
turned to righteousness."

Of President Tyler's administration it is said that the most
remarkable thing was "a powerful revival of religion." All the later
decades have been marked by manifestations of the Divine presence in
the college. Scarcely a year has passed in which some of its members
have not joyfully consecrated intellect and heart and life to the
service of Him who gave them.

Not a few have been "bright and shining lights" in the church. Of
Jesse Appleton, Rev. Dr. Anderson says: "I have been placed in
circumstances to see much of not a few great men in the Church of
Christ, but I have been conversant with only a few, a very few, whose
attributes of power seemed to me quite equal to his. The clearness of
his conceptions was almost angelic. If I am fitted to do any good in
the world, I owe what intellectual adaptation I have very much to his
admirable training, especially as he took us through his favorite
Butler."

Few American divines have had a wider or more varied sphere of
influence than Dr. Appleton's classmate, Ebenezer Porter, a _pioneer_
in sacred Rhetoric, one of the originators of the American Tract
Society, the most prominent of the founders of the American Education
Society, which he adopted as his child and heir, the beloved and
honored first president of the oldest Theological Seminary in the
United States.

Of Samuel Worcester, the distinguished opponent of Channing, we have
the following valuable record: "When the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions was formed, his labors as the
Corresponding Secretary, with the whole system now in operation for
the conduct of missions abroad, required the same processes of
original evolution and determination of principles and rules, as so
signally characterized the formation of our Federal government. Here
was displayed his peculiar, if we may not say his transcendent, power
among his eminent associates. The great value of 'the Constitution of
the Board, as a working instrument,' 'the nicely adjusted relations of
the voluntary and ecclesiastical principles,' the 'origination of what
is peculiarly excellent in the Annual Reports, and also in the
Instructions to Missionaries,' and the '_American_ idea' of
'organizing the missions as self-governing communities,' are justly
ascribed to him by the present senior Secretary, [Dr. Anderson] as
conclusive witness of his extraordinary 'sagacity' and of his being
far 'in advance of the age.'"

Philander Chase could found parish and diocese and seminary with equal
facility, performing a work for the Episcopal Church in America
unrivaled by that of any contemporary.

Nor should we overlook such names as Asa Burton, teacher of teachers
in theology, who could successfully measure swords with Emmons; Samuel
Wood, whose impress never left the mind of Webster; Daniel Story, a
pioneer of Marietta; Mase Shepard, Jonathan Strong, Walter Harris,
Ethan Smith, Alvan Hyde, William Jackson, Rufus Anderson, the honored
father of a not less honored son; John Fiske, Abijah Wines, Eliphalet
Gillett, whose home missionary zeal in Maine made a lasting impression
upon the rising state; Kiah Bailey, who first effectually moved the
springs which gave to the same State the Bangor Theological Seminary;
John Smith, an earnest and honored teacher in that Seminary;
Theophilus Packard, whose pupils have performed honorable service for
the Master in both hemispheres; Peter P. Roots, Bezaleel Pinneo, Asa
McFarland, Caleb Jewett Tenney, a leading founder of the East Windsor
(now Hartford) Theological Seminary; Thomas A. Merrill, Abraham
Burnham, George T. Chapman, John Brown, Daniel Poor, the pioneer in
Christian learning in Ceylon and Madura; Austin Dickinson, to whom the
world is under large obligations for a higher type of periodical
literature; Levi Spaulding, the worthy coadjutor of Poor; Nathan W.
Fiske, Daniel Temple, who carried the first missionary printing-press
to Western Asia, and made for classic lands a Christian literature;
William Goodell, the leading founder of two flourishing Christian
missions on heathen soil, and the translator of the whole Bible into
the Armeno-Turkish language; Ephraim W. Clark, John S. Emerson, and
Austin H. Wright, of similar spirit; Benjamin Woodbury, Aaron Foster,
a leading founder of the American Home Missionary Society, and John K.
Lord, whose early death in the Queen City of the West, was as the
falling of "a standard-bearer."

To these we might add many eminent living heralds of the cross, and a
Hovey and a Townsend in leading Theological Seminaries. We cannot more
fitly close on this head than by remarking that of the last forty-four
subjects in the second volume of Sprague's invaluable "Annals of the
Pulpit," eleven were Dartmouth alumni, while all the others, save
eight, numbered her alumni among their teachers.

Dartmouth has an honorable record in the various departments of Law
and in statesmanship. Most naturally we dwell upon the name of Daniel
Webster, towering in strength and grandeur, like the mountain beside
which he was born, amid the surrounding granite, who left the impress
of his genius upon the jurisprudence of his native State, upon the
Constitution of his adopted State, and upon nearly every conspicuous
page of America's civil or political history for half a century; who
loved Plymouth Rock and Bunker Hill with an undying affection,
dwelling alternately beside the one or the other; who cherished as the
apple of his eye his Alma Mater and the nation for whose service she
had prepared him; who in early life and middle life and old age
advocated the universal brotherhood of man, whether pleading in behalf
of the oppressed African, or the oppressed Greek, or the oppressed
Hungarian; who gave all his sympathy and all his influence in aid of
every pursuit, enterprise, and institution which could ennoble the
human race; who made all other human law pay homage to the
Constitution of his country, and all human law to the Divine
Revelation; who gave to Dartmouth a more enduring fame throughout
America, and to America a more enduring fame over the whole earth: of
Levi Woodbury, who as Governor of his native State clearly
comprehended and carefully regarded its various interests; as a
Senator commanded the profound respect of the National Legislature; as
a Cabinet minister, inaugurated "a series of reforms which pervaded
the whole department, and penetrated to every branch of the service,"
and who upon the Supreme Bench of the United States gave judicial
opinions which are "monuments of patient research, ripe, and rarely
erring judgment, enlarged and liberal views, and eminent attainments:"
of Thaddeus Stevens, of whom his biographer says: "Thoroughly radical
in all his views, hating slavery with all the intensity of his
nature, believing it just, right, and expedient, not only to
emancipate the negro but to arm him and make him a soldier, and
afterward to make him a citizen, and give him the ballot, he led off
in all measures for effecting these ends. The Emancipation
Proclamation was urged upon the President by him, on all grounds of
right, justice, and expediency; the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution was initiated and pressed by him:" of Rufus Choate, who
combined in more majestic and graceful proportions than any other
American lawyer, the ripe scholar and the successful advocate; who
with the beauty and power of his language could captivate a jury, a
popular audience, or the American Congress with equal facility; who
gave to English literature some of its most brilliant gems, and who in
his immortal eulogy upon Webster, in the opinion of competent judges,
gave to the world one of the most finished and impressive examples of
elegiac eloquence to which it has listened since the days of Pericles:
and of Salmon P. Chase, who, when our government needed, gave to it
the "sinews of war," and in the eloquent language of Evarts, "Whether
by interposing his strong arm to save Mr. Birney from the fury of a
mob; or by his bold and constant maintenance in the courts of the
cause of fugitive slaves, in the face of the resentments of the public
opinion of the day; or by his fearless desertion of all reigning
politics to lead a feeble band of protestants through the wilderness
of anti-slavery wanderings, its pillar of cloud by day, its pillar of
fire by night; or, as Governor of Ohio, facing the intimidations of
the Slave States, backed by Federal power and a storm of popular
passion; or in consolidating the triumphant politics on the urgent
issue which was to flame out into rebellion and revolt; or in his
serene predominance, during the trial of the President, over the rage
of party hate which brought into peril the coördination of the great
departments of government, and threatened its whole frame,--in all
these marked instances of public duty, as in the simple routine of his
ordinary conduct, Mr. Chase asked but one question to determine his
course of action,--'Is it right?'"

Nor should we forget others who have left a lasting impression upon
the jurisprudence of New England, and indeed our whole country. Among
them Samuel S. Wilde, who had few peers as an advocate in Maine, or as
a judge in Massachusetts; Ezekiel Webster, who as lawyer and statesman
left a monument in New Hampshire which shall never crumble; Richard
Fletcher, "whose legal acumen, clear, distinct, and precise statement,
closely reasoned argument, and conscientious mastery of his subject,
adorned the bench no less than the bar;" Joseph Bell, who as advocate
and legislator, in ability as in station, towered above most of his
associates; Ichabod Bartlett, "the Randolph of the North," who could
measure swords with Mason or Webster or Clay, without either shield or
shame; and Joel Parker, who honored alike the bar, the bench, and the
lecture-room.

As members of one branch or the other of our National Legislature, we
record other honored names in alphabetical order:

Samuel C. Allen, who voted _alone_ in his place in Congress, in favor
of suffrage without regard to color. Helium Allen, Lemuel H. Arnold,
Samuel Bell, Samuel N. Bell, Silas Betton, Abijah Bigelow, John
Blanchard, Daniel Breck, Elijah Brigham, David Brunson, Joseph Buffum,
Dudley Chase, Daniel Chipman, Martin Chittenden, Daniel Clark, in
every public position a leading spirit, Judah Dana, Samuel Dinsmoor,
Daniel M. Durell, Ira A. Eastman, Thomas M. Edwards, Walbridge A.
Field, Benjamin F. Flanders, Isaac Fletcher, George G. Fogg, Sylvester
Gilbert, Calvin Goddard, Daniel W. Gooch, John N. Goodwin, George
Grennell, James W. Grimes, pioneer statesman of the far West, Matthew
Harvey, Henry Hibbard, Henry Hubbard, a man of rare abilities and
influence, Jonathan Hunt, Luther Jewett, Joseph S. Lyman, Asa Lyon,
Rufus McIntire, Charles Marsh, George P. Marsh, the honored son of an
honored father, Gilman Marston, Ebenezer Mattoon, Jeremiah Nelson,
Moses Norris, John Noyes, Benjamin Orr, Albion K. Parris, James W.
Patterson, whose eminent abilities and elaborate culture have placed
him in the foremost rank of the present generation of New England
statesmen, Charles H. Peaslee, Edward C. Reed, Erastus Root, Joseph
Richardson, Eleazer W. Ripley, equally fearless as a soldier and a
statesman, Ether Shepley, alike conspicuous for mental and moral
powers, John S. Sherburne, George A. Simmons, who by his own efforts
attained rare eminence, Peleg Sprague, Samuel Taggart, Amos Tuck, a
pioneer in philanthropic politics, John Wentworth, who in large
measure maintains the reputation of an ancient and honored family,
Phineas White, Leonard Wilcox, Charles W. Willard, Hezekiah Williams,
and William Wilson. To which should be added the names of James C.
Alvord and Sylvanus Backus, who were elected to Congress, but did not
live to take their seats.

When Daniel Webster entered the American Senate, five of its twelve
New England representatives were Dartmouth alumni. Their labors in
Congress form a part of the history of every Administration of our
National government.

Amos Kendall, beside large usefulness, in other spheres, was an
honored Cabinet Minister.

Amos T. Akerman has been similarly honored, as Attorney General of the
United States.

The names of Charles B. Haddock, George P. Marsh, George G. Fogg, and
Edward F. Noyes, deserve honorable mention in connection with public
service abroad.

The names of Samuel Dinsmoor, the younger, John Hubbard, Ralph
Metcalf, Peter T. Washburn, Nelson Dingley, and Benjamin F. Prescott
should be noticed, as State Governors, in addition to several who have
added this honor to others, of which we have already made mention.

In Judicial life many names attract our notice beside those, which
have been mentioned in other connections; among them Nicholas Baylies,
Nicholas Emery, Nathan Weston, Ira Perley, Jonas Cutting, Benjamin W.
Bonney, Isaac F. Redfield, Robert R. Heath, Andrew S. Woods, William
H. Bartlett, John S. Sanborn, and Benjamin H. Steele, of the deceased,
and William G. Woodward, Timothy P. Redfield, George F. Shepley, James
Barrett, Jason Downer, Jonathan E. Sargent, Lincoln F. Brigham, Oliver
Miller, and Charles Doe, among the living. Nor should we forget that
of living members of the American Bar few names have been honored more
in the East than that of Charles B. Goodrich, and few names have been
honored more in the West than that of James F. Joy.

Dartmouth has contributed largely to American Education.

Bowdoin's first two presidents were Joseph McKeen and Jesse Appleton.

Thomas C. Upham was one of its honored Faculty for more than forty
years.

Oren B. Cheney was a leading founder of Bates College, in later years.

James Marsh, John Wheeler, and Joseph Torrey were successively
presidents of Vermont University, and each left upon it a most
valuable and durable impression.

William Jackson and Thomas A. Merrill inscribed their names indelibly
upon the foundations of Middlebury College, which numbers Benjamin
Labaree and Calvin B. Hulbert among its honored presidents.

Zephaniah S. Moore, as president of Williams College, gave to it the
fruits of his valuable experience at Dartmouth, and materially
enhanced its usefulness; nor should we omit the name of its earnest
friend and guardian, Alvan Hyde.

In naming the leading founders of Amherst College, Professor Tyler
does not hesitate to place first, Rufus Graves, and next, Samuel F.
Dickinson. The value of Dr. Moore's services as first president has
been referred to in a previous chapter.

A record of its obligations to Professor Nathan Welby Fiske is a
material part of its history.

The biographer of George Ticknor says no one contributed more than he
toward the impulse which has resulted in Harvard's progress during the
last half century.

Amos Kendall was the honored founder of the College for Deaf Mutes at
Washington.

John M. Sturtevant has an honored place in the history of education
for the Blind in the South.

Jonathan P. Cushing resuscitated Hampden Sydney College when life was
nearly extinct, and made it again "a power in the land."

Philander Chase, in founding Kenyon and Jubilee Colleges, gave to the
Episcopalians of the West two of their leading literary institutions.

John M. Ellis founded Illinois College, which, with the influences
that centered around it, in large measure "gave character" to the
State.

Not less plainly did he write his name upon the foundations of Wabash
College, and not less plainly have Charles White, Edmund D. Hovey, and
Caleb Mills written their names upon the superstructure.

A proper estimate of the valuable labors of Joseph Estabrook, Stephen
Foster, and George Cooke, successively presidents of the College of
East Tennessee, can only be made by those who are familiar with the
history of the institution.

Drury College, so admirably located, bears the impress of Nathan J.
Morrison.

Beyond the Rocky Mountains, Samuel H. Willey and George H. Atkinson
will ever be honored among the leading founders and guardians of the
College of California, and the Pacific University.

No history of American education will be complete which does not
portray the earnest and valuable labors, in numerous other collegiate
institutions East, West, North, and South, of a long roll of Dartmouth
alumni; among them, beside many others, already noticed, Joseph Dana,
James Dean, Josiah Noyes, Frederick Hall, George T. Chapman, James
Hadley, Rufus W. Bailey, Benjamin F. Farnsworth, George Bush, Cyrus P.
Grosvenor, Oramel S. Hinckley, Samuel Hurd, Caleb S. Henry, John
Kendrick, Charles D. Cleaveland, Leonard Marsh, Forrest Shepherd,
Charles B. Dana, Nathaniel S. Folsom, Jarvis Gregg, Milo P. Jewett,
Diarca H. Allen, Kendrick Metcalf, Jacob H. Quimby, John B. Niles,
Daniel F. Richardson, Amos Brown, Calvin Tracy, John C. Webster,
Edmund Q. S. Waldron, Augustus Everett, Erastus Everett, Jonas De F.
Richards, Abner H. Brown, Henry L. Bullen, George P. Comings, David
Dimond, Charles H. Churchill, Amos B. Goodhue, Joshua J. Blaisdell,
Artemas W. Sawyer, Mark Bailey, Gideon Draper, Joseph O. Hudnut, Henry
E. J. Boardman, Charles S. Farrar, Nathan S. Lincoln, John Ordronaux,
John M. Hayes, Daniel Putnam, Martin H. Fisk, Isaac A. Parker, Ephraim
March, William E. Barnard, Ambrose W. Clarke, Amos N. Currier, Richard
C. Stanley, Albert S. Bickmore, George S. Morris, and John W.
Scribner. It is hardly possible to overestimate the influence of these
men in shaping the thought and life of our country.

If we turn to academies we find that Mark Newman, Osgood Johnson, and
Samuel H. Taylor, especially the two latter, were largely instrumental
in placing Phillips Academy, at Andover, at the head of such
institutions in America. Few schools of the kind have a more brilliant
record than Kimball Union Academy, and few American educators have
acquired more permanent renown than Cyrus S. Richards.

The labors of Amos J. Cook at Fryeburg, of John Vose at Atkinson and
Pembroke, of Andrew Mack at Gilmanton and Haverhill, of John Hubbard
at New Ipswich, of Ezra Carter at Peacham, of Clement Long and William
Nutting at Randolph, of James K. Colby at St. Johnsbury, of Ebenezer
Adams at Leicester, of Proctor Pierce at Deerfield, of Caleb Butler at
Groton, and Benjamin Greenleaf at Bradford, constitute a vital portion
of the history of academic education in New England. Nor must we
forget that such men as Albert C. Perkins, at Exeter, C. F. P.
Bancroft, at Andover, and Homer T. Fuller, at St. Johnsbury, are still
laboring in this important sphere, while Hiram Orcutt is performing
valuable service in a somewhat similar sphere at West Lebanon.
Worcester Free Institute is under large obligations to Charles O.
Thompson and John E. Sinclair.

If we turn to the metropolis of New England we find that John D.
Philbrick has made her schools and school-houses in their leading
features models for a world, fit successor to Elisha Ticknor, the
leading founder of her primary schools, and Caleb Bingham and John
Park, who in large measure revolutionized female education in America.

Beaumont Parks taught successfully for forty years in Indiana and
Illinois; Charles E. Hovey founded the Illinois Normal School--worthy
followers of Daniel Story at Marietta, the pioneer professional
teacher of the West.

John Eaton, as Commissioner of General Education, has stamped his
name, indelibly, upon our country's history.

In Literature, Dartmouth has a worthy record.

In Philosophy, the names of James Marsh, Thomas C. Upham, and Caleb S.
Henry, command universal respect.

In History, the names of George Ticknor, Joseph B. Felt, Joseph Tracy,
George Punchard, Samuel Hopkins, John Lord, and Edwin D. Sanborn, will
live as long as our language.

In Scientific popular literature, the names of Abel Curtis, who is
believed to have given to America its first English Grammar in a
separate and distinct form, of Caleb Bingham, who followed in his
footsteps and enhanced the value of his work, of Daniel Adams, who
gave to the world the invaluable Arithmetic, of Benjamin Greenleaf,
whose mathematical works have added materially to the usefulness of
his long and busy life, of Charles D. Cleaveland and Alphonso Wood,
are stars of the first magnitude.

In Periodical literature, the names of John Park, David Everett,
Thomas G. Fessenden, Asa Rand, Russell Jarvis, Absalom Peters,
Nathaniel P. Rogers, Ebenezer C. Tracy, Amasa Converse, Henry Wood,
Nathaniel S. Folsom, Alonzo H. Quint, and Henry A. Hazen, deserve
especial notice.

In Polite literature, the names of Nathaniel H. Carter, Charles B.
Haddock, Rufus Choate, George P. Marsh, Richard B. Kimball, and John
B. Bouton, command universal admiration.

The writings of Samuel L. Knapp, Henry Bond, and Nathan Crosby are
valuable contributions to American Biography.

In Professional and Classic literature, the alumni of Dartmouth have
done a good work. We can only glance at leading names, many of which
have been mentioned in their more appropriate places. Among them are
Asa Burton, Jesse Appleton, Ebenezer Porter, Samuel C. Bartlett, Alvah
Hovey, Luther T. Townsend, Isaac F. Redfield, Silas Durkee, Edmund R.
Peaslee, W. W. Morland, F. E. Oliver, Jabez B. Upham, Edward H.
Parker, Joseph Torrey, Nathan W. Fiske, George Bush, and Alpheus
Crosby.

In Industrial literature, the names of Henry Colman and John L. Hayes
will be honored so long as agriculture and manufactures shall have a
prominent place among human pursuits.

In Medicine, a goodly proportion of her most eminent sons have given
to Dartmouth their personal services as teachers; we have only to
recall in this connection the honored names recorded in a preceding
chapter,--Mussey, Perkins, Crosby, and Peaslee. But other names claim
our notice. Amos Twitchell, by tireless industry and fidelity in his
regular professional work, and his boldness and skill as an operative
surgeon, gained a reputation equaled by few in New England, and
extending to the Old World. The name of George C. Shattuck shines with
equal lustre, as the benefactor of his Alma Mater, and the friend of
suffering humanity in the metropolis of New England.

Luther V. Bell wrote his name as plainly upon the foundations of the
McLean Asylum, at Somerville, as did his honored father, Samuel Bell,
upon the jurisprudence of New Hampshire. The name of John E. Tyler is
scarcely less conspicuous upon the superstructure.

New Jersey will never forget her obligations to Lyndon A. Smith for
the earnest efforts which gave to that State a similar institution.
Nor should we be silent in regard to the services of living men who
are now conducting or prominently connected with similar institutions;
among them, Jesse P. Bancroft, Clement A. Walker, John Ordronaux,
Homer O. Hitchcock, William W. Godding, and John P. Brown.

As Medical lecturers, we cannot fail to notice other honored names;
among them, Josiah Noyes, Joseph A. Gallup, James Hadley, Jesse Smith,
Arthur L. Porter, Gilman Kimball, Benjamin R. Palmer, Noah Worcester,
Abner Hartwell Brown, Nathan S. Lincoln, and Phineas S. Conner.

A reference to all the living medical alumni of Dartmouth, who are
acting the part of useful practitioners or teachers, added to the
above, would take us to nearly every leading medical institution, and
nearly every family, in our broad land.

In Productive industry and the development of our national resources,
the alumni of Dartmouth have an honorable place.

Eastern New England will never be unmindful of her obligations to
William A. Hayes, for his successful efforts to introduce a better
grade of wool than had ever before been produced in that region; nor
will the country or the world forget their obligations to his honored
classmate, Henry Colman, the American pioneer in scientific
agriculture. The names of Thomas G. Fessenden and Amos Brown also
deserve notice in this connection.

Petroleum, instead of being at the present time a leading American
product, might have remained, in large measure, in its ancient bed,
but for the skillful, persevering enterprise of George H. Bissell and
Francis B. Brewer.

In Railroad enterprise, the names of Erastus Hopkins, Thomas M.
Edwards, and Francis Cogswell, in the East, and James F. Joy, in the
West, are "familiar as household words."

The sons of Dartmouth have performed honorable service in the field.
More than a score were soldiers of the Revolution. Among them John S.
Sherburne, who lost one of his limbs; Absalom Peters, whose efficient
service in Vermont contributed largely to the protection of our
Northern frontier; and Ebenezer Mattoon, who by forced marches with
his gallant men furnished cannon which "told" at Saratoga.

In the War of 1812-1815 they acted well their part. Eleazer Wheelock
Ripley, at Lundy's Lane, after General Scott had been disabled (with
the aid of the gallant Miller), wrested victory from an almost
triumphant foe, on the bloodiest field of the war.

In that War, too, Sylvanus Thayer gained a measure of the renown which
has rendered the name of the most efficient founder of the Military
Academy at West Point illustrious in both hemispheres.

In the late War one of the most valuable coadjutors of two of its
leading captains--Grant and Sherman--was Joseph Dana Webster.

In letters of living light we write many other names, among them
Charles and Daniel Foster--par nobile fratrum--Samuel Souther, Charles
Augustine Davis, Isaac Lewis Clarke, Calvin Gross Hollenbush,
Valentine B. Oakes, Franklin Aretas Haskell, Arthur Edwin Hutchins,
Lucius Stearns Shaw, Horace Meeker Dyke, Edwin Brant Frost, William
Lawrence Baker, Charles Whiting Carroll, George Washington Quimby,
George Ephraim Chamberlin, Charles Lee Foster, Henry Mills Caldwell,
and Stark Fellows, who at Bull Run, Antietam, Fredericksburg, the
Wilderness, Cold Harbor, and elsewhere, gave their lives in defense of
the American Union.

No aggregation of volumes would adequately portray the whole work of
Dartmouth's alumni. In quiet places, the great majority, day by day,
and year by year, have performed their allotted tasks. In such places
all over America, and in other lands, they have built their most
enduring monuments. The calm lustre of their lives is almost as widely
diffused as the morning light.

Eleazer Wheelock founded the college, in faith and hope, for the
enlightenment and evangelization of future generations in that mighty
storehouse of thought and action, central New England.

John Wheelock carried forward the work with energy and zeal, and a
large measure of success.

Francis Brown gave a valuable life for the protection of his still
youthful Alma Mater.

Daniel Dana was a man of kindred spirit, and not less devoted to his
work.

Bennet Tyler magnified his office, and, laboring in season and out of
season, added "goodly ornaments."

Nathan Lord added new halls, new departments and modes of instruction,
gave larger prestige, and left the impress of a great mind upon two
thousand pupils.

Asa D. Smith added yet other halls, secured new endowments, and
provided a long line of scholarships, for the development of latent
talent, and the encouragement of genuine worth.

Samuel C. Bartlett brings to the accomplishment of his task the name
of an ancient and honored family, and the experiences of an earnest
and fruitful life.

Dartmouth has blessed New England and Old England, North America and
the whole world.

Her location, unrivaled in many respects by that of any sister
institution, her history, so full of romance and of reality, and her
work, recorded first in the history of the eighteenth century, and
indelibly impressed upon the history of the nineteenth, all warrant
the hope that her walls may stand, through all the ages of the future,
strong as the everlasting hills, and beautiful as the celestial dome.




APPENDIX.


A LIST OF THE ENGLISH SUBSCRIBERS TO DR. WHEELOCK'S INDIAN
CHARITY SCHOOL OR ACADEMY.


LONDON.

                                                        £  s. d.

    His Most Gracious Majesty                         200
    Mr. Isaac Akerman                                   5  5  0
    Mr. John Atkins                                     5  5  0
    Messrs. Adair, Jackson & Co.                        5  5  0
    Mr. William Ames                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Joseph Armitage                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Joseph Aldersey                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Ebenezer Atkinson                               2  2  0
    Mrs. Allovine                                       2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Ashworth of Daintree                   1  0  0
    Mr. Atwell, A. B.                                     10  6
    Mr. John Anther                                       10  6
    Anonymous                                              5  3
    Mr. Andrews                                            5  0
    Mrs. Sarah Axford                                      1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Sam. Brewer's Collection             141  2  6
    Messrs. Day. Barclay & Sons                        31 10  0
    Mrs. Brine                                         20  0  0
    Robert Butcher, Esq.                               10 10  0
    Mr. John Bradney                                   10 10  0
    Mr. Diederick Beckman                              10 10  0
    Mr. John Bonus                                     10 10  0
    Messrs. Bland & Barnett                            10 10  0
    Mr. Thomas Brooks                                  10 10  0
    Jam. & Hen. Baker, Esqs.                           10 10  0
    Thom. Smalley Browning, Esq.                       10 10  0
    John Bond, Esq.                                    10 10  0
    Bank Note, K 483                                   10  0  0
    Sir ---- Blackmore                                  6  6  0
    Robert Bird, Esq.                                   5  5  0
    Mrs. Sarah Bradney                                  5  5  0
    Mrs. B. W.                                          5  5  0
    Mr. Blunkett of Peckham                             5  5  0
    John Buchanan, Esq.                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Clement Bellamy                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Geo. Baskerville                                5  5  0
    Mr. Michael Barlow                                  5  5  0
    Mr. John Bayley                                     5  5  0
    Mr. Frederick Ball                                  5  5  0
    Mr. Jonathan Bond                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Bowles                                          5  5  0
    Mr. Bush                                            5  5  0
    Mr. Richard Brown                                   3  3  0
    Mr. William Butler                                  3  3  0
    Mr. Guy Brian                                       2  2  0
    Mr. J. Bosley                                       2  2  0
    Dr. Bragge                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Bragge                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Jonathan Bowles                                 2  2  0
    ---- Brooks, Esq., of Cambridge                     2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Burch                                    2  2  0
    B. C.                                               2  2  0
    Mrs. Blakesly                                       1 11  6
    Mr. Henry Burder                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Burkitt                                         1  1  0
    The Rev. Charles Bowles                             1  1  0
    Mrs. B-f-t                                          1  1  0
    Mr. George Braithwaite                              1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Barnardistone                            1  1  0
    Mr. Bassingtine                                     1  1  0
    Mr. William Brown                                     10  6
    Mr. Biggs, Junior                                     10  6
    A Banker's Clerk                                      10  6
    Mr. Wt. B.                                             7  0
    Mr. Ball                                               5  3
    Mr. John Baker                                         5  3
    Mr. William Baker                                      5  0
    Mr. Benjamin Coles                                 20  0  0
    Messrs. Capel, Hanbury, Oswald & Co.               10 10  0
    Mr. James Crafts                                    5  5  0
    Mr. William Cross                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Cranch, in the Borough                          5  5  0
    Mr. James Cox                                       5  5  0
    Mr. Benjamin Clempson                               3  3  0
    Mr. Lawrence Charlesson                             3  3  0
    Mr. Creswell, of Stourbridge per Mr. Micklin
      the Mercer                                        3  3  0
    Mr. Cross                                           2  2  0
    Mr. Benjamin Champion                               2  2  0
    Mr. Compson                                         2  2  0
    Mr. John Collier                                    2  2  0
    Mr. John Colebrooke                                 1 11  6
    C. T. F.                                            1  3  0
    Mr. John Cox                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Cowper                                   1  1  0
    Mr. William Coombes                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Cooper                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Cooper                                         1  1  0
    Mr. John Cobb                                       1  1  0
    Mr. William Crooke                                    10  6
    Mr. Joseph Clarke                                     10  6
    Mr. Henry Cowling                                     10  6
    Rt. Hon. William, Earl of Dartmouth, a
      Trustee and President                            50  0  0
    Messrs. Deberdt & Burkitt                          20  0  0
    Mr. John Dick                                       5  5  0
    D. T.                                               5  5  0
    Mrs. Davis                                          5  5  0
    Mr. William Dermer                                  5  5  0
    Phil. Dotton, Esq., of Plymouth, per Mr. Sheppard   2 17  0
    Mr. Darnford                                        2  2  0
    Miss Dixon                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Dewn                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Denne                                           1  1  0
    Mr. James Donald                                    1  1  0
    Mr. James Deethait                                  1  1  0
    Mr. James Duncan                                    1  1  0
    Mr. D.                                              1  1  0
    Mr. Benjamin Dickers, per Dr. Gibbons               1  1  0
    Mr. D. D.                                             10  6
    Mr. Dudds                                             10  6
    Mr. Dell                                              10  6
    Mrs. Davis                                             5  3
    Mr. Zephaniah Eade                                  6  6  0
    Mrs. Anna Eade                                      6  6  0
    Mr. Samuel Ewer                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Edwards                                         1  1  0
    Mr. E. H.                                           1  1  0
    Mr. John Elliott                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Eaton                                           1  1  0
    Dr. Fothergill                                     21  0  0
    A Friend of the Cause                              20  0  0
    Mr. Fuller & Son                                   10 10  0
    Thomas Fletcher, Esq.                               5  5  0
    Mr. Benjamin Forsitt                                5  5  0
    The Rev. Mr. Ford.                                  5  5  0
    Dr. John Ford                                       5  5  0
    Mr. William Fisher, Sen.                            5  5  0
    Messrs. Flight & Halliday                           5  5  0
    Messrs. Freeman & Grace                             5  5  0
    Mr. William Fletcher                                3  3  0
    Mr. George Flower                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Fassett                                         1  1  0
    Mr. F. P.                                           1  1  0
    Mrs. Flight                                         1  1  0
    Mr. David Field                                     1  1  0
    A Friend in the Country                               10  0
    Sir John Griffin Griffin                           20  0  0
    Mr. William Grace                                  10 10  0
    Mr. Daniel Gallopine                               10 10  0
    Mr. Gerrish                                         5  5  0
    Mrs. Sarah Gale                                     5  5  0
    Mrs. Gumley                                         5  5  0
    Mr. Grainger                                        5  0  0
    Mr. John Geere, Sen., collected by him              4 14  6
    Mr. Robert Griffiths                                4  4  0
    Mr. Daniel Goodwin                                  3  7  6
    Mr. John Geere, of Hythe                            3  3  0
    Thomas Gibbons, D.D.                                2  2  0
    Mr. Walter Gelly                                    2  2  0
    G. E.                                               2  2  0
    Mr. Griffin                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Gibbon                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Gardner                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Grote                                           2  2  0
    Mrs. Nellaby Gibson                                 1  1  0
    Mr. John Gould                                      1  1  0
    Miss Gould                                          1  1  0
    Messrs. G.                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Ann Gusthart                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Samuel Gordon                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Owen Griffith                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Good                                              10  6
    Mrs. G----s                                           10  6
    Mr. William Gardiner                                   5  0
    Isaac Holles, Esq.                                100  0  0
    The Rev. Mr. Holden's collection of Deptford       51  2  0
    Sir Charles Hotham, a Trustee, deceased            50  0  0
    Mrs. Halsey                                        50  0  0
    Charles Hardy, Esq., a Trustee                     25  0  0
    Mr. Robert Hodgson                                 20  0  0
    Sir Joseph Hankey and partners                     10 10  0
    Mr. William Hervey                                 10 10  0
    Edward Hollis, Esq.                                 5  5  0
    Thomas Hollis, Esq.                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Richard Hawtyn                                  5  5  0
    Mr. Peregrine Hogg                                  5  5  0
    Mr. Hugh Humstone                                   5  5  0
    Mr. John Hose & Son                                 5  5  0
    Richard Hill, Esq.                                  5  5  0
    Thomas Hall, Esq., of Harnfel Hall, near Henley     5  5  0
    Messrs. Higgins, Garrett & Hartfield                5  5  0
    Mr. Joseph Hart                                     5  5  0
    Mr. Benjamin Horrocks                               3  3  0
    Miss Hillier                                        3  3  0
    Mr. Howell                                          2 12  6
    Mrs. Ann Holloway                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Heckley, per Dr. Gibbons                 2  2  0
    Mr. Holdgate                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Houston                                  1  1  0
    Mr. William Heathfield                              1  1  0
    Mr. Horton                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Nathaniel Hillier                               1  1  0
    Mr. Hett                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Hunt                                              10  6
    Mr. Heath                                             10  6
    Mr. Harley                                            10  6
    Mr. Richard Hatt                                      10  6
    Mr. William Hunter                                    10  6
    Mrs. Harle                                            10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Hatham, of Loughborough                  10  6
    Mrs. Halford and Son                                   7  6
    Mrs. H. P.                                             5  0
    I. S.                                              20  0  0
    Mr. Jackson, of the Temple                         10 10  0
    Mr. Thomas Justis                                   5  5  0
    Mr. John Jones                                      3  3  0
    Mr. Edward Jefferies                                2  2  0
    J. P.                                               2  2  0
    I. R., per John Sabatier                            2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Jefferys                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Jacomb                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Jackson, Basinghall St.                         1  1  0
    Mr. J. G.                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Judd                                              10  6
    Mr. Richard Jeffreys                                  10  6
    Mr. Philip Jones, at Upton in Worcestershire           5  3
    Mr. Robert Keen, a Trustee                         25  0  0
    Mr. William Kelly                                   5  5  0
    Mr. King                                            3  3  0
    Mr. John Kennedy                                    2  2  0
    Miss Kingsley                                       1  1  0
    Samuel Lloyd, Esq.                                 21  0  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. John Langford's          13  0  0
    Mr. George Lowe                                    10 10  0
    Mr. Thomas Lowe                                    10 10  0
    Mr. John Laurence                                   5  5  0
    Mr. L. F.                                           2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Luck                                     2  2  0
    Mr. L. G.                                           2  2  0
    Mr. Robert Lathroppe                                1  1  0
    Mrs. L. G.                                          1  1  0
    Mr. L. D.                                           1 11  6
    Mr. John Lefevre                                    1  1  0
    The Rev. Dr. Langford                               1  1  0
    Mrs. Lavington                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Lawrence                                          10  6
    His Excellency, General Monckton                   21  0  0
    Mr. B. Mills                                       20  0  0
    Messrs. R. H. & R. Maitland                        10 10  0
    The Rev. Mr. Martin's Collection at Deptford        5 10  0
    Mr. James Mabbs                                     5  5  0
    John Mills, Esq.                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Thomas Maltby                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Thomas Mason                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Samuel Moody                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Maine, of Kensington                            5  5  0
    Mr. Thomas Mayor                                    5  5  0
    Mrs. Marlow, per Dr. Gifford                        5  5  0
    The Rev. Mr. Madan                                  5  0  0
    Mr. Millet                                          4  5  0
    Mrs. Molineaux                                      3  6  6
    Mr. Mangles                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Brough Maltby                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Messenger                                       2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Matthews                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Peter Mallard                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Morris                                          2  2  0
    Mr. Mace                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Matravers                                1  1  0
    Mr. Moggridge                                       1  1  0
    Miss March                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. M.                                             1  1  0
    Mr. Marston                                         1  1  0
    Mr. D. Maitland                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Morrison                                        1  1  0
    Mr. James Murray                                      10  6
    Mr. Samuel Mason                                      10  6
    Mr. Samuel Munday                                     10  6
    M. C.                                                 10  6
    Mr. Robert Newton, per Charles Steer               50  0  0
    Mr. Ric. Neave & Son                               21  0  0
    Mr. Edw. Thomas Nelson                              2  2  0
    Mr. and Mrs. Noyes                                  2  2  0
    Miss Nichols                                        2  2  0
    Mr. Noton                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Abraham Ogier                                   2  2  0
    Mr. John Orton                                      2  2  0
    Mr. Olney                                           1  1  0
    Mr. John Oldham                                     1  1  0
    Mr. John Oliver                                       10  6
    Thomas and Richard Penn, Esqs.                     50  0  0
    Messrs. Pewtress & Robarts                         10 10  0
    Mr. James Pearson                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Pomeroy                                         2  2  0
    Mrs. Rachel Phipps                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Michael Pearson                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Prettyman                                2  2  0
    Mr. Rowland Page                                    2  2  0
    Mr. John Prentice                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Page                                       1  1  0
    Mrs. P.                                             1  1  0
    Mr. John Price                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Chancey Poole                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Petree                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Parks                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Pitts                                    1  1  0
    Mr. George Prettiman                                  10  6
    Mrs. Mary Parker                                      10  6
    Mr. John Payne                                        10  6
    Mr. N. Paul                                            5  3
    The Rev. Mr. Phillips                                  5  0
    Mr. Peakes                                             2  6
    The Rev. Mr. Romaine's Collection
      at St. Anne's, Black Friar's                    107 13  3
    Samuel Roffey, Esq., a Trustee                     50  0  0
    Mrs. Roffey, of Lincoln's Inn Fields               10 10  0
    Marchioness of Rockingham                          10 10  0
    Mr. Samuel Rickards                                10 10  0
    Mrs. Russel                                        10  0  0
    Mrs. Radcliffe                                     10  0  0
    Mr. Henry Rutt                                      3  3  0
    Mr. John Robarts                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Matthew Randall                                 5  5  0
    Mr. George Rutt                                     3  3  0
    Mr. and Mrs. Rawlins                                2  2  0
    Miss Rymers                                         2  2  0
    Mr. John Robin                                      1  1  0
    Mrs. Russel, of Greek Street                        1  1  0
    Mr. Stephen Roe                                       10  6
    Mr. Rumley                                            10  6
    Mr. Robarts                                            5  3
    Right Hon. Earl of Shaftesbury                     81 10  0
    Mr. Samuel Savage, a Trustee                      100  0  0
    Samuel Sparrow, Esq.                               50  0  0
    Rev. Dr. Stennett's Collection                     42 10 11
    The Rev. Mr. Charles Skelton's Collection          13 13  0
    The Rev. Mr. Stafford and his Friends              10 10  0
    William Stead, Esq.                                10 10  0
    Mr. Robert Stuart                                  10 10  0
    Mr. Baron Smythe, a Trustee                         6  6  0
    Mr. Samuel Stainton                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Sherland Swanstone                              5  5  0
    Mr. James Smith                                     5  5  0
    Mr. J. Short                                        5  5  0
    Mr. John Striteal                                   5  5  0
    The Rev. Sam. Martin Savage                         5  5  0
    Mr. Sainsbury Sibley                                5  5  0
    Mr. Smith (partner with Mr. Nash)                   5  5  0
    Mrs. Sowdon                                         4  4  0
    Mr. Thomas Smith                                    3  3  0
    S. W.                                               3  3  0
    Messrs. Simmonds & Co.                              3  3  0
    Mr. Self                                            2 12  6
    The Rev. and Hon. Mr. Shirley                       2  2  0
    Mr. R. Saddington                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Sarney                                          2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Smithers                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Somerhayes                                      1  1  0
    Mrs. S. G.                                          1  1  0
    Mr. John Seaber                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Shrapnell                                       1  1  0
    S. F.                                               1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Spilsbury                              1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Savage                                   1  1  0
    Mr. James Still                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Spicer                                   1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Sheppard                               1  1  0
    Mr. James Smith                                     1  1  0
    Mr. John Sparks                                     1  1  0
    Mr. William Slow                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Shickle                                    18  0
    Mr. Statham                                           10  6
    Mr. Francis Simpson                                   10  6
    Mr. Stibbs                                            10  6
    Mrs. Scott                                             5  3
    S. S.                                                  5  3
    John Thornton, Esq., a Trustee and Treasurer      100  0  0
    Barlow Trecothick, Esq.                            21  0  0
    Sir John Toriano                                   20  0  0
    Sir John Thorold, Bart. of Cranwell                10 10  0
    Mr. William Tatnall                                10 10  0
    Mr. Thomas Turville                                10 10  0
    A Lady Unknown, per Mr. Thompson                   10 10  0
    The Rev. Mr. Thomson                                5  5  0
    Mr. John Townsend                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Robert Trevors                                  2  2  0
    T. B.                                               1  1  0
    Mr. Robert Territ                                   1  1  0
    Messrs. Tredway & Bayley                            1  1  0
    T.                                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Twelves                                         1  1  0
    Mr. John Thorne                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Timothy Topping                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Taylor                                            12  0
    Mrs. Tomkins                                          10  6
    Miss Ann Tayleure                                     10  6
    A Person Unknown                                   50  0  0
    A Gentleman and several Ladies to be unknown       30  9  0
    James Vere, Esq.                                   20  0  0
    Mr. Vowell the Stationer                            2  2  0
    A Providential Guinea                               1  1  0
    A Lady Unknown                                      5  5  0
    A Person Unknown                                    2  2  0
    Ditto                                               2  2  0
    Cash Unknown                                        2  2  0
    Unknown                                            10 10  0
    Unknown, four entries, each                         1  1  0
    A Lady Unknown                                        10  6
    Unknown, nine entries, each                           10  6
    Ditto, per Rev. Mr. Traile                            10  6
    Ditto, per Rev. Mr. Franks                            10  6
    Mr. Veck                                              10  6
    Unknown, four entries, each                            5  5
    Wm. Wilberforce, Esq.                              25  5  0
    Mr. Rich. Wilson and Lady                          25  5  0
    Dan. West, Esq., a Trustee                         25  0  0
    Samuel Wordsworth, Esq.                            10 10  0
    Miss Ann Wordsworth                                10 10  0
    Mr. John Wallaston                                 10 10  0
    Mr. Stephen Williams                               10 10  0
    Messrs. Welch & Rogers                             10 10  0
    Mr. Thomas Whitehead, per Rev. Mr. Romaine          6 14  9
    Mr. Jonathan Wathen                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Rob. Waller, at Gosport                         5  5  0
    Mr. Nathaniel Weeks                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Robert Watkinson                                5  5  0
    Mr. Thomas Wilson                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Moses Willatts                                  5  5  0
    Mr. George Wilkinson                                5  5  0
    Mr. William Willatts                                5  5  0
    Mr. John Wathen & Son                               3  3  0
    Mr. James Walker                                    3  3  0
    Mrs. Mary Ward                                      3  3  0
    Mr. Wheelar                                         3  3  0
    Messrs. Thomas & John Wellings                      2  2  0
    Dr. Wray                                            2  2  0
    Mr. Woodroffe                                       2  2  0
    Mr. Walker, in Whitechapel                          2  2  0
    Mr. Walcot, of Dartmouth                            2  2  0
    Mr. Whiten & Co.                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Wilson                                          1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Watson                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Caleb White                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Wolmer                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Wells                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Samuel Williams                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Waddilove                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Wilton                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Wells                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Withers                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Wallis                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Wordsworth                                       10  6
    Rev. Dr. Worthington                                  10  6
    Mr. Welch                                             10  6
    Mrs. Williams                                          5  3
    Mr. William W.                                         4  0
    X. Q.                                              50  0  0
    Y. R.                                               1  1  0
    Z.                                                     5  3

    Total in London                                 £3165  3  8


COLLECTIONS AT ABINGDON, IN BERKSHIRE.


    Mr. Joseph Butlar                                  21  0  0
    Mr. Joseph Tomkins                                 10 10  0
    Mr. William Tomkins                                10 10  0
    Mr. Benjamin Tomkins                               10 10  0
    Mrs. Tomkins                                       10 10  0
    Mr. Nathaniel Roberts                               5  5  0
    Rev. Mr. John Moore                                 2  2  0
    Miss Palmer                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Flight                                   2  2  0
    Mrs. Elizabeth Flight                               1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Fuller                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Sarah Fuller                                   1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Daniel Turner                              1  1  0
    Mrs. Elizabeth Turner                                 10  6
    The Public Collection                               5  6  6


DONATIONS AT ASHBURTON, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    The Rev. Mr. Bradford, of Buckfastleigh             5  5  0
    Mr. Richard Bennett, etc.                           1 14  3
    Mrs. Mary Berry                                       13  0
    Mrs. Susannah Bennett                                  3  0
    Mr. Cocksley                                          10  6
    Miss Eals                                             10  6
    Mr. Peter Fabyon, etc.                              1  6  9
    Mr. Nicholas Fabyon, etc.                             15  0
    Mr. James Furman                                      10  6
    Mr. Richard Harris                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Leaman                                     10  6
    Rev. Mr. Naylor, vicar of Ashburton                 1  1  0
    Mr. Walter Park and Family                          2  0  0
    Mrs. Mary Rennell, etc.                               18  9
    Mrs. Sowter                                           10  6
    Miss Soper and Sister, each                           10  6
    Mr. Soper                                              5  3
    Messrs. John, Richard & Moses Tozer                 1 16  6
    Mr. Nicholas Tripe                                    10  6
    A Person Unknown                                       7  6
    Samuel Windeat                                        10  6
    Mr. Winsor                                             5  3
    The Rev. Mr. Waters                                   10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Waters'                   8 16  7


DONATIONS AT ST. ALBANS IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    Collected at Rev. Messrs. Hiron's and Gill's       22  2  2-1/4


DONATIONS AT ASHFORD, IN KENT.


    Mr. Benjamin Harrison                               1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Brook's                   9  1  9-3/4
    Do. at Rev. Mr. Gillabrand's                        5  0  0


DONATION AT ASHBORN, IN DERBYSHIRE.


    Collected at Rev. Mr. Rawlins'                      2  8 11


DONATIONS AT AULCESTER, IN WARWICKSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Broadhurst's              2  4  5


DONATION AT APPLEDORE, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Evan's                    8  0  0


BRISTOL.


    Mr. Ariel                                           2  2  0
    Mr. P. Allard                                       1  1  0
    T. & M. Allard                                      1  1  0
    Mrs. Allison                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Robert Atkins                                   1  1  0
    Mr. William Arnold                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Apthorp                                         1  1  0
    John & Fran. Bull, Esqs.                           10 10  0
    Miss Brown                                          5  5  0
    Miss Sarah Barrow                                   3  0  0
    Mr. Britton                                         2 12  6
    Sarah, Mary, and Nathaniel Britton                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Bull and Miss Bull one guinea each             2  2  0
    Mr. Blake                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Bright                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Brice                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Badcocke                                       1  1  0
    Mr. John Bryant                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Beverston                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Jas. and Miss Brown                             1  1  0
    Mr. Daniel Brown                                      10  6
    Mr. Baker                                              5  0
    Mr. John Collett                                    5  5  0
    Mr. James Cowles                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Robert Coleman                                  3  3  0
    Mr. Robert Cottle                                   3  3  0
    Mr. Francis Collins                                 2  2  0
    Rev. Mr. Cook of Dington                            2  2  0
    Mr. William Cowles                                  2  2  0
    Lady Croston                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Cheston                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Collins                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Richard Champion                                1  1  0
    Mr. Ric. Champion, Jr.                              1  1  0
    Mr. George Champion                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Benjamin Chandler                                 10  6
    Mr. Richard Carpenter                                 10  6
    Mr. Cottles' men                                       4  0
    Mr. Henry Durbin                                    2  2  0
    Mrs. D.                                             2  2  0
    Mrs. Davis                                          2  2  0
    Mr. Dugdale                                         1 11  6
    Mr. Edward Daniel                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Dallaway                                        1  1  0
    Mr. John Dafforn                                      10  6
    Mr. William Day                                       10  6
    Mr. E. Daniel                                          2  6
    Mrs. Drew                                              5  0
    Mr. Daniel                                             2  6
    Mr. John Evans                                      3  3  0
    Mr. Thomas Evans                                    1  1  0
    Mr. John Edwards                                      10  6
    Mrs. Edwards                                          10  6
    Mrs. E. H.                                             5  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Evan's Meeting           30  0  0
    Rev. Mr. Wm. Foote                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Frampton                                        2  2  0
    Mr. George Fownes                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Farnall                                         1  1  0
    A Friend                                              10  6
    Mr. Frame                                             10  6
    Mr. Francis                                            4  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Foot's, at Kally Hill     6 10  7
    Mr. Gordon                                          5  5  0
    Mr. Jos. Green                                      3  3  0
    Mr. Garlick                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Gomond                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. George                                         2  2  0
    Rev. Mr. Grand, Rector of Durham                    2  2  0
    Mr. Griffith                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Granger                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Robert Gordon                                   1  1  0
    Mr. J. Gordon                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Grimes                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Joanna Gough                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Gorton                                           10  6
    Collected at Mr. Gillard's, Castle Green           11  0  9
    Mr. R. A. Hawksworth                                5  5  0
    Mr. William Hazle                                   5  5  0
    Mr. John Harris                                     5  5  0
    Mr. Mark Hartford, Jr.                              2  2  0
    Mr. William Hale                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Hale                                           1  1  0
    Mrs. Howard                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Hibbs                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Haddocke                                        1  1  0
    Messrs. Howlett and Rainsford                         15  9
    The Rev. Mr. Hart                                     10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Haines                                   10  6
    Mrs. Hill                                             10  6
    Mr. George Harris                                     10  6
    Mr. Hollister                                         10  6
    Mr. Hopkins                                           10  6
    Mr. Harmer                                            10  6
    Mr. Hall                                              10  6
    Mr. Howell Harris                                     10  6
    Mr. Hewlett and Children                              11  0
    Mr. Hinton                                             4  0
    Collected at Mr. Harwood's                          6 11  4
    Capt. James                                         5  5  0
    Mr. James Ireland                                   5  5  0
    Mrs. Mary Johnson                                   3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. Jillard                                2  2  0
    Mrs. Elizabeth Johnson                              2  2  0
    Mr. James                                           1  7  0
    John Jennys, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Mary Jackson                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Iredel                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Sam. Johnson                                      10  6
    Mrs. King                                           4  4  0
    The B. of K----'s Lady                              1  1  0
    Mr. E. King                                            2  6
    Collected at Kingswood                              6  4  0
    Harford Lloyd, Esq.                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Thomas Ludlow                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Christopher Ludlow                              5  5  0
    Mr. William Ludlow                                  3  3  0
    From two Ladies                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Ledyard                                  2  2  0
    Mr. John Lawle                                      1  1  0
    Mrs. Lloyd                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Isaac Ludlow                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Treat Ludlow                                    1  1  0
    Dr. Lyne                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Llewellyn, etc.                                   14  6
    Miss Ludlow                                           10  6
    Mr. Lewis                                             10  6
    Mr. R. Ludlow                                          5  0
    Mr. Lemon                                              5  3
    Hon. and Rev. Mr. M.                               10 10  0
    Mr. Meyler, Sen.                                    2  2  0
    Mrs. Merlott                                        2  2  0
    Mr. Munkley                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Milliard                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Maynard                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Martin                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Moss                                            1  1  0
    Mrs. Moore                                          1  1  0
    Mr. John Morgan                                       10  6
    Mr. Maxwell                                           10  6
    Mrs. M.                                               10  6
    Mr. J. Maynard                                         2  6
    Mrs. ----                                              5  0
    Mr. John Needham                                      10  6
    Mr. Nash                                              10  6
    Mr. Overbury                                        1  7  0
    Mr. Owen                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Owen                                              10  6
    Mr. Pynock                                          2  2  0
    Widow Poole, Broad Street                           2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Peach                                    2  2  0
    Mrs. Parsons                                        2  2  0
    Mrs. Poole, Bridewell Lane                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Pollard and Pierce                             1 16  6
    Mr. Purnall                                         1  1  0
    Mr. John Parstow                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Purnall                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Power and Children                                15  6
    Mrs. Price                                            10  6
    Mr. Parry                                             10  6
    Mr. Power                                             10  6
    Mr. Charles Prosser                                   10  6
    Mrs. Poole                                            10  6
    Collected at Chelwood, by Dr. Pearce               13  5  6
    Ditto, at Peaulton                                  7  1  0
    William Rewees, Esq.                               10 10  0
    Mrs. Roscoe                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Rienke                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. R.                                             1  1  0
    Mr. Rogers                                            10  6
    Mrs. Rogers                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Rowles                                           10  6
    Mr. John Storck                                     5  5  0
    Mr. Stonehouse, Mill Hill                           3  3  0
    Mr. Edward Stanfell                                 3  3  0
    Mr. Joseph Sievier                                  2 12  6
    Mr. Isaac Stephens                                  1 11  6
    Mr. B. Stevenson                                    1  1  0
    The Rev. Dr. Stonehouse                             1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Symes                                  1  1  0
    Counsellor Skidmore                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Seymour                                  1  1  0
    Messrs. Simmonds and Woodman                        1  1  0
    Samuel Sedgeley, Esq.                               1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Shapland                                   10  6
    Mr. Daniel Searnell                                   10  6
    Mr. Smith                                              2  6
    Sundry small ones                                      6  6
    Mr. Josiah Taylor                                   1  1  0
    Dr. Townsend                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Tomlinson                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Teague                                            10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Thomas's Meeting         15  6  1
    Unknown, 2 entries, each                            2  2  0
    Unknown                                             1 11  0
    Unknown, 2 entries, each                            1  1  0
    Ditto, 3 entries, each                                10  6
    Samuel Webb                                         5  5  0
    Mr. Peter Wilder                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Edward Whatley                                  5  5  0
    Mrs. Willis, in Rosegreen, Kingswood                5  5  0
    Mr. F. Weaver                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Samuel Waterford                                1  1  0
    Mr. Daniel White                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Jos. and Charles Whittuck                       1  1  0
    Mr. Watts                                             10  6
    Mr. Woodward                                          10  6
    Mr. Abraham Whitluck                                  10  6
    Mr. Wills                                             10  6
    Mr. Whituck                                            2  6
    Mr. Williams                                           5  0
    Mr. J. Watts                                           5  0
    A Widow                                                5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Whitfield's Tabernacle,
      Mr. Rowand's, £3 4_s_                            25  6  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's Room            23 15  0


BRADFORD, IN WILTSHIRE.


    Mr. Humphrey Trywell                                1  1  0
    Mr. John Smith                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Smith                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Saunders                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Towgood and Mr. Baines                           10  3
    Collected at Rev. Messrs. Haine's, Skirven, and
      Foote's Meetings                                 18 14  8
    The Rev. Mr. Spencer and Friends                    7 14  0


BRIDGEWATER, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    Counsellor Allen                                    1  1  0
    Thomas Allen, Esq.                                  1  1  0
    Counsellor Bingford, etc.                           1  3  0
    Rev. Mr. Burroughs                                    10  6
    Mr. Chubbs                                             5  3
    James Hervey, Esq.                                    10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Stansbury                                 5  0
    Dr. Taylor                                          1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wilson's                 10 15  6
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Harris's                          2  8  0


BRATTON.


    Mr. John Blatch                                     1  1  0
    Mr. William Ballard                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Ann and Eleanor Ballard                          10  6
    Mrs. Mary Drewett                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Eleanor Ellis                                     5  0
    Mrs. Eleanor Froud                                  1 19  6
    Mr. Henry Phipps Rendall                               5  0
    Mrs. Sarah Rendall                                     5  0
    Jeffery Whitaker, Esq.                              2  2  0
    Mrs. Thomas Whitaker                                1  1  0
    The General Collection                              1  7  0


BIDDIFORD, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    George Buck, Esq.                                   2  2  0
    Charles Davie, Esq.                                   10  6
    Mr. Greening                                        1  1  0
    Walter Shallabar, Esq.                              5  5  0
    Mrs. Saltren                                        1  7  0
    Unknown                                                5  3
    Rev. Mrs. John Whitefield                           2  2  0
    Collected at Rev. Mr. Samuel Lavington's           35 19  6


BARNSTAPLE, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Collected in Barnstaple                            31 15  6
    From the parishes of Withredge and Thelbridge         17  1


BLANFORD, IN DORSETSHIRE.


    Edward Madgwicke, Esq.                              4  4  0
    Mrs. Gifford                                        3  3  0
    Mr. Thomas Roe and Dr. Pultney, etc.                1  2  0
    Mr. Matthew Cummings                                1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Henry Field                                2  2  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Field's                  13 16  5


BREMISTER, IN DORSETSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bryant's                  9  6  0


BRIDPORT, IN DORSETSHIRE.


    Miss Whitty                                           10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Rooker's                 31  5  6
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Sutton's                         11 18  0


BROUGHTON.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Steel's                  11  0  0


BOURTON, ON THE WATER.


    William Snooke, Esq.                               10 10  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Beddom's                 19 10  0


BROOMSGROVE, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    From an unknown lady, per Mrs. Blackmore, of
      Manchester                                        6  6  0
    Collected at Rev. Messrs. Phillips', Jenkins',
      and Butterworth's                                20 17  8-1/2


BEDWORTH.


    Rev. Mr. Howlett, a clergyman                         10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Saunder's                 9 14  9


BEDFORD, IN BEDFORDSHIRE.


    Mr. Belsham                                         2  0  0
    Joseph Barham, Esq.                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Bayley                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Berthray                                         10  6
    Messrs. Costins                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Custerson                                         10  6
    Mr. Dunton                                             3  0
    Mr. Franklin                                           5  0
    William Foster, Esq.                                1  1  0
    John Howard, Esq.                                   5  5  0
    Mrs. Hensman                                        1  1  0
    Mr. King                                            3  3  0
    Mr. Leach                                             10  6
    Messrs. Negus                                       1 11  6
    Mr. Odell                                           5  5  0
    Mr. Palmer, Sen.                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Palmer, Jr.                                     1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Joshua Symonds                             1 11  6
    Mrs. Sanderson                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Wilsher                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Wells                                             10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Symmonds                 13  6  7-1/2


BINGLEY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lilley's                 11  1  1-1/2


BRADFORD, IN YORKSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Crabtree's                6 18  3-1/2
    Rev. Mr. Sykes, Vicar                                 10  6
    The Rev. Mr. ----                                     10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Smith                                  1  1  0
    Collected by ditto of his people                    5  5  0
    Ditto of the Rev. Mr. Wesley's people               8  0  0


BIERLEY.


    Richard Richardson, Esq.                           10 10  0
    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Stillingfleet             6 16  6


BURSTALL, IN YORKSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                  6  6  4-1/4


BURY, IN SUFFOLK.


    Mr. Crosbie                                        10 10  0
    Mrs. Crosbie                                       10 10  0
    Mr. Robert Hayward                                 10 10  0
    Mr. Robinson and Son                                6  6  0
    Mr. Cumberland and Sons                             6  6  0
    Mrs. Sarah Cumberland                               5  5  0
    Miss Crosbie                                        2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Frost                                    2  2  0
    Rev. Mr. B. Mills, Rector                           1  1  0
    Miss M. Crosbie                                     1  1  0
    Mr. William Hollman                                 1  1  0
    Unknown                                             1  1  0
    Mr. Charles Darby and Wife                            10  6
    Mr. Umfreville                                        12  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Saville's                 3 18 10-3/4
    Mrs. Lucas                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Darby                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Wright                                         1  1  0
    ---- Palmer, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Lyng                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Knock                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Ely                                             1  1  0
    Mr. Chaplin                                           10  6
    Mr. Mast                                              10  6
    Mrs. Mast                                              5  3
    Mr. Leech                                             10  6
    Mr. Sleckles                                          10  6
    Mrs. Webster                                          10  6
    Mr. Bullen                                             8  0
    Mr. Rutter                                             5  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lincoln's                 4 18 10


BRAINTREE AND BOCKING, IN ESSEX.


    Mr. Gamaliel Andrews                                1  1  0
    Mr. Boosey, Sen.                                    3  3  0
    Mr. Boosey, Jun.                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Boosey                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Barnet                                          1  1  1
    Mr. Thomas Bennet                                     10  6
    Mrs. Barber                                           10  6
    Mr. Crackenthorp                                   10 10  0
    John Churchman, Esq.                                4  4  0
    Mr. Darcy Clark                                     2  2  0
    Mr. John Church                                     1 16  0
    Mr. Thomas Davey                                    3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. Davidson                               2  2  0
    Mr. Death                                           2  2  0
    Mrs. Anne English                                   6  6  0
    Mr. John English                                    3  3  0
    Deacon Fuller                                       4  4  0
    Mr. Fordham                                           10  6
    Mr. Harriott                                        5  5  0
    Mr. Halls                                           1  1  0
    The Rev. Dr. Hall, Dean of Bocking                  1  1  0
    Mr. Hall                                              10  6
    Mr. Joseph Josline                                    10  6
    Mr. John Lambert                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Isaac Livermore                                 1  6  0
    Mr. Thomas Lake                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Livermore, Glazier                              1  1  0
    Mrs. Mayor                                          6  6  0
    Rev. Mr. Powell, Rector                             2  2  0
    Mr. Quincey                                           10  6
    Mrs. Reeve                                          5  5  0
    Mr. Richard Sayer                                   6  6  0
    Dr. Stapleton                                       5  5  0
    Mr. Joseph Saville                                  3  3  0
    Mr. John Tabor                                      6  6  0
    Mr. Samuel Tabor                                    5  5  0
    Mrs. Anne Tabor                                     2  2  0
    Unknown                                             2  1  6
    Ditto, per the Rev. Mr. Davidson                    1  1  0
    Mr. John Watkinson                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Watkinson                                  10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Davidson's               33  9  9


BERKHEMPSTEAD, IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    The Rev. Mr. Bland                                     5  0
    Mr. Duncom                                             5  0
    ---- Noyse, Esq.                                      10  6
    Mrs. Noyse                                            10  6
    Mrs. Thompson                                         10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Sexton's                  7  3  6


BASINGSTOKE, IN HAMPSHIRE.


    His Grace the Duke of Bolton                        3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. Burroughs                                10  6
    ---- Castle                                           10  6
    ---- Covey                                            10  6
    Mr. England                                         1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Hinchman                                 10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Ingham                                   10  6
    Collected at Rev. Mr. Ingham's                      4  9 10
    Mr. Portsmouth                                        10  6
    Mrs. Payton                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Russell                                         1  1  0
    From Sundries                                       3  4  0
    Mr. Vicary                                            10  6
    Rev. Mr. Underwood                                    10  6


BRIGHTHELMSTONE, IN SUSSEX.


    Collected of Mr. Beach and other Friends of
      Religion                                          8  1  9


BEACONSFIELD, IN BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


    Mr. Samuel Anthony                                  2  2  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Darby's                   7  7  9


BEVERLY, IN YORKSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Harris'                   4 12  8-3/4


BOSTON, IN LINCOLNSHIRE.


    Brought by Mr. Robert Barlow                       10 10  0


BUNGAY, IN SUFFOLK.


    Mr. Thomas Prentice                                 5  5  0
    Collected and sent by the Rev. Mr. Newton,
      near Norwich                                      1 17  0


BEWDLEY, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected by the Revs. Messrs. Skeys               20  3  3


BATH.


    The Right Rev. the Bishop of Derry                 10 10  0
    Mrs. Browne                                        10  0  0
    Mrs. B. Bethell                                     5  5  0
    Mrs. Bethell                                        5  5  0
    William Blake, Esq.                                 3  3  0
    Mrs. Bearsley                                       2  2  0
    Mr. John Bleakley                                   1  1  0
    Thomas Bury, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Countess of Charleville                             5  5  0
    Mr. Colborne                                        2  2  0
    Mr. Benjamin Colborne                               2  2  0
    Mr. Cox                                             1  1  0
    Governor Dinwiddie                                  3  3  0
    The Rev. Dr. Dechair                                2  2  0
    Mrs. E----                                          1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Frank                                  1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Frank's                  26 10  4-1/2
    Dr. Gusthart                                        2  2  0
    Hall Atfield, Esq.                                    10  6
    Mr. William Hoare                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Hervey                                           10  6
    Mr. Jones                                             10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Jessie                                 1  1  0
    Major Maine                                         5  5  0
    Mr. Allen                                           1  1  0
    Andrew Millar, Esq.                                 5  5  0
    Mr. Richard Marchant                                3  3  0
    Mr. Edward Marchant                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Magee                                          1  1  0
    John Miller, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Dr. Moysey                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Parker                                          1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Parsons                  11  8 11
    James Roffey, Esq.                                  5  5  0
    Mrs. Revead                                         1  1  0
    William Roffie, Esq.                                1  1  0
    Hon. Richard Salter                                 5  5  0
    The Rev. J. Sparrow                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Shally                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Speering                                           5  0
    Unknown                                                5  3
    John Wentworth, Esq., Governor of New Hampshire    21  0  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                  6  1  5


BROMPTON.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Potts                     2  0  6


CHALFORD.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Phene                     6  6  0


CROSCOMBE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Watkins                   1 13  0


CALUMPTON, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Collected at Rev. Messrs. Cassel's and Morgan's     5  9  3


CULMSTOCK.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Gillerd's                 5  1  6


CREDITON, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Rev. Mr. Hart, Vicar                                  11  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. J. Berry's               30  0  0


CHUDLEIGH, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Joel Orchard's           11 13  6


CREWKERN.


    The Rev. Mr. Taggart                                1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Cox                                      10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Blake's                  17  4  4


COVENTRY, IN WARWICKSHIRE.


    The Rev. Dr. Edwards and three of his parishioners  3 13  6
    Collected of the Rev. Messrs. Jackson's and
      Lloyd's people                                   56  7  2-1/2
    Collected of the Rev. Mr. Butterworth's people     10 19  6
    Collected of the Rev. Messrs. Simpson's and
      Alcott's people                                  39 14 10-1/4
    Mr. Cleve                                           1 16  0
    Mrs. Tibbits                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Mayor                                           1  1  0


CIRENCESTER, IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


    The Rev. Mr. Davis                                  1 11  6
    Mr. Freeman                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Kimber                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Wilkins                                         1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Johnson                                  10  6
    Mr. Wavel                                             10  6
    Mr. Francis Turner.                                   10  6
    Mr. John Reeve and Unknown                            10  0


CHELTENHAM, IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev.
      Mr. Dunscomb's                                    9  4  9


CARLISLE, IN CUMBERLAND.


    The Rev. Mr. Robinson                                 10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Mills                     8 14  7


CASTLE HEDINGHAM.


    The Rev. Mr. Ford                                   2  2  0
    Mr. U.                                              1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Ford's                   12 14  3-3/4


COGGESHALL, IN ESSEX.


    Mr. John Abbott                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Buxton                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Bott                                       10  6
    Mr. Joseph Choate                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Choate                                       10  6
    Mr. John Decks                                      1  1  0
    Dr. ----                                              10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Dowdle                                   10  6
    Mr. John Fordham                                      10  6
    Dr. Godfrey                                         1 11  6
    Mr. Edward Harrington                                 10  6
    Mrs. Elizabeth Mason                                  10  6
    Mr. Midcalf                                           10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Petto                                    10  6
    Mrs. E. Powel                                         15  0
    Mr. Robert Rist                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Seach                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Robert Salmon                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Shuttleworth                                      10  6
    Unknown                                             1  1  0
    Messrs. Urwine                                      3 13  6
    Mrs. Urwine                                           10  6
    Mr. John Wright                                     2  2  0
    Two Widows                                            10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Petto's                   7  9  7


CAMBRIDGE.


    Of Mr. Robinson, by a Person unknown               21  0  0
    Ebenezer Hollick, Esq.                             10 10  0
    Mr. Richard Forster                                 5  5  0
    Miss Patterson                                      3  3  0
    Mr. Eaton                                           3  3  0
    Mr. Lincoln                                         2  2  0
    Dr. Randall, Professor of Music                     2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Robinson                               1  7  0
    Mrs. Biggs                                          1  7  0
    Mr. Purchase                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Hawthorn                                       1  1  0
    Alderman Gifford                                    1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Jones (Ely)                            1  1  0
    Mr. Mayor                                           1  1  0
    Messrs. Penticross & Decoetligon                    1  1  0
    Unknown, by Mr. Brooks                              1  1  0
    Mrs. Lancaster and Mrs. Halsall                       15  9
    Dr. Smith, Vice-Chancellor                            10  6
    Mr. N. V. Stephens                                    10  6
    Mr. Juet                                              10  6
    Mr. Pike                                              10  6
    Mrs. Lake                                             10  6
    Mr. William Blows (Whittier)                        0 10  6
    Mr. Rayner (Duxford)                                  10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Robinson's               22 10  3-1/2
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Saunders'                17  5  5


CLEAVERING.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Reynolds'                 5 12  8-1/2


CHESHAM IN BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


    ---- Scotto Esq.                                    5  5  0
    Dr. Rumsey                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Lasenby                                         1  1  0
    Mr. John Harden                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Putnam                                            13  0
    Mr. Hepburn                                           10  6
    Mr. Richard Wheeler                                   10  6
    Mr. John Priest                                       10  6
    Mr. Putnam                                            10  6
    Mr. Simson                                            10  6
    Mr. Treacher                                          10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Spooner                                  10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Cock's and Mr. Spooner's  6  8  8


CHEYNES.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Cromwell's                4  8  6


COLNBROOKE, IN BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Woodman's                 6 12  0
    The Rev. Mr. Leighton, of Uxbridge                  1  1  0


CRANBROOKE, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Noyse's and Dobb's    7  8  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Colville's of Goodhurst     17  6


CANTERBURY, IN KENT.


    The Rev. Mr. Perronet                               1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Benge                                  1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Delasay                                   5  0
    Mr. Claris                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Lapine                                            10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Sheldon's and
      Chapman's.                                       15 17  2
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Perronet's                2  3  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                  2 16  8


CHATHAM, IN KENT.


    William Gordon, Esq., and Lady                      2  2  0
    ---- Brooks, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Dr. Craddocke                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Poley                                             10  6
    Mr. Stubbs                                            10  6
    Unknown                                                2  0
    Collected at Messrs. Neal's & Meremeth's            3 10  6-1/2
    Collected at the Tabernacle                        11  2  2-3/4


THE DEVIZES IN WILTSHIRE.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Benj. Fullar and
      the Rev. Mr. Henry Williams                      28  7  0


DARTMOUTH, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Adams'                   23 10  6


DORCHESTER, IN DORSETSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lamb's                   12 12  5
    Persons unknown, sent to Messrs. Pewtress &
      Robarts                                           2  2  0


DUDLEY, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Handcox's                12 12 10-1/4


DERBY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Thomas White's            5 14  9


DEDHAM.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bingham's                13 13  6


DURHAM.


    Collected at the Dissenting Meeting                 2 18  7-1/2


DOVER, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Holt's and Ashdown's  8  1  6


DENTON, IN NORFOLK.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Bocking                   7 10  0
    A Clergyman                                           10  6
    A Gentleman                                            7  6


DEAL, IN KENT.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. John Say                  3 15  8


EXETER, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Mr. Joseph Allen                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Addicott                                 1  1  0
    Dr. Andrews                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Abbot                                             10  6
    A. C.                                                 10  6
    Mr. Charles Barring                                 3  3  0
    Mr. Bellfield                                       1  1  0
    Mrs. Buckland                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Caleb Blight                                      10  6
    Mr. Britland                                          10  6
    Mr. John Bowrug                                       10  6
    Mr. Bastard                                           10  6
    Mr. Bidwell                                           10  6
    Mrs. Elizabeth Battersby                               5  3
    Benjamin & Elizabeth Binham, each                      1  0
    Mr. Cranch                                          2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Coade                                    1  1  0
    Mr. John Carter, per Mrs. Trowbridge                1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Clark                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Peter Clark                                     1  1  0
    Mr. William Clark                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Coleman                                        1  1  0
    Mr. William Coward                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Coffin, Sen.                                    1  1  0
    Messrs. Clark & Mayne                                 11  0
    Mr. Cross                                             10  6
    Mr. Charlock                                          10  6
    Mr. Coffin, Jr.                                       10  6
    Mr. Thomas Coffin                                     10  6
    Miss Coffin                                            5  3
    Mr. Casely                                            10  6
    Mr. Joel Cadbury                                      10  6
    Mr. John Catbury                                       5  0
    Mr. John Cadbury                                       5  0
    John Duntze, Esq.                                   6  6  0
    Mrs. Dickers                                        4  4  0
    John Duntze, Esq., Sr.                              3  3  0
    Mrs. Durnsford                                        10  6
    Capt. Dawson                                          10  6
    Mr. Dennis                                            10  6
    Mr. Richard Durnsford                                  5  3
    Mrs. Evans                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Ann Enty                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Richard Evans                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Matthew Frost                                     10  6
    Dr. Glass                                           3  3  0
    Mr. Thomas Gearing                                  2  2  0
    Madam Gould                                         1 10  0
    Mr. Jonathan Green                                  1  7  0
    Mr. James Green                                     1  7  0
    Mr. Thomas Glass                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Benjamin Grant                                  1  1  0
    Dr. Gifford                                         1  1  0
    Mr. G. A. Gibbs                                     1  1  0
    Mrs. Glyde, widow                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Gifford                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Gillett                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Glyde                                            12  6
    Mr. Samuel Glyde                                      10  6
    Mr. William Grigg                                      5  3
    Mr. John Holmes, Jr.                                3  3  0
    Mrs. Mary Hollworthy                                2  2  0
    Mr. Harris                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Hallett, widow                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Hillman, widow                                 1  1  0
    Mr. William Hornsey                                   10  6
    Miss Handlugh                                         10  6
    Mr. William Holmes                                    10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Hogg                                     10  6
    Rev. Mr. Richard Hale                                 10  6
    Mr. Hornsey                                            5  3
    Mr. Hartsel                                            5  3
    Mrs. Jones, widow                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Jerwood                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Herman Kattencamp                               3  3  0
    Mr. Abraham Kenneway                                2  2  0
    Mr. Wm. Kenneway, Sen.                              1  1  0
    Mr. William Kenneway                                1  1  0
    Mr. William Kent                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Kelley                                          1  1  0
    Matthew Lee, Esq.                                   5  5  0
    Mrs. Lee                                            2  2  0
    Mrs. Lavington                                      1  1  0
    Mr. William Luke                                      10  6
    Capt. Luke                                            10  6
    Mr. John Luke                                         10  6
    Mr. Luscombe, Sr.                                     10  6
    Mr. Humph. Mortimore                                1  1  0
    Mr. Samuel Milford                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Mandrott                                        1  1  0
    The Rev. Dr. Musgrave                               1  1  0
    Dr. Musgrave, M.D.                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Katharine Moore                                  10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Moore                                    11  6
    Mr. Killow Nation                                   2  2  0
    Mr. James Newman                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Ogburn                                             5  3
    Mr. Samuel Parminter                                5  5  0
    Mrs. Praed                                          3 12  0
    Mr. John Vowler Parminter                           2  2  0
    Mrs. Pope (widow)                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Pope                                     1  1  0
    Mrs. Parminter                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Benjamin Peckford                               1  1  0
    Mr. John Phillips                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Matthew A. Paul                                 1  1  0
    Mr. William Pittfield                               1  1  0
    Mr. Robert Prudom                                     10  6
    Mr. Pengelly                                          10  6
    Paddington Meeting                                  1 19  6
    The Rev. Mr. Chancellor Quick                       2  2  0
    Mr. John Reed                                       1 11  6
    Mrs. Ridler                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Reeves                                             4  0
    Mrs. Stockes, by the Rev. Mr. Towgood               3  3  0
    Mr. Thomas Smith                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Short                                    2  2  0
    The two Miss Shepherds                              2  2  0
    Mr. John Stoodley                                   1 16  0
    Mr. John Stephens                                   1  7  0
    Mr. Charles Stoodley                                1  1  0
    Mr. George Sealey                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Shorland                                   1  1  0
    John Shapley, Esq.                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Joshua Saunders                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Score                                      10  6
    Mr. Samuel Sweetings                                  10  6
    Mr. Strong                                            10  6
    Mr. Spry                                              10  6
    S. C.                                                 10  6
    Mr. Sams                                               1  0
    Mrs. Skinner                                           2  6
    Mr. Jonathan Tucker                                 2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Stephen
    Mr. William Tucker                                  1 11  6
      Towgood                                           1  1  0
    Miss Townsends                                      1  1  0
    Messrs. Tozer and Davis                             1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Tozer                                  1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Micajah Towgood                        1  1  0
    Mr. Tanner                                            10  6
    Mrs. Mary Trowbridge                                  10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Turner                                   10  6
    Mr. Tucker                                            10  6
    Mr. Henry Tarrant                                      6  9
    The Rev. Mr. Tarrant                                   5  3
    Unknown, per Rev. Mr. Towgood                       3 12  0
    Ditto, per ditto                                    2  2  0
    Mrs. Vowler                                         2  2  0
    Unknown                                             3  3  0
    Ditto                                               1  9  0
    Ditto                                               1  3  6
    Ditto                                               1  1  0
    Ditto                                                 15  9
    Ditto, per Mrs. Pope                                  10  6
    Ditto                                                 10  6
    Ditto                                                  6  9
    Ditto, per Mr. Morris                                  5  3
    Ditto                                                  5  3
    Ditto                                                  5  0
    Ditto                                                  5  0
    Ditto                                                  3  6
    John Waldron, Esq.                                  3  3  0
    Mr. John Waymouth                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Henry Waymouth                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Waymouth                                 2  2  0
    Mrs. Mary Waymouth                                  1 10  0
    Miss Waymouth                                       1  7  0
    Mrs. Sarah Waymouth                                 1  7  0
    Mr. Benjamin Withers                                1  7  0
    Mr. Joshua William, Sr.                             1  1  0
    Mr. Joshua William, Jr.                               10  6
    James White, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Franklin Waldron                                1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Williams                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Whites                                           10  6
    Mr. Edward White                                      10  6
    Collected at the New Meeting                       25  8  5-1/2
    Ditto at Bow                                       19  9  9-1/2
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. William's                     5 17  5-1/2
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Lewis'                            3 17  9
    Ditto at the New Baptist Meeting                    3 16  6


EVERSDEN.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bond's                    3 17  0


EVERSHAM, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Cardale's                 4 11  2-1/2
    Rev. Mr. Cardale                                    2  2  0


FROOME, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    Mr. T. Bunn                                         5  5  0
    Mr. Smith                                           4  4  0
    Mr. and Mrs. Bayley                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Walter Sheppard                                 2  2  0
    Mr. William Sheppard                                2  2  0
    Mr. John Allen                                      2  2  0
    Mr. Mortimer's House                                2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Housdon                                1  1  0
    Mr. Burril                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Sheppard                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Z. Bailey                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Handcock                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Handcock                                       1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Clarke                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Pritchard                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Henry Allen                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Matthews                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Dan. and Mrs. Letitia Wayland                   1  1  0
    Mr. J. Allen and Mrs. Rachel Tymball                1  1  0
    Mr. Henry Sheppard                                    10  6
    Mrs. Lacey                                            10  6
    Mr. Griffith                                          10  6
    Mr. Ames                                              10  6
    Mr. James Jordan                                      10  6
    Mr. Benjamin Ball                                     10  6
    Some Silver                                           12  6
    The Rev. Mr. Kingdon                                1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Kingdon's                18 18  6
    The Rev. Mr. Sedgefield                             2  2  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Sedgefield's             12 16  6


FARNHAM, IN SURREY.


    Rev. Mr. John Wigmore                                 10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6


FOLKSTONE, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Whitehead's              13  6  6


GLOUCESTER.


    Alderman Harris and Friends                         7  7  0
    Esquire Wade                                        2  2  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Dickinson's              13 14  3
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. N. Phene's                   52  6  9
    Sent afterwards by Rev. Mr. Phene                   2 17  0


GLASTONBURY, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    The Rev. Mr. Phillips                               1  1  0


GOSPORT, IN HANTS.


    Mr. Robert Waller                                   5  5  0
    The Rev. Mr. Williams                               1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Williams'                39  4  2


GILDERSOM.


    The Rev. Mr. Ashworth's Collection                  4  0  0


GUILDFORD, IN SURREY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Chamberlain's             1 18  0


GODALMING IN SURREY.


    The Rev. Mr. Ring                                   1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Ring's                    2  3  0


GRAVESEND, IN KENT.


    Collected by Mr. Occom at the Meeting               1 11  3-1/4


HITCHIN, IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    John Radcliffe, Esq.                                5  5  0
    Miss Ann Ireland                                    5  5  0
    Mr. Brown                                           5  5  0
    Mr. Simson                                          4  4  0
    Mr. John Dearmer                                    4  4  0
    The Rev. Mr. Hickman                                3  3  0
    Mr. Vincent                                         3  3  0
    Mr. John Dermer                                     3  3  0
    Mr. Thomas Dermer                                   3  3  0
    Mr. Richard Tristam                                 3  3  0
    Mr. John Gutherage                                  3  3  0
    Mr. William Wiltshire, Jr.                          3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. W.                                     2  2  0
    Mr. John Stephens                                   2  2  0
    Mr. John Goodwyn                                    2  2  0
    Mrs. Brown                                          1  1  0
    Mr. John Creasey                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Isaac Field                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Philip Rudd                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Hide                                            1  1  0
    Miss Sukey Field                                    1  1  0
    Mr. William Childs                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Moore                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Baldock                                    15  9
    Mrs. Flack                                            10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Mr. Henry Croesy                                      10  6
    Mrs. Wiltshire                                        10  6
    Mr. John Newman                                       10  6
    Mr. Patternoster                                      10  6
    Mrs. Warby                                            10  6
    Mr. William Crawley                                   10  6
    Miss Sally Smith                                       5  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hickman's                13  7  8-1/2
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. James'                   84  0  7


HULL BISHOPS.


    The Rev. Mr. Haskell                                1  1  0
    Mrs. Downing                                          10  6
    Thomas Drake, Esq.                                    10  6
    Mr. Robert Daw                                         5  0


HALL STOCK.


    Collected by Mr. Occom                                15  9


HARBOROUGH, IN LEICESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Addington's              28  1  6


HOOKNORTON.


    The Rev. Mr. Whitmore                               2  3  0


HAWORTH.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hartley's                12  6  5-1/2


HALLIFAX, IN YORKSHIRE.


    Dr. Leigh, Vicar                                   10 10  0
    Collected of the people of the Established Church  13 18  0
    Mr. John Lea                                        3  3  0
    Mr. Benj. Dickinson                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Jeremiah Marshall                               2  2  0
    Mr. James Kershaw                                   2  2  0
    Mr. David Stansfield                                2  2  0
    Mr. William Buck                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Hollings                                 1  1  0
    Collected at Halifax Meeting                       10 13  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Knight's                  4  4  8-1/2


HECKMONDWAKE.


    Rev. Mr. James Scott                                5  5  0
    Mr. John Priestly, Sr.                              5  5  0
    Mr. Joseph Priestley                                5  5  0
    Mr. William Priestley                               5  5  0
    By Sundry Persons                                   1 16  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Scott's                  16  3  4-1/2


HULL, IN YORKSHIRE.


    The Corporation of Hull                            21  0  0
    The Corporation of the Trinity House, at Hull      21  0  0
    Alderman Watson & Son                              10 10  0
    Alderman Wilberforce                               10 10  0
    Alderman Cogan                                      5  5  0
    Robert Wilberforce, Esq.                            5  5  0
    William Thornton, Esq.                              5  5  0
    H. Etherington, Esq.                                5  5  0
    Joseph Sykes, Esq.                                  5  5  0
    Mr. P. Green                                        4  4  0
    Joseph Pease, Esq.                                  3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. Arthur Robinson, Vicar                 2  2  0
    Cornelius Cayley, Esq.                              2  2  0
    Benjamin Blaydes, Esq.                              2  2  0
    Nathaniel Maisters, Esq.                            2  2  0
    Mr. Robert Macfarland                               2  2  0
    Mrs. Frances Wilkinson                              2  2  0
    Mrs. Jane Wilkinson                                 2  2  0
    Mr. Richard Moxon, etc.                             1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Clarke                                 1  1  0
    Gardner Egginton, Esq.                              1  1  0
    Mr. Spivie                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Hickson                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Hannah Hall                                    1  1  0
    Peter Thornton, Esq.                                1  1  0
    A Providential Guinea                               1  1  0
    Mrs. Ann Thompson                                     10  6
    Mrs. Lydia Finley                                      5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Burnet's                 24  0  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Beverly's                17  0  0


HADLEY, IN SUFFOLK.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Tom's                    13  2  1


HALSTEAD, IN ESSEX.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Field's                  23  9  0


HEMPSTEAD IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    Dr. Wiltshire                                      10 10  0
    The Rev. Mr. Jones                                  2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Whitehead, etc.                        1 11  6
    The Rev. Dr. Sterling.                              1  1  0
    Rich. Richardson, Esq.                              1  1  0
    Mr. Collett                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Squires                                           10  6
    Mr. Dearmer                                           10  6
    Rev. Mr. Hews, Curate                                  2  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Jones'                   11  5  1


HIGH WICKHAM, IN BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


    Mr. Carter                                          3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. Smithson                               3  3  0
    Mrs. Price                                          2 12  6
    Mr. Allnut and Children                             2 12  6
    Mr. Edmund Ball                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Hartley's Family                                2  2  0
    Mr. Haydon                                          2  2  0
    Mr. Shrimpton                                       2  2  0
    Mr. John Hollis                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Hannon                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Aldersey                                       1  1  0
    Mrs. Salter                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Grove                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Blackwell                                       1  1  0
    Mrs. Ives                                           1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Llewellin, Clergyman                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Galpin                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Kiddle                                           10  6
    Mr. Crouch                                            10  6
    Mrs. Gibbons                                          10  6
    Mr. Goodwin                                           10  6
    Mr. Doney                                             10  6
    Mr. Lee                                                5  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Smithson's                7  7 11-1/4


HENLEY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Gainsborough's            8 14 10-1/2


HORSHAM, IN SUSSEX.


    Mr. Thos. Shelley, Jr.                              1  1  0
    Mrs. Shelley                                          10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Thomas'                   3 17  0
    Collected at the Baptist Meeting                    1  4  0


HYTHE, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Clarke's                  7  9  0
    Rev. Mr. Smith, Clergyman                             10  6


HERTFORD.


    From an Unknown Friend, by Rev. Mr. Saunders        5  5  0
    Mr. Isaac Rudd                                      2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Jeeves                                   2  2  0
    Dr. Samuel Rogers                                   2  2  0
    Mrs. Whittenburg and Children                       2  2  0
    Mrs. Upton and Children                             2  2  0
    Mr. Sprat                                           2  2  0
    Richard Isles, Esq.                                 2  2  0
    Miss Isles                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Dimsdale                                       2  2  0
    Mrs. Came                                           2  2  0
    Mrs. Chamberlain                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Gatward                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Haynes                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Man                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Lawrence                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Rackstraw                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Haynes                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Benjamin Young                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Worsley                                         1  1  0
    Mr. John Flack                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Plows                                      10  6
    Mr. John Page                                         10  6
    Mr. Samuel Saunders                                   10  6
    Miss Martha East                                      10  6
    Mrs. Hanscombe                                        10  6
    Mr. John Harrod                                       10  6
    Rev. Mr. John Saunders                              1  1  0
    Mr. J. Wood                                           10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Saunders'                20 11  9


IPSWICH, IN SUFFOLK.


    Mr. John Barnard                                    4  4  0
    Mr. John Flindall                                   4  4  0
    Mr. John Turner                                     3  3  0
    Miles Wallis, Esq.                                  3  3  0
    Mr. George Nolcut                                   2  2  0
    Messrs. John and Jos. Flindall                      2  2  0
    Mr. Ralph Hare                                      2  2  0
    Mr. John May Dring                                  2  2  0
    Mr. John Scott                                      2  7  3
    Mr. Daniel Wade and two Sisters                     2  2  0
    Unknown                                             1 12  6
    Mr. Ralph                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Ralph's Sister                                    10  6
    Mr. George Death                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Abbot                                           1  1  0
    Mrs. Abbot                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Philip Dikes                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Byles                                    1  1  0
    Mr. J. Hall                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Paul Smith                                      1  1  0
    Mr. John Beardwell                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Robert Sporle                                   1  1  0
    Mr. William Clarke                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Clark                                            10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Scott                                    10  6
    Rev. Mr. Lathbury                                      5  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Edward's                 33  8  6


KINGSBRIDGE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Curtis'                  12  0  0


KETTERING, IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Boyce's                  20  7  3
    From several of Mr. Boyce's people                  6  6  9
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Browne's                  3 13  6
    From Rev. Mr. Matlock                                 14  6
    Mr. Buswall                                            2  0


KIDDERMINSTER, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    The Rev. Mr. Fawcett, in Books                     10 10  0
    Mr. John Watson                                    10 10  0
    Mr. John Broome and Son                            10 10  0
    Messrs. Cranes                                     10 10  0
    Mr. Joseph Austin                                   6  6  0
    Messrs. John & Francis Lea                          5  5  0
    Mr. Nich. Pearsall and Son                          5  5  0
    Mr. Jefferys and Son                                4  4  0
    Mrs. Longmore                                       4  4  0
    Mr. Henry Penn                                      3  3  0
    Mrs. Bate                                           3  3  0
    Mr. Nicholas Penn                                   2  2  0
    Mr. John Symonds                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Francis Best                                    2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Orton                                  2  2  0
    Dr. Johnstone                                       2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Richardson                               2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Read                                     1 11  6
    Mr. Talbutt                                         1 11  6
    Mr. John Wilkinson                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Aaron                                          1  1  0
    Mr. John Butler                                     1  1  0
    Mr. John Pearsall                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Baker                                      1  1  0
    Mr. John Lea                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Benjamin Lea                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Harper                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Hanbury                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Hornblower                                      1  1  0
    Mr. James Hill                                      1  1  0
    Mr. John Richardson                                 1  1  0
    Mr. John Cooper                                     1  1  0
    Mr. John Wright                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Broom, Sr.                                      1  1  0
    Miss Symonds                                          10  6
    By Sundry Persons                                  14  2  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Fawcett's                21  4  7-1/2


KEPPIN.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Whitford's                6 17  8


KEIGHLEY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Neil's                    5  5  0


LUTON, IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hall's                    6  7  6


LUTTERWORTH, IN LEICESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at Rev. Messrs. Dowley and Kidman's      16 15  2


LIVERPOOL, IN LANCASHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Johnson's                16 10  7
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                  8  8  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Endfield's               15  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hall's                   11 13  4
    Collected by Sundries                               9  6  0


LEEDS, IN YORKSHIRE.


    Lady Margaret Ingham                                5  5  0
    Mrs. Medhurst                                       5  5  0
    Mr. C. Barnard, in Testaments                       4  4  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. John Edwards'            15  3 10-1/2
    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Thomas Whittaker         14 14  0
    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Wesley's People           8  1  6-1/2


LINTON, IN CAMBRIDGESHIRE.


    Mr. Haylock                                         1 11  6
    Mr. Barker                                            10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Curtis's                  5  2  1


LEWES, IN SUSSEX.


    Collected of Sundries and at Rev. Mr. Johnson's    20  4 10-3/4


LONG MILFORD.


    Henry Moore, Esq.                                   6  6  0
    Hon. Wm. Campbell, Esq.                             5  5  0
    Robert Cook, Esq.                                   3  3  0
    William Jennings, Esq.                              3  3  0
    ---- Kedington, Esq.                                1 16  0
    Mrs. Bradley                                        1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hubbard's                11 17 10


MINCHIN HAMPTON, IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Francis'                  5 10  6
    M. H.                                                 10  6
    Mr. William Innell                                    10  6
    Mrs. Fuller                                            5  0


MODBURY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Moore's                   3 14  1


MARTOCK.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bakers                    4  3  1


MILBORNE PORT.


    Collected by Mr. Scott                              2 15  6


MORLEY.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Morgan's                  8  0  0


MELBORN, IN CAMBRIDGESHIRE.


    Mr. Forster                                         1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Cooper's                 14  9  3-3/4


MARGATE, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Purchase's                4 13  8


MAIDSTONE, IN KENT.


    Mrs. Prosper                                        5  5  0
    The two Mrs. Maynard's                              3 12  0
    The two Miss Todds                                  3  3  0
    Mrs. Travers                                        3  3  0
    Dr. Milner                                          2  2  0
    Mr. Fullagar                                        2  2  0
    Mr. Wicking                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Sawkins                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Beal Boreman                                    1 11  6
    Mrs. Heath                                          1 11  6
    Mrs. Savage                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Polhill                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Sharp                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Prentice                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Winter                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Pierce                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Harris                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Jesser                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Dawson                                            10  6
    Mrs. Dean                                             10  6
    Messrs. Knowlden & Blythe                              9  6
    Mr. Bleigh                                             5  3
    Mr. Leicester                                          2  6
    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Lewis', Jenkins',
      and Wyethe's                                     17  9  0
    Collected by Mr. Occom                              7 18  9-1/2


MORPETH.


    Unknown                                             1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Trotter's                12 11  3-1/4


NEWTON ABBOTT.


    Rev. Mr. Peter Fabian                               1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Hewgo, Curate of Newton                  10  6
    Mr. Joseph Tozer                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Flammark                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Westcott                                 1  0  6
    Mr. John Matthews                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Tozer and Family                           1 13  6
    Mr. William Flammark                                  10  6
    Mrs. Mary Matthews                                    10  6
    Sundries                                            4  9  6


NEWPORT, IN THE ISLE OF WIGHT.


    Thomas Urry, Esq.                                   5  5  0
    Mr. Kirkpatrick                                     5  5  0
    Dr. Cook                                            2  2  0
    Mr. Sharp                                           2  2  0
    Mrs. Trattle                                        2  2  0
    Mr. Stephen Leigh                                   1 11  6
    The Rev. Mr. Sturch                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Richard Cooke                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Cooke                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Temple                                          1  1  0
    Mr. John Clarke                                     1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Atkins                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Till                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Brown                                           1  1  0
    Counsellor White                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Holliere                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Whitehead                                      1  1  0
    Farmer Cook                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Douglas                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Caleb Cook                                      1  1  0
    Dr. Cowlam                                            10  6
    Mr. Upward                                            10  6
    Messrs. Lucas & Hollier                               10  6
    Captain Pike                                          10  6
    Mr. Nichols                                           10  6
    Mr. Wilson                                            10  6
    Mr. John Taylor                                       10  6
    Rev. Mr. Edwards                                      10  0
    Sundry persons                                      1  2  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Atkins'                   7  8 10-1/2
    Sent afterwards by Mr. Kirkpatrick                 18  1  6


NORTHAMPTON.


    Rev. Mr. Ryland                                     1  1  0
    Joseph Churchill, Esq.                              1  1  0
    Mr. Edward Whitton                                    10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Timms                                     5  3
    Mr. Dicey                                              5  3
    Mr. Win                                                4  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Rylands                  20 11  8-1/2
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. Hextal's                     24  3  0


NOTTINGHAM.


    Collected at Rev. Messrs. Sloss' and Allistone's   41 15  9
    Capt. Scott                                         1  1  0
    Collected of Rev. Mr. Wesley's people, by ditto     2 11  8-1/2
    Collected of Dr. Eaton's people
    Mr. Fellows                                         2  2  0
    Mrs. Burden                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Immings                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Benj. Bull and Son                              1  1  0
    Mr. Seagrage                                        1  1  0
    Alderman Hornbuccle                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Foxcroft                                        1  1  0
    Mr. J. Buxton                                         10  6
    Mr. Wilkinson                                         10  6
    Mr. Stubbins                                          10  6
    By Sundries                                         1  0  6


NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LINE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Willotts                  8  5  0


NAMPTWICH, IN CHESHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Haughton's                8  3  9


NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE.


    Mayor and Corporation                              21  0  0
    Sir Walter Blackett                                10 10  0
    Collected of Sundries                               3  8  0
    ---- Cookson, Esq.                                  5  5  0
    Joseph Ord, Esq.                                    4  4  0
    Mr. Airy                                            2  2  0
    Unknown                                             1  1  0
    Messrs. Widdrington & Gibbons                       1  1  0
    Dr. Stoddart, etc.                                    16  6
    Mr. Donaldson                                       1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lowthian's               21  4 11-1/2
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Ogilvie's                        15 15  0
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Shields                          15  4  3-1/2
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. Richardson's                  8 18  8
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Atkins'                          13 10  0
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Murray's                         23  8  0
    Ditto by the Rev. Mr. Wesley                        6  3  1
    Ditto by Rev. Mr. Peel, of Hexham                   2 18  0
    Ditto, and paid into the Bank                       3  6  6


NORWICH, IN NORFOLK.


    Mr. Mayor                                           1  1  0
    John Ruggles, Esq.                                  5  5  0
    Mr. John Scott & Sons                               5  5  0
    Mr. Wm. Barnet & Son                                4  4  0
    Mr. Thomas Paul                                     3  3  0
    Rev. Mr. Tapps, Curate of St. George's              2  2  0
    Rev. Mr. Philip Pyle                                2  2  0
    Rev. Dr. Wood                                       2  2  0
    Dr. Peck                                            2  2  0
    Alderman Crowe                                      2  2  0
    Alderman Woods                                      2  2  0
    Aldermen Ives and Jeves                             2  2  0
    Alderman Rogers                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Lincoln                                         2  2  0
    Messrs. Day and Watts                               2  2  0
    Mr. John Woodrow                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Jeremiah Pestle                                 2  2  0
    Charles Weston, Esq.                                2  2  0
    Mr. Claxton Smith                                   2  2  0
    Mr. Stephen Gardiner                                2  2  0
    Philip Stannard, Esq.                               2  2  0
    Mrs. Corsbie                                        1  3  0
    Mr. Baldy and others                                1  3  0
    Mr. Patterson and Sister                            1 11  6
    Rev. Mr. Burcham                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Cubit                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Robert Sewell                                   1  1  0
    Mr. William Firth                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Hinsman                                         1  1  0
    Capt. Smith                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Harvey                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Ives                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Sidley Reymes                                   1  1  0
    Mr. James Wheeler                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Gimmingham                                      1  1  0
    Mr. John Reymes                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Hopson                                          1  1  0
    Messrs. Smith & Barlow                              1  1  0
    Rev. Dr. Newton                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Beardman                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Partridge                                       1  1  0
    Mrs. Pie (_10s. 6d._) and others                    1  9  0
    Mr. Whinnard                                          10  6
    Mr. Ferguson                                          10  6
    Mr. Ollyett                                           10  6
    Mr. Wiggit                                            10  6
    Mr. Shalders                                          10  6
    Mr. Beavers                                           10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Dr. Wood's Chapel            32  1  6
    Alderman Marsh                                      3  3  0
    Samuel Wiggett, Esq.                                3  3  0
    Mr. James Tompson                                   3  3  0
    Mr. Coldham                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Bayley                                          2  2  0
    Mr. William Taylor                                  2  2  0
    Peter Finch, Esq.                                   2  2  0
    Mr. William Carter                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Nasmith                                         2  2  0
    Mr. William Fell                                    1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. John Hoyle                                 1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Bruckner                               1  1  0
    Mr. Charles Marsh                                   1  1  0
    Dr. Manning                                         1  1  0
    Mr. James Smith, Sen.                               1  1  0
    Mr. Philip Taylor                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Charles Dalrymple                               1  1  0
    Mr. Wright Smith                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Martineau                                       1  1  0
    Mr. John Baldy                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Peter Fromow                                    1  1  0
    Mr. James Barrow                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Chamberlain                                    1  1  0
    Miss Pointer                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Lessingham                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Newman                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Bird                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Frederick Friday                                  10  6
    Mr. J. Trull                                           5  3
    Miss Lincolnes                                         5  3
    Mr. Christopher Newman                                 5  0
    Mrs. Newman                                            5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hoyle's Chapel            8 11  6-1/2
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Fisher's Chapel           5 18  0


NAYLAND.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bloomfield's              6 13  2


NEWBERRY, IN BERKSHIRE.


    Rev. Mr. Reader                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Merriman                                        2  2  0
    Rev. Mr. Penrose, Mayor, etc.                       2  2  0
    From Sundries                                       9 10  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Reader's                  6 17  0
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. Lewis'                        1  3  6


NORTH SHIELDS.


    Mr. Pearson                                         1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Rae's                     8  0  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Dean's                    8  3  4


NORTH ORAM.


    Mrs. Horton                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Wainhouse                                        10  6
    Mrs. Holmes                                           10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hesketh's                 3  0  3


OLNEY AND NEWPORT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Drake's                   9  4  7
    The Rev. Mr. Bull                                     10  6


OXFORD, ETC.


    From Merton College                                 5  5  0
    The Rev. Mr. Kilner                                 1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Stillingfleet                          1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Blaney                                 1  1  0
    Mrs. Kent                                           2  2  0
    Mr. Archdale Rook                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Plater                                   1  1  0
    Mr. William Fox                                     1 11  6
    Mr. Samuel Fox                                      1 11  6
    Mrs. Prime                                             5  3
    Collected at Burford, per Mr. Darby                 1  9  1
    Ditto at Whitney, per ditto                         1 10  0


OSSET.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Haggerstone's             4 15  6


OAKHAM, IN RUTLANDSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Panting's                 3  6  2


PLYMOUTH, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Mr. William Kingdom                                10 10  0
    Mr. William Sheppard                                5  5  0
    Mr. John Bayley                                     5  5  0
    Mr. William Clarke                                  5  5  0
    Mr. William Deane                                   5  5  0
    Rev. Mr. Zachary Mudge                              2  2  0
    Mr. Culme                                           2  2  0
    Mr. John Jones                                      2  2  0
    Messrs. William and Philip Cookworthy               2  2  0
    Mr. Mignam                                          2  2  0
    Mr. John Fox and Son                                2  2  0
    Mr. Francis Cock                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Henry Pitt Sutton                               2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Squire                                   2  2  0
    Mr. John Harris                                     2  2  0
    Mr. William Batt                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Connell                                         2  2  0
    Mrs. Holdens                                        1  6  3
    Mr. William Phillips, Mayor                         1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. John Bedford                               1  1  0
    Mr. George Leach                                    1  1  0
    Major Yeo                                           1  1  0
    Capt. B----g                                        1  1  0
    Dr. Huxham                                          1  1  0
    Dr. Mudge                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Collier                                  1  1  0
    Mr. John Browne                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Sugars                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Frey                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Roger Trend                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Charles Fox                                     1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Vivian                                 1  1  0
    Mr. John Snook                                      1  1  0
    Anthony Porter, Esq.                                1  1  0
    Widow Elworthy                                      1  1  0
    Mr. William Pierce                                  1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Julian                                 1  1  0
    Mr. D. Jardine                                      1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Kinsman                                1  1  0
    Mrs. Ann Gwennap                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Peter Bayley                                    1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Gibbs                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Loval                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Bickford                                         19  6
    Mr. Sherdevoyne                                       13  0
    The Rev. Mr. Dodge                                    10  6
    Rev. Mr. Gandy                                        10  6
    Rev. Mr. Lemoyne                                      10  6
    Mr. Miotts, Jr.                                       10  6
    Mr. Michael Nichols                                   10  6
    Mr. P. Lyman                                          10  6
    Mr. George Perry                                      10  6
    Mr. Jacob Austin                                      10  6
    Mr. John Cock                                         10  6
    Miss Jennys                                           10  6
    Mr. Stone                                             10  6
    Mrs. Wilcocks                                         10  6
    Mr. Bicknar                                           10  6
    Mr. William Pearce, Jr.                               10  6
    Mr. Elias Romery                                      10  6
    Mr. Erthur                                            10  6
    ---- Julian, Esq.                                     10  6
    Mrs. Ellery                                           10  6
    Mr. J. Wills                                          10  6
    J. Moorshead, Esq.                                    10  6
    Mr. John Collier                                      10  6
    Mr. Samuel Champion                                   10  6
    Mr. How                                               10  6
    Mr. J. Symonds                                        10  6
    Mr. Joseph Pearce                                     10  6
    Mr. Freeman                                           10  6
    Mr. Husbands                                          10  6
    Mr. John Wallis                                       10  6
    Dr. Scott                                             10  6
    Mrs. Fuge                                             10  6
    Mr. Omony                                             10  6
    Mr. Perry                                             10  6
    Mrs. Tope                                             10  6
    Mr. Putt                                              10  6
    Mr. Henry Hewer                                       10  6
    Mr. Burt                                              10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Captain Sparks                                        10  6
    Mr. Dunsterfield                                      10  6
    Mr. Carter                                            10  6
    Mrs. Dengey                                           10  6
    Mr. James                                             10  6
    Mr. Lovell                                            10  6
    Sundry persons                                      2 19  3
    Ditto                                               2 14  6
    Ditto                                               2  4  6
    Ditto                                               1 10  9
    Ditto                                               1 10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Mends'                   15 15  7-1/4
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Rennel's                  9 15  0
    Ditto at the Tabernacle                             7 15  8-1/2
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Gibbs'                            4 18  8


PLYMOUTH DOCK.


    Hon. Commissioner Rogers                            5  5  0
    John Lloyd, Esq.                                    3  3  0
    Mr. Blackmore                                       2  2  0
    Mr. Poleman                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Samuel Young                                    1 16  0
    Hon. Col. Burleigh                                  1  7  0
    Mr. Philip Justice                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Ralph Paine                                     1  1  0
    Dr. Vincent                                         1  1  0
    Madam Durrell                                       1  1  0
    Major Campbell                                      1  1  0
    Dr. Wolcombe                                        1  1  0
    Dr. Colvil                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Jane                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Heath                                           1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. John Stokes                                  10  6
    Mr. Austin                                            10  6
    Mr. Moore                                             10  6
    Mr. Atkinson                                          10  6
    Mr. Nicholas Mercator                                 10  6
    Mr. William Crossman                                  10  6
    Mrs. Hooper                                           10  6
    Mrs. Spry                                             10  6
    Mr. George Patrick                                    10  6
    Mr. James Howell                                      10  6
    Mr. Hinckstone                                        10  6
    Mr. Matthew Watson                                    10  6
    Mr. John Scott                                        10  6
    Mr. Brooking                                          10  6
    Mr. James Helling                                     10  6
    Mr. Nash                                              10  6
    Mr. John Row                                          10  6
    Mr. Robert Jeffery                                    10  6
    Mr. William Phillips                                  10  6
    Mrs. Dillon                                           10  6
    Mrs. Ivey                                             10  6
    Mr. P. Langmaid                                       10  6
    Mr. Rodds                                             10  6
    Mrs. Mary Bennett                                     10  6
    Mr. Lawrence Rowe                                     10  6
    Captain of Marines                                    10  6
    Mr. Weggan                                            10  6
    Mr. Mullis                                            10  6
    Mr. May                                               10  6
    Mr. Harding                                           10  6
    Mr. Baron                                             10  6
    Mr. Jeffery                                           10  6
    Mr. Lampen                                            10  6
    Mr. Weston                                            10  6
    Mr. Hatcher                                           10  6
    Mr. Yeo                                               10  6
    Mr. John Linzee                                       10  6
    Mr. Robert Bennett                                    10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Sundry persons                                      4  5  9
    Ditto                                               1  7  3
    Ditto                                                  8  9
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's Tabernacle  22  0  0
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Wesley's                          4 17  0


STONEHOUSE (A PARISH BETWEEN PLYMOUTH AND THE DOCK).


    Madam Farr                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Marshal                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Bogue                                             10  6
    Captain Ball                                          10  6
    Mr. Gillard                                           10  6
    Mr. Binney and Banwick                                10  6


POOL, IN DORSETSHIRE.

    Mr. Samuel Clark                                    5  5  0
    Mrs. Green                                          3  3  0
    Mr. Pike                                            3  3  0
    Mr. Joliff and Ladies                               1 11  0
    Rev. Mr. Nairn, Rector                              1  1  0
    Mr. Sutton                                          1  1  0
    Mr. John Green                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Bird                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Hyde                                            1  1  0
    Mr. George Milner                                   1  1  0
    Mr. D. Durrell                                      1  1  0
    Mr. George Olive                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Martin Kemp                                     1  1  0
    Miss Frances Welch                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Miller                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Elizabeth Pike                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Bayly, Mrs. Pain, and Mrs. Campbell             1  0  6
    Rev. Mr. Ashburner                                    10  6
    Mr. Sherran                                           10  6
    Mr. James Bristowe                                    10  6
    Mr. Budden                                            10  6
    Mr. J. Budden                                         10  6
    Mr. G. Durrell                                        10  6
    Mr. Tito Durrell                                      10  6
    Mrs. Oliver, Sen., and Mrs. Oliver, Jr.               15  9
    Mr. Thomas Stephens                                   10  6
    Mr. Farr Strong                                       10  6
    Mrs. Thompson                                         10  6
    Mrs. Haseldon                                         10  6
    Mr. Frith                                             10  6
    Mr. John Bird                                         10  6
    Mr. William Taverner                                  10  6
    Mr. John Sweetland                                    10  6
    Mrs. Mary Linthorn                                    10  6
    Mr. Richard Rix                                       10  6
    Mr. Basset                                             5  3
    Mrs. Jolliff                                           5  3
    Mr. J. Stodely                                         5  3
    Mrs. Elizabeth Christian                               5  0
    Mr. Lacey                                              2  6
    Mr. Spurrier                                           2  6
    Sundry Persons                                      2 17  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Howell's                  7 18  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Ashburner's               7  0  6-1/2


PORTSMOUTH, IN HANTS.


    Mr. William Pike                                   10 10  0
    The Rev. Mr. Walter, Chaplain to the Dock             10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wren's                   25 11  4-1/2


PORTSMOUTH COMMON.


    Mr. Pierson                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Whitewood & Unknown                             1  1  0
    Mr. Millard                                           10  6
    Mr. Daniel Hayward                                    10  6
    Mr. Thomas Symms                                      10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lacey's                   5  5  9
    Collected at the Tabernacle                         4  2 10-1/2


PERSHORE, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    Mr. Samuel Rickards                                 1  1  0
    Mr. James Rickards                                  1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Dark                                     10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Beal                                     10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Ash                                      10  6
    Mr. Smith                                              5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Ash's                     7  7  6


PUDSEY.


    The Rev. Mr. Wainman                                1  1  0
    Unknown                                                2  6


PINNER.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Madgwick's.              10  1  9


RUMSEY, IN HANTS.


    The Rev. Mr. J. Samuel                              1  1  0
    Mr. John Comley                                     1 11  6
    Mr. Thomas Comley                                   1 11  6
    Mrs. Comley                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Tarver                                          1 11  6
    Mr. Clement Sharp, Sen.                             1  1  0
    Mr. Clement Sharp, Jr.                              1  1  0
    Mr. Madgwicke                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Newman                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Bernard                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Waldron                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Richard Sharpe                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Fanner                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Newlands                                        1  1  0
    Mr. John Hewlett and Sisters                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Collier                                        1  1  0
    Sundry Persons unknown                              1 11  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Samuel's                 11  4  9
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Finch's                   3  3  0


RINGWOOD, IN HANTS.


    Mr. N----n                                          5  5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Wright's and
      Horsey's                                         16  2  0


ROTHWELL, IN NORTHUMBERLAND.


    Collected at the Rev. Moses Gregson's              16 15  0


RAWDON.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Aulton's                 11 15  6


ROTHERHAM, IN YORKSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Thorp's, and the Rev.
      Mr. Moult's                                      21 18  9-1/2
    A Private Benefaction, sent by Rev. Mr. Moult       1  1  0


ROYSTON, IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    Mrs. Ward                                           4  4  0
    Mr. Edward Fordham                                  2  2  0
    Mr. John Fordham                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Joseph Forster                                  1  6  0
    Mr. George Fordham                                  1 11  6
    Mr. Coxall                                          1 11  6
    Mr. Butler                                          1  1  0
    Mrs. Beldham                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. Wright                                         1  1  0
    Mr. John Phillips                                   1  1  0
    Mr. John Newling                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Coxall                                           10  6
    Mr. Philips                                           10  6
    Mrs. Beldham                                          10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wells'                    6 10  1-1/2


READING, IN BERKSHIRE.


    The Mayor                                           1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Merrick                                    1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Camble                                     1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Noon                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Davidson                                        1  1  0
    Mrs. King                                           1  1  0
    Mrs. Girl                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Harrison                                          10  6
    Mr. Willats                                           10  6
    Mrs. Noon                                             10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Noon's                   18 11  7-3/4
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Armstrong's               7  2  5
    A Clergyman and a person unknown, by the Rev.
      Mr. Armstrong                                     2  2  0


RAMSGATE, IN THE ISLE OF THANET.


    Unknown                                             5  0  0
    Mr. George Rainier                                  2  2  0
    Mr. John Garret                                     2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Bradbury                               1  1  0
    Mr. Cornelius Friend                                1  1  0
    Mr. Daniel Friend                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Elizabeth and Sarah Friend                     1  1  0
    Mrs. Abbot                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Curling                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Kemp                                           1  1  0
    Unknown                                             1  1  0
    Mr. Small, Jr.                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Cracraft                                          10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bradbury's               11 13  9-3/4


SAFFRON WALDEN, IN ESSEX.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Gwenap's                 70 10  0


SOUTHWELL, IN HERTFORDSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Field's                  12 10  6


SHIPTON MALLETT, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    The Rev. Mr. Jellard                                2  2  0
    Mrs. Stephenson                                     1 11  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Jellard's                13  0  0


SOUTH MOULTON, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bishop's                  5  5  0


SALISBURY, IN WILTSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Williams's                9 17 10
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Phillips'                 2  0  6


SHERBORNE, IN DORSETSHIRE.


    Mr. Samuel Foot                                     3  3  0
    Mr. Goadby                                          1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lewis's                  15  0  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Thomas's.                 5 17  9


SOUTH PETHERTON, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    Mr. Toller                                          1 16  0
    Masters John and Thomas Toller                         5  0
    Mr. Ostler                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Channing                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Anstice                                         1  1  0
    Messrs. Adams, Phillips, & Vaux                       15  6
    Mr. Chapman                                           10  6
    Mr. Lock                                              10  6
    Sundry Persons                                      1 11  3
    Rev. Mr. Thomas                                        5  3
    The Rev. Mr. Kirkup                                   10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Kirkup's                 14 10  0-1/2


SOUTHAMPTON, IN HANTS.


    Madame Rollestone                                  10 10  0
    Mr. Bartholomew Bray                                3  3  0
    Mrs. & Miss Messer & Mr. Bulkley                    2 12  6
    Rev. Mr. Rooke, V. of St. Michael's                 1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Wm. Kingsbury                              1  1  0
    Mr. Walter Taylor                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Taylor, Sen.                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Taylor                                   1  1  0
    ---- Norris, Esq.                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Bissault                                       1  1  0
    Mrs. Percival                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Peter Bernard                                   1  1  0
    Mr. Thomas Bernard                                  1  1  0
    Mrs. Bernard                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Bernard                                    10  6
    Mrs. Raymond                                          10  6
    Mrs. Heckwich                                         10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Mrs. Forithorne                                        2  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Kingsbury's               9  1  0


STOURBRIDGE, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Edge's                   21 10  4


STRETTON, IN WARWICKSHIRE.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Richard Alliot of
      Coventry                                          6 10  0


SOUTH SHIELDS.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Rae's                     3 14  0


SUNDERLAND, IN DURHAM.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lee's                     7 11  0-3/4
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Waugh's                   9  9  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Somervil's               11  9  0-1/4
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                  2 17  0


STOCKTON, IN DURHAM.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Blackie's                 8  4  0-1/4


STROUD, IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Ball's                   18 19  0


SAINT-NIOTS.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Davis'                    6 18  1-1/4


SHEFFIELD, IN YORKSHIRE.

    _Collected of the Rev. Mr. Pye's People._


    Mr. Benjamin Roebuck                                5  5  0
    Mr. Samuel Greaves                                  3  3  0
    The Rev. Mr. Pye                                    2  2  0
    Mr. Vennor                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Parker                                         2  2  0
    Messrs. John & Roger Wilson                         1  1  0
    Mr. Samuel Wilson                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Roebuck, Sen.                                  1  1  0
    Mr. John Smith                                      1  1  0
    Mr. Bennett                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Winter                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Windle & Mr. Love                               1  1  0
    Mr. Bridges                                         1  1  0
    Mr. William Smith                                   1  1  0
    Mrs. Smith, Sen.                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Nutt                                            1  1  0
    Mrs. Holy                                             10  6
    Mr. Andrews                                           10  6
    Mr. William Marshall                                  10  6
    Mr. Loy                                               10  6
    Mr. Robert Hall                                       10  6
    Mr. Joseph Wilson                                     10  6
    Mr. Worrell                                           10  6
    Mr. Samuel Parkin                                     10  6
    Mr. Littlewood                                        10  6
    By Sundries                                         1 13  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Pye's                    15 12  0


    _Collected of the Rev. Messrs. Evans's and Dickinson's People._


    Mrs. Eddowes                                        1 16  0
    Mr. Shore, Sen.                                     1  1  0
    Mrs. Robarts                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Robarts                                         1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Evans                                  1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Hall of Stannington                    1  1  0
    Mr. Simmons                                           10  6
    Mr. Kaigh                                             10  6
    Mr. Samuel Hall                                       10  6
    Mr. Haynes                                            10  6
    Mr. Marshall                                          10  6
    Mr. Nathaniel Hall                                    10  6
    From Sundries                                         19  9
    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Evans' and
      Dickinson's Meeting                               7  3  9


    _Collected of others in Sheffield._


    Messrs. Broomhead                                   2  2  0
    Mr. G. Greaves                                      1  1  0
    Mr. John Fenton                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Roger Wilson                                      10  6
    Mr. G. Woodhead                                       10  6
    Mr. John Winter                                       10  6
    Unknown                                                2  6
    Mr. Kenyon and two others                             15  6
    Mr. Matthews                                          10  6
    Mr. Moore                                              5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Bryant's                  5  5  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                  2 17  0


SUTTON, IN ASHFIELD.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Wilson's                  4  0  8


STAMFORD, IN LINCOLNSHIRE.


    Rev. Dr. Wilberforce                                1  1  0
    Dr. Jackson                                         1  1  0
    Mrs. Wingfield                                      1  1  0
    Middleton Trollop, Esq.                             1  1  0
    Mr. Adams                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Torkington                                        10  6
    Mr. Woodroffe                                         10  6
    Rev. Mr. John Ralph                                   10  6
    Dr. Tathwell                                          10  6
    Mrs. Delamore                                          5  0


STOW MARKET, IN SUFFOLK.


    The Rev. Mr. Archer                                 1  1  0


SUDBURY, IN SUFFOLK.


    ---- Gainsborough, Esq.                            10 10  0
    Mrs. Margaret Fenn                                  5  5  0
    Mr. John Burket, Sen.                               5  5  0
    Mr. Holman                                          4  4  0
    Mr. Thomas Burket                                   3  3  0
    Mr. John Burket, Jr.                                2  2  0
    Rev. Mr. Heginbothom                                1  1  0
    Mrs. Holman, Jr.                                    1  1  0
    Mr. Stow                                            1  1  0
    Mr. Watkinson of Lavingham                          1  1  0
    Mr. Stockdell (Clark)                               1  1  0
    Mr. Darby                                           1  1  0
    Miss Shepherd                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Barker                                            10  6
    Mrs. Addison                                          10  6
    Mr. Ellis                                             10  6
    Mr. John Holman                                       10  6
    Mrs. Holman                                           10  6
    Miss Holman                                           10  6
    Mr. Brabrook                                          10  6
    Mr. Thomas Stow                                       10  6
    Mr. English                                           10  6
    Mrs. Pawlett                                          10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Heginbothom's             4 12  6
    Thomas Fenn, Esq.                                   5  5  0
    Mr. T. Fenn, Jr.                                    3  3  0
    Mrs. Fenn                                           2  2  0
    Mr. Thomas Gibbons                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Addison                                         1 16  0
    Mr. John Ralling                                    1 11  6
    Mr. William Gibbons                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Abraham Greggs                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Chaplain                                          10  6
    Miss Ralling                                          10  6
    Miss Burket                                           10  6
    Miss Stow                                             10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Lombard's                 2  7  3


STAMBORNE.


    The Rev. Mr. Hallam                                 1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Hallam's                 10 18 11-1/4


SHOREHAM, IN KENT.


    The Rev. Mr. Perronett and Friends                  1 16  9


SEVEN OAKS, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Stenger's                 5  6  8
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. Bligh's                       2 11 10-1/2
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. Wesley's                      1 13  6


SHEERNESS, IN KENT.


    Collected at the meeting                            5  6  9


SOUTHWOLD, IN SUFFOLK.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Hurrion                  11 16  6


TETBURY, IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Phene                    10 10 10


TROWBRIDGE, IN WILTSHIRE.


    Mrs. Turner                                         2 12  6
    Mrs. Temple                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Whittaker                                       1  1  0
    Mr. Amos Simon                                      1  1  0
    Esquire Mortimer                                    1  1  0
    Mr. James Shrapnell and son                           11  6
    Mr. Butlar                                            10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Waldron's                16 18  0
    Ditto at the Rev. Mr. Cross'                       15  6  6
    Ditto at Mr. Rawling's                              2  4  8


TAUNTON, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    Governor Pool                                       2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. Blake                                  2  2  0
    Mr. Wascot                                          2  2  0
    Mrs. Welman                                         2  2  0
    Mr. Follaquire                                      2  2  0
    Mrs. Halliday                                       2  2  0
    The Rev. Mr. William Johnson                        1  1  0
    Mr. Kirkpatrick                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Jefferies, Sen.                                 1  1  0
    Mr. Joseph Jefferies                                1  1  0
    Mrs. Follaquire                                     1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. John Ward                                    10  6
    Rev. Mr. Joshua Toulmin                               10  6
    Mr. Handcocke                                         10  6
    Mrs. Stone                                            10  6
    Mr. Harrison                                          10  6
    Mr. Norma                                             10  6
    Mr. Joseph Cornish                                    10  6
    Mr. William Stow                                      10  6
    Mrs. Peacock                                          10  6
    Mr. Samuel Reed                                       10  6
    Dr. Cabble                                            10  6
    Mr. Thomas Grove                                      10  6
    Mr. J. Furnival                                       10  6
    Mr. Nobb                                              10  6
    A Lady unknown                                        10  6
    Miss Smith                                             5  0
    Mr. J. Burcher                                         5  0
    Mr. Jowitt                                             2  6
    Unknown                                                2  6
    Ditto                                                  2  0
    Mr. Slowar and a poor Widow                            3  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Johnson's                 19 4  1


TOPSHAM, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Mrs. Fryer                                          4  4  0
    Mr. John Fryer                                      2  2  0
    Mr. William Elliott                                 1  1  0
    Mr. William Kennaway, Sen.                          1  1  0
    Mr. Simon Morris                                    1  1  0
    Mrs. Burgess                                        1  1  0
    Madam Collier                                       1  1  0
    Mr. John Woolcombe                                    10  6
    Mrs. Thomas                                           10  6
    Captain William Sherville                             10  6
    Mr. Reynolds                                          10  6
    Captain Coleman                                       10  6
    Mr. George Culverwell                                 10  6
    Mr. Watton                                            10  6
    Mr. Samuel Hill                                       10  6
    Miss Bultell                                          10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Pitts                                    10  6
    Unknown                                               10  6
    Mrs. Love                                              5  3
    The collection                                     27  4  3


TOTNESS, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Reynell's and
      Chapman's                                        27  6  0


TAVISTOCK, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Mr. Thomas Windiat                                  5  5  0
    Mr. John Rowe                                       3  3  0
    Mr. Roger Lang                                      1  1  0
    Richard Turner, Esq.                                1  1  0
    A person unknown                                    1  1  0
    Dr. Lavington                                         10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Jago                                      7  3
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Dowdell's                 8  2  5


TEWKSBURY, IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


    John Humphries, Esq.                               10  0  0
    The Rev. Mr. Jones                                  1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Hayward                                  10  6
    From sundries                                       1 19  0
    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Graham's and
      Haydon's                                         21  0 10


TIVERTON, IN DEVONSHIRE.


    Mr. Parsons                                         3  3  0
    Mrs. Lewis                                          3  3  0
    Mrs. Mary Moore                                     2  2  0
    Mr. Hamilton                                        2  2  0
    Mrs. Glass                                          1  1  0
    Mr. Lewis                                           1  1  0
    Mr. John Bosley                                     1  1  0
    Mr. Atherton                                        1  1  0
    Mr. Smith                                           1  1  0
    Mr. Ensmarch, Sen.                                  1  1  0
    Mr. Isaac Ensmarch                                  1  1  0
    Miss Ensmarch                                       1  1  0
    A person unknown                                    1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Follett                                  10  6
    Mrs. Glass                                            10  6
    The Rev. Mr. Kiddall                                  10  6
    Mr. Zelby                                             10  6
    Mr. Gilbert                                           10  6
    Mr. Frank Besly                                       10  6
    Mr. Besly, Jr.                                        10  6
    Mrs. Lane                                             10  0
    Mr. Barn Besly                                         5  3
    Mrs. Munt                                              5  3
    Mrs. Kiddall                                           3  0
    Mr. Anstey                                             2  6
    Mrs. Hudford                                           2  6
    Mrs. Lachgate                                          2  6
    Mr. Raddon                                             2  6
    Mr. Small                                              2  6
    Mr. James                                              2  0
    Mr. Rathew                                             1  6
    Mr. Gill, Jr.                                          1  0
    Mr. Knight                                             1  0
    Mrs. Stone                                             1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Kiddal's                  2  9  9-1/2
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Follett's                 2  4  0
    Sent to be added to the above, per Mr. Parminter    2  8  0


THAXTED.


    Mr. Daniel Haddon                                   3  3  0
    Mr. Thomas Saward                                   2  2  0
    Mrs. Haddon                                         1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Parry's                   6  4  0


TUNBRIDGE WELLS, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Shepherd's and
      Arnold's                                          6  0 10
    Rev. Mr. Johnson                                      10  6


TENTERDEN, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Handcock's               24  8  2


UFCULM.


    Richard Clarke, Esq.                                1 11  6
    Mrs. Elizabeth Churley                              1  1  0
    Rev. Mr. Lamport                                      10  6
    Rev. Mr. Greenway                                     10  6
    Rev. Mr. John Windsor, Rector                         10  6
    Mr. Nicholas Wreford                                   5  0
    Unknown                                                5  0
    Mrs. Hill                                              4  0
    Mr. Hucker                                             4  0
    The Quakers                                         1 16  0
    Unknown                                                2  0
    The collection                                      3  1  6


UPPINGHAM, IN RUTLANDSHIRE.


    Collected at the meeting                            3 14  3-3/4


UPTON, IN WORCESTERSHIRE.

    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Jones'                   18  7  7
    Mr. Brockhurst                                      1  1  0
    Mrs. Skinner                                        1  1  0
    The Rev. Mr. Steele                                    7  6


WESTBURY, IN WILTSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Mylett's                 14 11  3


WARMINSTER, IN WILTSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Fisher's                 15  3  1


WELLINGTON, IN SHROPSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Field's and at the
      Rev. Mr. Day's                                   23 12 10


WAREHAM, IN DORSETSHIRE.


    Sundry subscriptions sent to the Rev. Mr. S.
      Reader                                           29  0 10
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. S. Reader's               9  4  8


WILTON, IN WILTSHIRE.


    Edward Baker, Esq.                                  3  3  0
    Major Seward                                        1  7  0
    Rev. Mr. Gardner                                    1  1  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Gardner's                10  0  8


WINCHESTER.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Boarman's                 5 18  3


WELLINGBOROUGH, IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Grant's                   9  1  1


WARWICK.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Kettle's                  5 13  4


WELFORD.


    Mrs. Bakewell                                       2  2  0
    Unknown, per sundries                               8  6  6
    Ditto                                                 14  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. King's                    4  1  6


WORCESTER.


    The Rev. Mr. Blackmore                              2  2  0
    Mr. Cooke                                           1  1  0
    By private subscriptions                           21  5  3
    A donation from the Public Fund                     7 13  3
    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Urwick's and
      Pointing's                                       21  2  6


WOLVERHAMPTON.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Cole's, etc.             33 19  3-1/2


WEST BRAMWICH.


    Collected at the Rev. Messrs. Robin's,
      Stillingfleet's, and Griffith's                  42  8  8-1/2


WALSALL, IN STAFFORDSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Llewellin's              10  3  0


WAKEFIELD, IN YORKSHIRE.


    James Milnes, Esq.                                  3  3  0
    John Milnes, Jr., Esq.                              2  2  0
    Mr. Richard Lamb                                    1  1  0
    Mr. John Lamb                                         10  6
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. William Turner's         11 15  9


WOODBRIDGE, IN SUFFOLK.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Palmer's                 18  9  3-1/2
    By sundries                                         2  4  0
    Brought by Mr. Field to be added to ditto           2  7  4


WATESFIELD.


    The Rev. Mr. Harmer                                 1  1  0
    Given by the Trustees                               5  5  0
    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Harmer's                  5  6  0
    Sent afterwards                                       16  0


WATFORD.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Medley's                 30  0  0


WHITCHURCH, IN HAMPSHIRE.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Meek's                    8 17  5


WINGHAM.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Chapman                   2 15  0


WOOLWICH, IN KENT.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. McGregor's                2  0  0


WRENTHAM, IN SUFFOLK.


    Collected by the Rev. Mr. Sweetland                20  0  0


YEOVIL, IN SOMERSETSHIRE.


    Mr. Bullock                                         1  1  0
    Mr. Gilson                                          1  1  0
    Dr. Dumaresque                                      1  1  0
    Rev. F. C. Parsons                                    10  6
    Dr. Daniel                                            10  6
    Mr. John Taylor                                       10  6
    Collected by Rev. Mr. Evans                         6  4  3-3/4


YARMOUTH, IN NORFOLK.


    Collected at the Rev. Mr. Whiteside's              19 14  3
    Ditto at Rev. Mr. Howe's                           27 10  0

    Total                                          £9,494  7  7-1/2

Donations in Scotland amounted to about £2,500.


PROPOSED DONATIONS WHICH DETERMINED THE LOCATION OF THE COLLEGE AND
SCHOOL AT HANOVER IN 1770.

The King's most gracious Majesty, by advice of his Excellency John
Wentworth, Esq., his Majesty's governor of the province of New
Hampshire, and of his council, a Charter of the township of Landaff,
about 24,000 acres.

Honorable Benning Wentworth, Esq., late governor of New Hampshire, 500
acres, on which the College is fixed in Hanover.

Hon. Theodore Atkinson, Esq., 500 acres.

Theodore Atkinson, Jr. Esq., one right.

Hon. Mark H. Wentworth, Esq., one right in Plainfield.

Hon. J---- Nevin, Esq., half a right.

William Parker, Esq., half a right in Piermont.

Hon. Peter Levius, Esq., one right in Piermont.

Hon. Daniel Warner, Esq., one right in Leichester.

Hon. John Wentworth, Esq., one right in Thetford.

Hon. Daniel Pierce, Esq., 500 acres.

Samuel Livermore, Esq., 300 acres in Chatham.

Walter Bryent, Esq., one right in Burton.

John Moffat, Esq., one right in Masons-Claim.

Matthew Thornton, Esq., one right in Castleton.

Mr. Ebenezer Smith, 100 acres.

Phillips White, Esq., 250 acres in Wentworth, and 250 in Warren.

Col. Jonathan Grulley, 125 acres in Wentworth, and 125 in Warren.

John Phillips, Esq., seven rights in Sandwich.

Col. Nathaniel Folsom, one right in Sandwich.

Col. Nicholas Gilman, 100 acres in Sandwich.

Samuel Folsom, Esq., 50 acres in Sandwich.

Mr. Enoch Poor, 100 acres in Sandwich.

Col. Clement March, one right in Addinson, and one right in
Leichester.

Robert Fletcher, Esq., 100 acres.

John Wendal, Esq., one right in Barnard.

Walter Bryent, Jr. Esq., one right in Burton.

Hunking Wentworth, Esq., half a right in Barnard.

Reuben Kidder, Esq., half a right in Campton.

Col. Jonathan Moulton, 250 acres in Orford, 250 in Piermont, 250 in
Relhan, and 250 in Moultenboro'.

Mr. John Moulton, 100 acres in Moultenboro'.

Mr. Moses Little, two rights in Saville.

Mr. Samuel Emerson, 100 acres in Saville.

Mr. William Moulton, 300 acres in Stonington.

Mr. James Jewet, 100 acres in Stonington.

Mr. Adam Cogswel, 100 acres in Stonington.

Col. Jacob Bayley, 240 acres.

Timothy Bedel, Esq., 80 acres.

Capt. John Hazen, 240 acres.

Benjamin Whiting. Esq., 240 acres in Newbury and Topsham.

Israel Morey, Esq., 400 acres in Orford, and other towns, handy for
the use of the school.

Mr. Noah Dewey, 80 acres in Orford.

Capt. Noah Dewey, Jr., 80 acres in Orford.

Mr. Thomas Sawyer, 80 acres in Orford.

Mr. Daniel Tillotson, 80 acres in Thetford.

Mr. Benjamin Baldwin, 104 acres in Thetford.

Mr. Ebenezer Baldwin, 104 acres in Thetford.

Mr. Daniel Cross, 40 acres in Farley.

Mr. John Chamberlain, 120 acres in Canaan.

Mr. Samuel Gillett, 40 acres in Thetford.

Mr. Ebenezer Green, 80 acres in Thetford, and 80 acres in Lyme.

Mr. Fredrick Smith, 176 acres in Strafford.

Mr. Abner Chamberlain, 40 acres in Thetford.

Mr. John Sloan, 56 acres in Lyme.

Mr. William Sloan, 80 acres in Lyme.

Mr. Alexander Murray, 40 acres in Lyme.

Mr. David Sloan, 24 acres in Lyme.

Mr. Thomas Sumner, 130 acres in Gilsom.

Oliver Willard, Esq., 750 acres land and £20.

                                                        £. s. d.

    Capt. Zadock Wright                                 3  7  6
    Lieut. Joel Matthews                                1 13  9
    Mr. Paul Spooner                                    1 13  9
    Mr. John Laiton                                     1 13  9
    Mr. Christopher Billings                               6  9
    Mr. Charles Killam                                    16 10-1/2
    Mr. Timothy Lull                                    1  0  3
    Mr. Asa Taylor                                        13  6
    Mr. Zebulon Lee                                       16 10-1/2
    Mr. John Johnson                                      11  3
    Mr. Matthias Rust                                     11  3
    Capt. Francis Smith                                 9  0  0
    Mr. John Stevens, Jr.                               7 10  0
    Mr. Robert Miller                                   6  0  0
    Mr. Abel Stevens                                    7 10  0
    Mr. Reuben Jerold                                   2  5  0
    Mr. Willard Smith                                   6  0  0
    Mr. Adam Clark                                      2  5  0
    Mr. Charles Spalding                                6  0  0
    Mr. Daniel Short                                    6  0  0
    Mr. Josiah Russel                                   2  5  0
    Mr. Josiah Russel, Jr.                              3 15  0
    Mr. Daniel Woodward                                 3 15  0
    Mr. William Cutler                                  3 15  0
    Mr. Josiah Colton                                   3 15  0
    Mr. Joseph Smith                                    6  0  0
    Mr. John Stevens                                    7 10  0
    Mr. William Bramble                                 3 15  0
    Mr. Joshua Dewie                                    3 15  0
    Mr. Elisha Marsh                                    6  0  0
    Mr. Christopher Pease                               6  0  0
    Mr. John Strong                                     4 10  0
    Mr. David Bliss                                       15  0
    Mr. Elijah Strong                                   1 10  0
    Mr. Ebenezer Bliss                                  3 15  0
    Mr. Daniel Pinneo                                   6  0  0
    Mr. Thomas Miner                                    3  0  0
    Mr. Nathaniel Holbrook                              3 15  0
    Mr. Henry Woodward                                  3  0  0
    Mr. Abel Marsh                                      4 10  0
    Mr. Lionel Udal                                     4 10  0
    Lebanon Proprietors, 1440 acres.
    Mr. Thomas Storrs, 20 acres.
    Capt. Nathaniel Hall, 50 acres.
    John Salter, Esq., 50 acres.
    Mr. Nathaniel Storrs, 50 acres.
    Mr. Constant Southworth, 100 acres.
    Mr. Huckens Storrs, 100 acres.
    Mr. Amariah Storrs, 20 acres.
    Mr. Nehemiah Easterbrook, 50 acres.
    Capt. Samuel Storrs, 50 acres.
    Mr. Aaron Storrs, 200 acres.
    Mr. Huckens Storrs, Jr., 100 acres.
    Mr. Jedediah Hebard, 100 acres.
    Mr. Oliver Griswould, 100 acres.
    Mr. Levi Hyde, 100 acres.
    Mr. Israel Gillet, 100 acres.
    Mr. Rufus Baldwin                                  £1 10  0
      and 100 acres.
    Mr. John Gillet                                     1 10  0
      and 100 acres.
    Mr. Eliezer Robinson,                               2  5  0
      and 50 acres.
    Mr. Charles Hill                                    7 10  0
    Major John Slapp                                    1 10  0
    Mr. Joseph Wood                                     3 15  0
    Mr. Silas Waterman                                  1  2  6
    Mr. John Griswold                                     15  0
    Mr. David Bliss                                       15  0
    Mr. Joseph Martin                                   1  2  6
    Mr. Benjamin Fuller                                    7  6
    Mr. Azariah Bliss                                   3 15  0
    Mr. William Dana                                    7 10  0
    Mr. William Downer                                  3  7  6
    Mr. Joseph Tilden                                   4 14  6
    Mr. Samuel Mecham                                   1  7  0
    Mr. Benjamin Wright                                 2 14  0
    Mr. Benjamin Parkhurst, 50 acres land.
    Mr. David Rowland, 200 acres.
    Mr. Josiah Wheeler, 50 acres.
    Mr. Jacob Burton 67 acres, and                     £1  0  0
    Mr. Ebenezer Ball, 33 acres.
    Mr. Thomas Murdock, 33 acres and                   £0 10  0
    Mr. Elisha Crane, 33 acres and                        10  0
    Mr. Philip Smith, 33 acres and                      1  0  0
    Mr. Joseph Hatch, 33 acres and                      1  0  0
    Mr. Josiah Burton, 20 acres.
    Mr. Israel Brown, 27 acres and                     £0 10  0
    Mr. Daniel Baldwin, 13 acres and                    1 10  0
    Mr. Francis Fenton, 33 acres.
    Capt. Hezekiah Johnson, 80 acres and               £1  0  0
    Mr. John Serjeant, 40 acres and                     2 10  0
    Mr. Timothy Bush, 40 acres and                      2  0  0
    Mr. Peter Thatcher, 40 acres and                      15  0
    Mr. Daniel Waterman, 24 acres and                     15  0
    Mr. John Slafter, 40 acres and                      1  0  0
    Mr. Samuel Hutchinson                               2 10  0
    Mr. Medad Benton                                    2  0  0
    Mr. John Hatch                                      2 10  0
    Mr. Samuel Partridge                                2  5  0
    Mr. Elisha Partridge                                  10  0
    Mr. Jonas Richards                                    10  0
    Mr. John Hutchinson                                 1  0  0
    Mr. Elisha Burton                                   1 10  0
    Mr. Nathan Messenger                                   5  0
    Mr. John Wright                                     1  0  0
    Mr. Aaron Wright                                    1 10  0
    Mr. Francis Smalley                                 1  0  0
    Mr. Joseph Ball                                     1  0  0
    Mr. Jonathan Ball                                      5  0
    Mr. Samuel Brown                                    2  5  0
    Mr. Samuel Waterman                                    7  6
    Mr. Samuel Partridge, Jr.                             10  0
    Mr. Ebenezer Jaques                                    7  6
    Mr. Timothy Smith, 90 acres land.
    Mr. Jonathan Curtiss, 120 acres and                 3 15  0
    Mr. Benjamin Davis, 40 acres.
    Mr. John Ordway, 90 acres.
    Maj. Joseph Storrs, 110 acres.
    Mr. John House, 100 acres.
    Mr. Jonathan Freeman, 40 acres.
    Mr. Nathaniel Wright, 40 acres.
    Mr. Otis Freeman, 40 acres.
    Mr. Gideon Smith, 21 dollars.
    Mr. Nath. Woodward, 16 acres land.
    Mr. Isaac Bridgman, 40 acres.
    Mr. Knight Sexton, 80 acres and                   £15  0  0
    Mr. James Murch                                    30  0  0
    Mr. Simeon Dewey, 50 acres land and                 7 10  0
    Mr. Benjamin Rice                                   7 10  0
    Mr. Asa Parker, 50 acres.
    Mr. Edm. Freeman, Jr., 40 acres.
    Mr. Isaac Wallbridge, 40 acres and                    18  0
    Mr. David Mason                                     2  0  0
    Mr. Jeremiah Trescot                                  18  0
    Mr. Habakkuk Turner                                 7 10  0
    Mr. Samuel Rust                                       15  0
    Mr. Edmond Freeman, 50 acres.
    Mr. William Johnson, Jr.                            1  2  6
    Rev. Gideon Noble, 40 acres.
    Mr. Abner Barker, 30 acres.
    Mr. Prince Freeman, 50 acres.
    Mr. Abel Johnson                                    1  2  6
    Mr. William Johnson                                 3 15  0
    Mr. Russel Freeman                                    18  0

It should be remarked that many of the above named were unable to
fulfill their promises. The College received in all about 10,000 acres
of land.


EXTRACT FROM HANOVER TOWN RECORDS.

"Met according to adjournment, November 12, 1770. The following vote
was passed:

"_Whereas_, John Wright, David Woodward, Edmund Freeman, Otis Freeman,
Isaac Walbridge, Isaac Bridgman, and John Bridgman, have agreed to
give the Rev. Eleazar Wheelock, D.D., 300 acres of land in this town,
voted, that the above-mentioned persons may give deed of 300 acres of
land in the land now lying undivided among the proprietors, as
follows, namely, to begin at Lebanon line at the bound of a lot of
land lately given by the Hon. Benning Wentworth, Esq., to the Trustees
of Dartmouth College; then in the east line of said lot about 300
rods, to the southwest bound of the 17th hundred-acre lot west of the
half-mile line, then south sixty-four degrees, east about 168 rods, or
so far as that a line to run parallel with the first-mentioned line
and running to Lebanon will make 300 acres, said land to lie to the
above-mentioned persons for so much in their next division on the
respective original rights they now own; _i. e._ to John Wright 40
acres, to David Woodward 50 acres, to Isaac Bridgman 50 acres, to
Edmund Freeman 40 acres, to Isaac Walbridge 40 acres, to Otis Freeman
50 acres, to John Bridgman 30 acres. And whereas, the persons whose
names are hereafter mentioned have covenanted and agreed to give to
the Trustees of Dartmouth College, for the benefit of said college,
the following quantities of land, namely, Knight Sexton 100 acres,
Joseph Storrs 100 acres, John House 100 acres, John Ordway 100 acres,
Jonathan Curtice 140 acres, Tim. Smith 100 acres, Edmund Freeman 50
acres, Prince Freeman 50 acres, Jonathan Freeman 50 acres, Nathaniel
Wright 50 acres, Nathaniel Woodward 20 acres, Simon Dewey 50 acres,
Benjamin Davis 50 acres, Asa Parker 50 acres, voted, that the
above-named persons may give a deed of all the undivided land lying
east of the piece aforementioned, and south of the hundred-acre lots
in the 1st and 3d ranges of hundred acres in the 1st division of
hundred-acre lots, and west of the two-mile road, and north of Lebanon
line, it being about 1,000 acres, be it more or less, to lie for so
much to the original rights aforementioned as the present owners of
said rights have subscribed to give, reserving proper allowance for
highways for the benefit of the town."



OTHER PROPOSED DONATIONS.


"We the subscribers hereby severally promise for ourselves, our heirs,
etc., to pay to the Rev. Mr. Eleazar Wheelock, or such other person or
persons who shall be appointed to receive the same the sums
respectively affixed to our names for the founding and supporting a
school for the education of Indian youth and others to be paid in land
whereon to build a proper house or houses and in provisions and in
materials for building such house or houses which shall be judged
necessary for the support of said school, provided said school be
fixed in the first society in Hebron and there continued. Witness our
hands this 17th January, 1765.

    David Barbur          £80
    Alex Phelps            50
    John Phelps            50
    Asahel Phelps          20
    Joshua Phelps          16
    Ebenezer Gilbert       16
    Increase Porter        20
    Benjamin Sumner        10
    Obadiah Horsford       50
    Silvanus Phelps        15
    Israel Morey           20
    Stephen Palmer          5
    Aaron Stiles           10
    Isaac Ford             10
    Ichabod Buell          10
    Lijah Buell            10
    Alexander Mack          6
    Stephen Stiles          7
    Eliphalet Case         10
    Benjamin Day           20
    Asa White               2
    Eliphalet Youngs, Jr.   2
    Saml. Phelps            5
    Israel Post            20
    Nathl. Phelps          10
    Stephen Barbur         30
    Neziah Bliss           15
    Samuel Fielding         2
    Oliver Phelps           2
    Pelatiah Porter        15
    Eleazar Strong         10
    Thomas Post            15
    Saml. Gilbert, Jr.     20
    Thos. Summer            5
    Abijah Rowlee          10
    Danl. Tillotson        20
    Ephraim Wright          2
    Saml. Jones            20
    Danl. Porter           15
    Oliver Barbur           8
    Worthy Waters          10
    Zebulon Strong          2
    Jonathan Birge          1
    Story Gott             25
    Solomon Huntington      4
    Solomon Tarbox         15
    Elisha Mack            10
    David Carver           10
    Adam Waters            10
    Samuel Bicler, Jr.     14
    Ichabod Phelps         20
    Ichabod Phelps, Jr.    10
    Eliphalet Young        10
    Samuel Gilbert         65
    Benjamin Buell         20
    Thomas Tarbox          10

Mr. Wheelock's correspondence indicates that the School was kept one
year at Hebron, by Mr. Alexander Phelps.



"At a meeting of the First Company of the Delaware Purchasers (so
called), held by adjournment at the Town-house in Norwich, on the 3d
day of January, A. D. 1769,

"Voted that this Company do now grant to the Indian Charity School
under the care of Rev. Eleazar Wheelock, D.D., of Lebanon, six miles
square of land, to be laid out on the westermost part of this
Company's purchase upon Delaware River, upon condition said School
shall be erected on the Susquehannah Purchase (so called).

"The above is a true copy of the vote of the First Company of the
Delaware Purchasers.

    "Test Elisha Tracy, Clerk for said Company."

"At a meeting of the Second Company of the Delaware Purchasers (so
called), held by adjournment at the Town-house in Norwich, on the 3d
day of January, A. D. 1769,

"Voted that this Company do now grant to the Indian Charity School
under the care of the Rev. Eleazar Wheelock, D.D., of Lebanon, six
miles square of land, to be laid out for the use of said School on the
westermost part of this Company's purchase of land upon Lacawack
River, upon condition said School shall be erected upon the
Susquehannah Purchase, so called.

"The above is a true copy of the vote of the Second Delaware Company.

    "Test Elisha Tracy, Clerk for said Company."

In September, 1768, Messrs. Williams, Woodbridge, Sergeant, Willard,
Brown, Goodrich, Gray, Pixley, Jones, Curtis, Bement, Wilson,
Stoddard, Bouton, Dean, Fuller, and others, proposed to give various
sums, ranging from $5 to £150, provided the College, should be
located, agreeably to their wishes, at Stockbridge, Mass. During the
same year, Zephaniah Batcheller writes from Albany, stating that
Captain Abraham J. Lansing will give, in all, more than two hundred
acres of land, suitably located for buildings and other uses, and
worth £2,500, provided the College is located at Lansingburg, N. Y.

"Province of New Hampshire, June 18, 1770. At a proprietor's meeting,
lawfully warned and held at my dwelling-house in Lyme in the province
above said, voted to lay out to the use and benefit of Dartmouth
College fifteen hundred acres of land, ... provided said Trustees
shall fix or build said college in the township of Lyme, south of Clay
Brook.

"A true copy of file

    Test Jonathan Sumner, Proprietor's Clerk.

Lyme, June 18, 1770."



"January 22, 1770. Proprietors' meeting at Hampton.

"Whereas a charter for a College to be erected in the western part of
this province, by the name of Dartmouth College, has been granted
under the great seal of said province, with a special view of
Christianizing the several Indian tribes in America, therefore in
consideration of the many advantages that would accrue to the
proprietors of Orford if said College could be settled in said town,
and that the same pious design might be carried into immediate
execution,

"Voted, in case said College should be settled in said township, to
give and grant for the Use and Benefit of said College, for ever, one
thousand acres of land in said town. Also, whereas the Rev. Eleazar
Wheelock is appointed president of said College, and doubtless will
settle himself and family in the town where the College shall be,
where it will be very necessary he should have some land to settle
upon, therefore, for encouraging and promoting the same,

"Voted to give and grant unto the said Eleazar Wheelock, his heirs and
assigns for ever, one thousand acres of land in said town. They also

"Voted (conditionally) to give to the said Eleazar Wheelock the sum of
one hundred pounds lawful money."



Piermont offered one thousand acres of land to secure the College.
Other towns, not mentioned hereafter, among them Canaan, Boscawen, and
Cornish, are said to have presented some attractions to Dr. Wheelock.



"Honorable and Reverend: In the capacity of agent for the towns of
Newbury and Haverhill, I promise and engage (if Dartmouth College is
placed in said Haverhill in New Hampshire) that out of the
subscriptions of said Haverhill and Newbury and the town of Bath, that
three thousand acres of land shall be laid out in a convenient form at
the corner of Haverhill, adjoining the southwest corner of said town
of Landaff, and one thousand acres more, laid out in a gore, in Bath
adjoining said town of Landaff, and the three thousand acres in
Haverhill as above; and also I engage to give five hundred acres more
to the Honorable and Reverend Trust of said College, for the use of
said College, in a handsome form, round said College, if set in said
Haverhill; provided it is not set on lands already laid out, which if
it is to lay out said five hundred next adjoining, in a convenient
form, as also to make and raise a frame for a building two hundred
feet long and eighteen feet broad, one story high, or a frame or labor
to that value. The above I promise to perform at or before the first
day of November next. The frame I promise to set up on demand. Witness
my hand,

    Jacob Bayley.

    "Portsmouth, June 29, 1770.

    "To the Honorable and Reverend Trust of Dartmouth College."

    Newburyport, March 6, 1770.

Reverend Sir: I have lately received an account from Plymouth of a
subscription being opened and there is already three thousand dollars
in labor, provisions, etc., subscribed; also another here worth one
thousand dollars, provided the College is fixed in Campton, Rumney, or
Plymouth; also being sensible that you will be at great expense to
move into a new country, have opened another subscription for Rev. Dr.
Wheelock, which will be generous; I have lately heard that the College
is to be fixed before the meeting of the trustees, which is the reason
of Mr. Call's journey, the bearer of this, who is a friend to the
Indian cause, and in time past has been a means of collecting a
considerable for them. I should be much obliged if you would inform me
the time the College will be fixed, and I will bring or send the
subscriptions, which I make no doubt will be generous when completed.
If it should not be agreeable to the trustees to fix the College in
any of the above mentioned towns, these subscriptions will not do any
hurt to the College nor Dr. Wheelock, but spur on others to outdo. I
think, where it is fixed, they ought to do generously, as it must help
them much. I conclude with our family's and my duty to you and Madam
Wheelock, and regards to all the family, and remain your most obedient
servant,

    Moses Little.

"P. S. We hear that the most generous subscription is to carry the
College, provided the place is suitable; hope what we offer Dr.
Wheelock will not be any damage, for it is not done as a private
thing, but are willing the trustees and everybody else should know.

"M. L. has subscribed:

    20 thousand boards.
    20 tons hay, three years, is 60 tons.
    10 bushels wheat, three years, is 30 bushels.
    10 bushels rye, three years, is 30 bushels.
    10 bushels Indian, three years, is 30 bushels.
    10 days labor, three years, is 30 days.

"Also use of house and barn and land pasturing round it, twenty acres
cleared; also Esq. Brainerd, one right of land, etc., in Rumney; also
sent a man with a subscription, to be followed, we hope, in proportion
and more than proportion to the above. Expect some hundred bushels
grain yearly for three years, also land and labor; and if the above is
not enough subscribed by Moses Little, Dr. Wheelock shall have liberty
to improve as much of his land as he pleases."



    "Albany, May 9, 1767.

"Reverend Sir: I have had the pleasure to see your letter, directed to
the mayor of this city and others. The subject of it was a very
agreeable one. To encourage literature indicates a great mind; to
civilize savages, with a view to their eternal happiness, evinces a
goodness of heart and a charitable disposition truly commendable;
whoever attempts it has a right to claim the assistance of every
worthy member of society. I shall be happy if I can be any ways
instrumental in promoting the success of your humane plan; I am
informed that Mr. Mayor and the other gentlemen of the corporation
have expressed an equal desire, and I make no doubt but their offers
will be such as a corporation ought to make who are impressed with a
sense of its general utility. I could say much of the advantages that
would accrue from fixing the School near this city, but as you have
doubtless considered this affair with attention, you will have
anticipated all I could say on the subject. I shall only remark that I
have observed with much satisfaction that the morals of my
fellow-citizens are much less vitiated than those of other cities that
have an immediate foreign trade, and consequently import the vices of
other climes; to this, give me leave to add, that a becoming economy
is what characterizes our people, and may, by way of example, have a
very good effect on the Indian children, and such others as might be
allowed to take their education in the proposed seminary.

"Should you, however, reverend sir, after receiving the proposals of
the corporation, think them inadequate to the advantages the city
would receive, or should you, for reasons that do not occur to me,
think a more remote situation more eligible (which I wish may not be),
I then, sir, will make an offer, to forward the charity. But though I
have already fixed on the proposals I intend to make, I must yet
declare that those that I am told the city intends to offer appear to
me to have the advantage in point of fulfilling the intentions of the
gentlemen at home, but perhaps it may be thought otherwise, and I be
mistaken.

"Whenever, sir, this or your other affairs may call you into this
county, I shall be extremely glad to show you any civilities in my
power, and beg you will make my house your home, where I try to keep
up to the good old adage, 'to welcome the coming and to speed the
going guest.'

    "I am, with much respect, reverend sir,
    Your most obedient, humble servant,
    "To the Rev. Mr. Wheelock.      Ph. Schuyler."



    "February 10, 1770.

"Reverend Sir: As I understand that Colonel Alexander Phelps, Esquire,
has been on business of importance relative to your College, to wit,
the consulting the honorable trustees, at Portsmouth, concerning the
place where it will be best to set the said College, and as there is
great engagedness and large subscriptions making by the Proprietors
and others of the towns of Plainfield, Hartford, Harford, Lebanon,
Norwich, Hanover, and some other back towns, for the said School, if
said School should be set in Hanover, in the Province of New
Hampshire, now, sir, I suppose that Colonel Phelps never heard of this
subscription, and I apprehend he has not laid this donation, with the
circumstances of the place, before the Board at Portsmouth.

"Trusting in your wisdom and willingness to hear everything of
consequence to said School, I would therefore pray that the place for
the said College may not be fixed on till the donations may be
gathered and the circumstances of the place be properly laid before
their Honors.

"P. S. I suppose there can be as much or more said in favor of its
going to the said town of Hanover than any town on the river, which
will be laid before their Honors in writing, if desired.

    "From their humble servant and well-wisher to said School,
    James Murch."

In a later letter he says:

"Now, sir, we all hope you will view the place yourself, and the
people well all be satisfied that the College will be set in the best
place for its benefit; or, if a disinterested man should come and view
the places, and make a representation, it is generally thought it
would come to Hanover or Lebanon. Now, sir, I shall endeavor to set
before you some of the benefits of this place for the College. First,
here is a large tract of land of near three thousand acres or more,
all lying together, and the greater part some of the best of land. I
shall only add that there may be a good road to Portsmouth; and it is
in a line to Crown Point from Portsmouth; and a very narrow place in
the great river, for a brig; and it is by a long pair of falls; and
where salt and other articles, brought up the river, will be cheaper
than they will be further up.

"Having given some short hints of what is commonly talked of where I
have been, I hope you will condescend to forgive what is amiss in this
broken letter.

    "So I remain, yours to serve, James Murch.
    "Hanover, New Hampshire, March 13, 1770.

"P. S. I would inform you we all got up here well."



"The Company expected to attend Commencement at Dartmouth College,
August 26, 1772, with his Excellency Governor Wentworth, viz.: The
Honorable Mark Hunking Wentworth, Esq.; George Jaffrey, Esq.; Daniel
Rogers, Esq.; Peter Gilman, Esq.; the Honorable John Wentworth, Esq.,
_Speaker of Assembly_; Major Samuel Hobart, Esq., John Giddinge, Esq.,
Colonel John Phillips, Esq., John Sherburne, Esq., _Members of
Assembly_; John Fisher, Esq., _Collector of Salem_; Colonel Nathaniel
Folsom, Esq.; Rev. Dr. Langdon, of Portsmouth; Rev. Mr. Emerson, of
Hollis; Dr. Cutter; Dr. Bracket; Samuel Penhallow, Esq.; William
Parker, Jun., Esq.; Benjamin Whiting, Esq., _High Sheriff of
Hillsboro' County_; Honorable Samuel Holland, Esq., _Surveyor-General
of the Northern District of America and a Councillor of Canada_;
Thomas Mac-donogh, Esq., _Secretary to the Governor_. About ten more
are invited, but I think uncertain whether they'll undertake the
journey." From Gov. Wentworth.



    "Dartmouth College, June 3, 1777, at break of day.

"My dear Sir: I trust you have received my two late letters, by my son
and Sir Trimble, with orders, if you can to good advantage, to make
sale of my tenement at the Crank, and pay my debts to Mr. Dean, Mr.
Watson, and yourself. If you have successfully attempted the affair,
or shall soon so do, I should be glad to see you, and if it may be
with the remainder of the money as soon as may be; or if you could,
before you come, visit Dr. Mead, who was principal of, and agent for,
the first grantees of the town of Landaff, the settlement of which is
now retarded and discouraged by the influence of Mr. Joseph Davenport,
who has inspired an apprehension in the minds of the populace that
they shall be exposed to a quarrel, if they should settle there, etc.
I wish I could send you a copy of the College Charter, and enable you
to discourse understandingly with Dr. Mead, and let him see how amply
this incorporation is endowed, and how independent it is made of this
government or any other incorporation; that the first object of the
royal grant of said township was the dispersed Indian natives, and to
this corporation only in trust for that purpose; that such a matter of
controversy can be decided by no judicatory but supreme, or one equal
to that which incorporated it, that is the Continental Congress; that
unless they can prove that the fee of those lands was not in reality
in the king when the charter thereof was given to the College and the
grant made to the grantees (however irregular and unkind the steps
taken may have been), they will find it difficult, if not
impracticable, to recover it. However, to prevent any expense in that
matter, quiet the minds of people and facilitate the settlement, as
well as exercise proper regard to those who have looked upon
themselves injured thereby, I would propose some conditions of
agreement with those first grantees, whereby I might obtain their
quitclaims to the premises; that is, either a sum of money, or some
other way. What if you should see Dr. Mead and discourse with him
before you come hither? But the bearer is waiting. Accept love to you
and yours, etc., from your affectionate,

    "Mr. Jabez Bingham, Jun."



This letter was evidently written by President Wheelock.


MISCELLANEOUS MATTER.

"Since there is great misrepresentations by some concerning my life
and education, I take this opportunity to give the world, in few
words, the true account of my education. I was born a heathen in
Mmoyanheeunnuck, alias Mohegan, in New London, North America. My
parents were altogether heathens, and I was educated by them in their
heathenish notions, though there was a sermon preached to our Mohegan
tribe sometimes, but our Indians regarded not the Christian religion.
They would persist in their heathenish ways, and my parents in
particular were very strong in the customs of their forefathers, and
they led a wandering life up and down in the wilderness, for my father
was a great hunter. Thus I lived with them till I was sixteen years
old, and then there was a great stir of religion in these parts of the
world both amongst the Indians as well as the English, and about this
time I began to think about the Christian religion, and was under
great trouble of mind for some time. I thought the religion which I
heard at this time was a new thing among mankind, such as they never
heard the like before, so ignorant was I, and when I was seventeen
years of age I received a hope, and as I begun to think about
religion, so I began to learn to read, though I went to no school till
I was in my nineteenth year, and then I went to the Rev. Mr.
Wheelock's to learning, and spent four years there, and was very
weakly most of the time; this is the true account of my education.

    Samson Occom.

    "Boston, Nov. 28, 1765."



Mr. Occom spent the closing years of a useful life at Brotherton, N.
Y., where he died, in 1792, aged nearly seventy.



"A List of Charity Scholars (in Rev. E. Wheelock's School), from 1754
to 1767:

    John Pumpshire, a Delaware.
    Jacob Woolley, a Delaware.
    Samson Woyboy.
    Joseph Woolley, a Delaware.
    Hezekiah Calvin, a Delaware.
    Joseph Johnson, a Mohegan.
    David Fowler, a Montauk.
    Aaron Occom, a Mohegan.
    Samuel Kirtland, of Norwich.
    Isaiah Uncas, a Mohegan.
    Amie Johnson, a Mohegan.
    Joseph Brant,      }
    Negyes ----,       } Mohawks.
    Center ----, dead, }
    Miriam Stores, a Delaware.
    Moses ----,        } Mohawks.
    Johannes ----,     }
    Sarah Wyog, a Mohegan.
    Enoch Closs, a Delaware.
    Samuel Tallman, a Delaware.
    Daniel Mossock, a Farmington.
    Abraham Primus,    }
    Abraham Secundus,  } Mohawks.
    Peter ----,        }
    Patience Johnson, a Mohegan.
    Samuel Gray, of Boston.
    Mr. Samuel Ashpo, a Mohegan.
    Eleazar Sweetland, of Andover.
    Jacob Fowler, a Montauk.
    Manuel Simon, a Narraganset.
    Hannah Poquiantus, a Nehantic.
    Hannah Garret, a Narraganset.
    Mary Sequettass, a Narraganset.
    David Avery, of Norwich.
    David McCluer, of Boston.
    Mr. Titus Smith, of South Hadley.
    William Primus,    }
    William Secundus,  } Mohawks.
    Elias ----,        }

    Mr. Theophilus Chamberlain, of South Hadley.
    Susannah,          }
    Katharine,         } Mohawks.
    Mary ----,         }
    David ----, an Oneida.
    Mr. Aaron Kinne, of Volentown.
    Mundeus,           } Oneidas.
    Jacob,             }
    Sarah Simons, a Narraganset.
    Charles Daniel, a Narraganset.
    John Green, a Mohawk.
    Sam'l Johnson, a member of Yale College.
    Allen Mather, of Windsor.
    William, an Oneida.
    Paulus, a Mohawk.
    Seth ----, a Mohawk.
    John Shaddock,     } Narragansets.
    Toby Shaddock,     }
    Levi Frisbie, of Branford.
    Abigail ----,      } Narragansets.
    Martha ----,       }
    Toby Shadock's wife and child.
    Margaret ----."



In the "History of the Five Indian Nations," by Cadwallader Colden, we
find the following paragraph:

"The French priests had (from time to time) persuaded several of the
Five Nations to leave their own country and to settle near Montreal,
where the French are very industrious in encouraging them. Their
numbers have been likewise increased by the prisoners the French have
taken in war, and by others who have run from their own country
because of some mischief that they had done, or debts which they owed
to the Christians. These Indians all profess Christianity, and
therefore are commonly called the Praying Indians by their countrymen,
and they are called _Cahnuagas_ (Caghnawagas) by the people of
Albany."



"An agreement between the Reverend Doctor Eleazar Wheelock, president
of Dartmouth College, and Mr. John Smith, late tutor of the same, with
respect to said Mr. Smith's settlement and salary in capacity of
professor of the languages in Dartmouth College.

"Mr. Smith agrees to settle as Professor of English, Latin, Greek,
Hebrew, Chaldee, etc., in Dartmouth College, to teach which, and as
many of these and other such languages as he shall understand, as the
Trustees shall judge necessary and practicable for one man, and also
to read lectures on them, as often as the president, tutors, etc.,
with himself shall judge profitable for the Seminary. He also agrees,
while he can do it consistently with his office as professor, annually
to serve as tutor to a class of students in the College. In
consideration of which, Dr. Wheelock agrees to give him (the said Mr.
Smith) one hundred pounds L. My. annually as a salary to be paid one
half in money and the other half in money or in such necessary
articles for a family as wheat, Indian corn, rye, beef, pork, mutton,
butter, cheese, hay, pasturing, etc., as long as he shall continue
professor as aforesaid, and that he shall have these articles
delivered to him at the same price for which they were usually sold
before the commencement of the present war in America, viz.: that he
shall have wheat at 5s. per bushel, rye at 3s., Indian corn at 2s.
6d., fresh beef at 3d. per lb., salt beef at 4-1/2d., fresh pork at
4-1/2d., salt do. at 7d., fresh beef at 18s. per ct., do. pork at
25s., mutton at 3d. per lb., butter at 3d., cheese at 3d., bread at
2d., hay at 30s. per ton, pasturing per season for horse 30s., for cow
20s., and also to give him one acre of land near the College for a
building spot, a deed of which he promises to give him whenever he
shall request the same. Doctor Wheelock also agrees that Mr. Smith's
salary, viz.: one hundred pounds annually, shall not be diminished
when his business as professor shall be so great that it will render
it impracticable for him to serve as a tutor to a class in College;
and that Mr. Smith shall not be removed from his professorship except
the Trustees of Dartmouth College shall judge him incapacitated
therefor, and also that Mr. Smith's salary shall begin with the date
hereof. Doctor Wheelock also promises to lay this agreement before the
Trustees of Dartmouth College to be confirmed by them at their next
meeting. Mr. Smith also promises that whenever he shall have a
sufficient support from any fund established for the maintenance of a
professor of languages, he will give up the salary to which the
agreement entitles him.

"In testimony whereof, we have hereunto interchangeably affixed our
hands and seals this 9th day of November, 1777.

    "Eleazar Wheelock. [L. S.]
    "John Smith. [L. S.]

    "In presence of:
    "Sylvanus Ripley.
    "Joseph Mottey."



"July 3, 1816. The Governor and Council appointed Hon. Josiah
Bartlett, of Stratham, Hon. Joshua Darling, of Henniker, Hon. Wm. H.
Woodward, of Hanover, Matthew Harvey, Esq., of Hopkinton, and Levi
Woodbury, Esq., of Francestown, Trustees of Dartmouth University, and
on the following day added Henry Hubbard, Esq., of Charlestown, Dr.
Cyrus Perkins, of Hanover, Aaron Hutchinson, Esq., of Lebanon, and
Daniel M. Durell, Esq., of Dover. On the same days, Hon. John Langdon,
of Portsmouth, Hon. William Gray, of Boston, Mass., Gen. Henry
Dearborn, of Roxbury, Mass., Rev. Thomas Baldwin, of Boston, Hon.
Joseph Story, of Salem, Mass., Hon. W. Crowninshield, of Salem, Mass.,
Hon. Benjamin Greene, of Berwick, Me., Hon. Cyrus King, of Saco, Me.,
Elisha Ticknor, Esq., of Boston, Hon. Clifton Claggett, of Amherst,
Hon. Dudley Chase, of Randolph, Vt., Gen. Henry A. S. Dearborn, of
Boston, Hon. Jonathan H. Hubbard, of Windsor, Vt., Hon. George
Sullivan, of Exeter, James T. Austin, Esq., of Boston, Hon. Levi
Lincoln, Jr., of Worcester, Mass., Hon. Albion K. Parris, of Paris,
Me., Amos Twitchell, M.D., of Keene, Hon. William A. Griswold, of
Danville, Vt., Hon. Clement Storer, of Portsmouth, and Rev. David
Sutherland, of Bath, Overseers of Dartmouth University."



CONTENTS OF CULVER HALL.

Culver Hall has 1. The Hall Collection of Minerals, worth $5,000 by
estimate when presented to the College about forty years since. 2.
Minerals and rocks collected since, of no great value. 3. Minerals,
fossils, and a collection of 2,000 specimens from Maine deposited by
Professor Hitchcock. 4. A small zoological collection. 5. A large cast
of animals from Ward's University Series. 6. Antiquities. In the story
below is one room devoted to an excellent herbarium, another to the
natural objects obtained from the States of New Hampshire and Vermont.
These are largely those collected by the State Geologist, consisting
of 4,000-5,000 specimens illustrating the rocks. A wall of sections,
where specimens have been collected along thirteen lines east and
west through New Hampshire and Vermont; and colored geological
profiles behind, on the wall. A case of maps, ten in number, showing
such physical features of New Hampshire as these: geological
structure, surface geology, distribution of fauna, distribution of
trees, areas occupied by forests in 1874, hydrographic basins,
isothermal lines, amount of annual rainfall, distribution of soils and
the topography by means of contour lines. There is a large model or
relief map of the State on a table, scale one mile to the inch
horizontally, and 1,000 feet to the inch vertically, about fifteen
feet long, with the town boundaries, names of villages, rivers, ponds,
railroads, and mountains inserted in their proper places; other
collections are of the economic products of New Hampshire and Vermont,
their minerals and fossils. A large collection of birds and 1,000
species of insects are here also, presented by Professor H. Fairbanks.

The Geological recitation room has a large map of the United States in
it, and a case of drawers containing minerals, rocks, fossils, models
of crystals and other collections for use in giving instruction. The
laboratory is in two parts, one for general and the other for
analytical instruction. Agricultural College library in second story,
and several recitation rooms. Small working shop for Thayer Department
in the basement.



PICTURES IN THE HALLS OF DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.

    1. Rev. Eleazar Wheelock, D.D., Founder.
    2. Rev. Francis Brown, D.D.
    3. The Same.
    4. Rev. Bennet Tyler, D.D.
    5. Rev. Nathan Lord, D.D., LL. D.
    6. Ebenezer Adams, A. M., F. R. S.
    7. Rev. Roswell Shurtleff, D.D.
    8. Nathan Smith, M.D.
    9. Cyrus Perkins, M.D.
    10. Charles B. Haddock, LL. D.
    11. William Chamberlain, A. M.
    12. Dixi Crosby, M.D., LL. D.
    13. Albert Smith, M.D., LL. D.
    14. Rev. Benjamin Hale, D.D.
    15. Ira Young, A. M.
    16. Rev. David Peabody, A. M.
    17. Rev. Sam'l G. Brown, D.D., LL. D.
    18. Rev. Dan'l J. Noyes, D.D.
    19. Edwin D. Sanborn, LL. D.
    20. Stephen Chase, A. M.
    21. Edmund R. Peaslee, M.D., LL. D.
    22. John S. Woodman, A. M.
    23. Rev. John N. Putnam, A. M.
    24. Rev. Charles A. Aiken, D.D., Ph. D.
    25. Hon. James W. Patterson, LL. D.
    26. William Legge, Second Earl of Dartmouth.
    27. John Phillips, LL. D.
    28. Rev. Nathaniel Whitaker, D.D.
    29. Hon. Daniel Webster, LL. D.
    30. The Same (large picture).
    31. The Same (head and bust).
    32. Hon. Jeremiah Mason, LL. D.
    33. Hon. Jeremiah Smith, LL. D.
    34. Hon. Joseph Hopkinson.
    35. Amos Twitchell, M.D.
    36. Richard Fletcher, LL. D.
    37. Hon. Matthew Harvey.
    38. Hon. Charles Marsh.
    39. Hon. Rufus Choate, LL. D. (in action).
    40. The Same (head and bust).
    41. Richard B. Kimball, LL. D.
    42. Abiel Chandler.
    43. Samuel Appleton, A. M.
    44. Rev. Samson Occom.
    45. John Conant.
    46. Gen. Sylvanus Thayer, LL. D.
    47. Hon. John Quincy Adams, LL. D.
    48. A Knight in Armor.
    49. A Lady (a companion picture).
    50. Supposed to be a portrait of an Italian poet.
    51. An untouched photograph of the original of Stuart's Washington.
    52. An untouched photograph of Daniel Webster.
    53. A bust of Rev. Nathan Lord, D.D., LL. D.
    54. John Hubbard, A. M.
    55. Alpheus Crosby, A. M.
    56. Thomas R. Crosby, M.D.
    57. Pres. J. Wheelock.
    58. Rev. George T. Chapman, D.D.

The picture gallery also contains six slabs, with seven heroic
figures, from Nineveh, the gift of Sir Henry Rawlinson, obtained by
Rev. Austin H. Wright, D.D., of Ooroomiah, Persia.



In 1862 an inventory of the Philosophical Apparatus belonging to the
college was taken, and the transfer was made to the Appleton Fund; the
amount of this inventory was $2,352.75. While Rev. H. Fairbanks
occupied the chair of Natural Philosophy about $800 was paid out.
Prof. C. A. Young expended over $5,000 for apparatus while he had
charge of the department. Most of the apparatus is in good condition,
and its value is not far from $10,000.

For the Astronomical Department Prof. C. A. Young raised among the
Alumni and friends of the college, mostly in New England, over $5,000,
to put the Observatory in good condition.

Recent liberal donations to the College from the State, and from Hon.
E. W. Stoughton, of New York, have enabled the Faculty to put the
Medical Building in complete repair throughout. A suitable room for a
Pathological Museum has been finished, which is frequently receiving
specimens of diseased structure. The supply of plates, models, etc.,
is very ample, and is freely used in illustration of the lectures.



LEADING DONORS TO THE ACADEMICAL DEPARTMENT, SINCE THE DEATH OF THE
FOUNDER.

    Samuel Appleton, founder of the Appleton Professorship.
    George H. Bissell ($24,000), founder of Bissell Hall.
    Henry Bond, for the Library.
    Salmon P. Chase.
    David Culver ($25,000), founder of Culver Hall.
    William E. Dodge.
    Israel Evans, founder of the Evans Professorship.
    Richard Fletcher.
    James W. Grimes.
    Frederic Hall, founder of the Hall Professorship.
    Jeremiah Kingman, for Scholarships.
    Aaron Lawrence, founder of the Lawrence Professorship.
    Joel Parker, for the Library.
    John Phillips, founder of the Phillips Professorship.
    William Reed, founder of Reed Hall.
    George C. Shattuck, founder of the Shattuck Observatory.
    Isaac Spalding.
    Edward S. Tobey.
    John Wentworth.
    Henry Winkley ($25,000).
    Miss Mary C. Bryant, for the Library.
    Mrs. Betsey Whitehouse, for Scholarships.

The sums given by the above average perhaps about $15,000.

It is worthy of remark that a majority of these donations were made or
received during the administration of President Smith.



There are at present ten principal edifices erected for the use of the
various departments of the College:

Dartmouth Hall and the Medical College, erected during the
administration of Pres. John Wheelock; Thornton, Wentworth, and Reed
Halls, Shattuck Observatory, and the Chandler Building, erected or
completed during the administration of President Lord; Bissell,
Culver, and Conant Halls, erected during the administration of
President Smith.

During the latter period the President's chair received an endowment
of $30,000, and more than sixty scholarships an endowment of $1,000
each.

Recent bequests to the various departments from Tappan Wentworth, John
D. Willard, Richard Fletcher, John S. Woodman, and Joel Parker will
amount, _when available_, to over $700,000.




CHARTER OF DARTMOUTH COLLEGE.

GEORGE THE THIRD BY THE GRACE OF GOD, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND
IRELAND, KING, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, ETC.


    _To all to whom these presents shall come_, Greeting:

Whereas it hath been represented to our trusty and well-beloved John
Wentworth, Esq., Governor and Commander-in-Chief, in and over our
province of New Hampshire, in New England in America, that the Rev.
Eleazar Wheelock of Lebanon, in the colony of Connecticut, in New
England aforesaid, now Doctor in Divinity, did, on or about the year
of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and fifty-four, at his own
expense, on his own estate and plantation, set on foot an _Indian
Charity School_, and for several years, through the assistance of well
disposed persons in America, cloathed, maintained and educated a
number of the children of the _Indian natives_, with a view to their
carrying the gospel in their own language, and spreading the knowledge
of the great Redeemer among their savage tribes, and hath actually
employed a number of them as Missionaries and School Masters in the
wilderness for that purpose, and by the blessing of God upon the
endeavors of said Wheelock, the design became reputable among the
Indians, insomuch that a larger number desired the education of their
children in said School, and were also disposed to receive
missionaries and school masters in the wilderness, more than could be
supported by the charitable contributions in these American colonies.

Whereupon the said Eleazar Wheelock thought it expedient that
endeavors should be used to raise contributions from well disposed
persons in England, for the carrying on and extending said
undertaking, and for that purpose said Eleazar Wheelock requested the
Rev. Nathaniel Whitaker, now Doctor in Divinity, to go over to England
for that purpose, and sent over with him the Rev. Sampson Occom, an
Indian minister, who had been educated by the said Wheelock. And to
enable the said Whitaker, to the more successful performance of said
work on which he was sent, said Wheelock gave him a full power of
attorney, by which said Whitaker solicited those worthy and generous
contributors to the charity, viz. the Right Hon. William Earl of
Dartmouth, the Hon. Sir Sidney Stafford Smythe, Knight, one of the
Barons of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, John Thornton, of Clapham,
in the county of Surrey, Esq., Samuel Roffey, of Lincoln's Innfields,
in the county of Middlesex, Esq., Charles Hardey, of the parish of St.
Mary-le-bonne, in said county, Esq., Daniel West, of Christ's Church,
Spitalfields, in the county aforesaid, Esq., Samuel Savage, of the
same place, gentleman; Josiah Robarts, of the parish of St. Edmund the
King, Lombard Street, London, gentleman, and Robert Keen, of the
parish of St. Botolph, Aldgate, London, gentleman; to receive the
several sums of money which should be contributed, and to be trustees
to the contributors to such charity: which they cheerfully agreed to.

Whereupon, the said Whitaker did, by virtue of said power of attorney,
constitute and appoint the said Earl of Dartmouth, Sir Sidney Stafford
Smythe, John Thornton, Samuel Roffey, Charles Hardey, and Daniel West,
Esquires, and Samuel Savage, Josiah Robarts, and Robert Keen,
gentlemen, to be trustees of the money which had then been
contributed, and which should by his means be contributed for said
purpose; which trust they have accepted, as by their engrossed
declaration of the same under their hands and seals, well executed
fully appears, and the same hath also been ratified by a deed of
trust, well executed by said Wheelock.

And the said Wheelock further represents, that he has, by a power of
attorney, for many weighty reasons, given full power to the said
trustees, to fix upon and determine the place for said school, most
subservient to the great end in view. And to enable them
understandingly to give the preference, the said Wheelock has laid
before the said trustees the several offers which have been generously
made in the several governments in America to encourage and invite the
settlement of said school among them for their own private emolument,
and for the increase of learning in their respective places, as well
as for the furtherance of the general design in view.

And whereas a large number of the proprietors of lands in the western
part of this our province of New Hampshire, animated and excited
thereto by the generous example of his Excellency their Governor, and
by the liberal contributions of many noblemen and gentlemen in
England, and especially by the consideration that such a situation
would be as convenient as any for carrying on the great design among
the Indians; and also considering that without the least impediment to
the said design, the same school may be enlarged and improved to
promote learning among the English, and be a means to supply a great
number of churches and congregations which are likely soon to be
formed in that new country, with a learned and orthodox ministry, they
the said proprietors have promised large tracts of land for the uses
aforesaid, provided the school shall be settled in the western part of
our said province.

And they the said Right Hon. Hon. and worthy trustees before
mentioned, having maturely considered the reasons and arguments in
favor of the several places proposed, have given the preference to the
western part of our said province, lying on Connecticut river, as a
situation most convenient for said school.

And the said Wheelock has further represented a necessity of a legal
incorporation, in order to the safety and well being of said seminary,
and its being capable of the tenure and disposal of lands and bequests
for the use of the same. And the said Wheelock has also represented,
that for many weighty reasons, it will be expedient, at least in the
infancy of said institution, or till it can be accommodated in that
new country, and he and his friends be able to remove and settle by
and round about it, that the gentlemen whom he has already nominated
in his last will (which he has transmitted to the aforesaid gentlemen
of the trust in England) to be trustees in America, should be of the
corporation now proposed. And also as there are already large
collections for said school in the hands of the aforesaid gentlemen of
the trust in England, and all reason to believe from their signal
wisdom, piety, and zeal, to promote the Redeemer's cause (which has
already procured for them the utmost confidence of the kingdom) we may
expect they will appoint successors in time to come, who will be men
of the same spirit, whereby great good may and will accrue many ways
to the institution, and much be done by their example and influence to
encourage and facilitate the whole design in view; for which reasons
said Wheelock desires that the trustees aforesaid, may be vested with
all that power therein which can consist with their distance from the
same.

Know ye therefore that We, considering the premises and being willing
to encourage the laudable design of spreading Christian knowledge
among the savages of our American wilderness. And also that the best
means of education be established in our province of New Hampshire,
for the benefit of said province, do, of our special grace, certain
knowledge and mere motion, by and with the advice of our council for
said province, by these presents will, ordain, grant and constitute
that there be a college erected in our said province of New Hampshire,
by the name of _Dartmouth College_, for the education and instruction
of youths of the Indian tribes in this land, in reading, writing, and
all parts of learning, which shall appear necessary and expedient, for
civilizing and christianizing the children of pagans, as well as in
all liberal arts and sciences, and also of English youths, and any
others. And the trustees of said college may, and shall be, one body
corporate and politic in deed, action and name, and shall be called,
named, and distinguished by the name of _The Trustees of Dartmouth
College_.

And further, We have willed, given, granted, constituted and ordained,
and by this our present charter, of our special grace, certain
knowledge and mere motion, with the advice aforesaid, do for us, our
heirs and successors forever, will, give, grant, constitute, and
ordain, that there shall from henceforth and forever, be in the said
Dartmouth College, a body politic, consisting of Trustees of Dartmouth
College. And for the more full and perfect erection of said
Corporation and body politic, consisting of Trustees of Dartmouth
College, We, of our special grace, certain knowledge and mere motion,
do, by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, make, ordain,
constitute and appoint, our trusty and well beloved John Wentworth,
Esquire, Governor of our said province, and the governor of our said
province of New Hampshire, for the time being, and our trusty and well
beloved Theodore Atkinson, Esquire, now president of our council of
our said province, George Jaffrey and Daniel Pierce, Esqrs., both of
our said council, and Peter Gilman, Esq., now Speaker of our House of
Representatives in said province, and William Pitkin, Esq., one of the
Assistants of our colony of Connecticut, and our trusty and well
beloved Eleazar Wheelock, of Lebanon, Doctor in Divinity, Benjamin
Pomeroy, of Hebron, James Lockwood, of Weathersfield, Timothy Pitkin
and John Smalley, of Farmington, and William Patten of Hartford, all
of our said colony of Connecticut, ministers of the gospel (the whole
number of said trustees consisting, and hereafter forever to consist,
of twelve and no more) to be trustees of said Dartmouth College, in
this our province of New Hampshire.

And We do further, of our special grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, for us, our heirs and successors, will, give, grant and
appoint that the said trustees and their successors shall, forever
hereafter, be in deed, act and name, a body corporate and politic, and
that they the said body corporate and politic, shall be known and
distinguished in all deeds, grants, bargains, sales, writings,
evidences or otherwise however, and in all courts forever hereafter
plead and be impleaded by the name of _The Trustees of Dartmouth
College_. And that the said corporation by the name aforesaid, shall
be able and in law capable for the use of said Dartmouth College, to
have, get, acquire, purchase, receive, hold, possess and enjoy,
tenements, hereditaments, jurisdictions and franchises for themselves
and their successors, in fee simple or otherwise however, and to
purchase, receive, or build any house or houses, or any other
buildings, as they shall think needful and convenient for the use of
said Dartmouth College, and in such town in the western part of our
said province of New Hampshire, as shall, by said trustees, or the
major part of them be agreed upon, their said agreement to be
evidenced by an instrument in writing under their hands ascertaining
the same. And also to receive and dispose of any lands, goods,
chattels and other things of what nature soever, for the use
aforesaid. And also to have, accept and receive any rents, profits,
annuities, gifts, legacies, donations or bequests of any kind
whatsoever for the use aforesaid: so nevertheless, that the yearly
value of the premises do not exceed the sum of six thousand pounds
sterling. And therewith or otherwise to support and pay, as the said
trustees, or the major part of such of them as are regularly convened
for that purpose, shall agree; the president, tutors, and other
officers and ministers of said Dartmouth College, and also to pay all
such missionaries and school masters as shall be authorized, appointed
and employed by them for civilizing, Christianizing, and instructing
the Indian natives of this land, their several allowances, and also
their respective annual salaries or allowances, and also such
necessary and contingent charges, as from time to time shall arise and
accrue, relating to said Dartmouth College. And also to bargain, sell,
let or assign lands, tenements, hereditaments, goods or chattels, and
all other things whatsoever, by the name aforesaid, in as full and
ample a manner, to all intents and purposes as a natural person or
other body corporate or politic, is able to do by the laws of our
realm of Great Britain, or of said province of New Hampshire.

And further, of our special grace, certain knowledge and mere motion,
to the intent that our said corporation and body politic may answer
the end of their erection and constitution, and may have perpetual
succession and continuance forever, We do for us, our heirs and
successors, will, give and grant unto the said trustees of Dartmouth
College, and to their successors forever, that there shall be once a
year, and every year, a meeting of said trustees, held at said
Dartmouth College, at such time as by said trustees, or the major part
of them, at any legal meeting of said trustees shall be agreed on. The
first meeting to be called by the said Eleazar Wheelock, as soon as
conveniently may be, within one year next after the enrolment of these
our letters patent, at such time and place as he shall judge proper.
And the said trustees, or the major part of any seven or more of them,
shall then determine on the time for holding the annual meeting,
aforesaid, which may be altered as they shall hereafter find most
convenient.

And We do further ordain and direct, that the said Eleazar Wheelock
shall notify the time for holding the first meeting to be called as
aforesaid, by sending a letter to each of said trustees, and causing
an advertisement thereof to be printed in the "New Hampshire Gazette,"
and in some public newspaper printed in the colony of Connecticut. But
in case of the death or incapacity of said Wheelock, then such meeting
to be notified in manner as aforesaid, by the Governor or Commander in
Chief of our said province for the time being.

And We also, for us, our heirs and successors, hereby will, give and
grant unto the said trustees of Dartmouth College aforesaid, and to
their successors forever, that when any seven or more of the said
trustees or their successors are convened and met together for the
service of said Dartmouth College, at any time or times, such seven or
more shall be capable to act as fully and amply to all intents and
purposes, as if all the trustees of said College were personally
present; and all affairs and actions whatsoever, under the care of
said trustees, shall be determined by the majority or greater number
of those seven or more trustees, so convened and met together.

And we do further will, ordain and direct, that the president,
trustees, professors, and tutors, and all such officers as shall be
appointed for the public instruction and government of said College,
shall, before they undertake the execution of their respective offices
or trusts, or within one year after, take the oaths and subscribe the
declaration, provided by an act of Parliament, made in the first year
of King George the First, entitled, "An Act for the further security
of his Majesty's person and government, and the succession of the
Crown in the heirs of the late Princess Sophia being Protestants, and
for the extinguishing the hopes of the pretended Prince of Wales, and
his open and secret abettors," that is to say, the president before
the governor of our said province for the time being, or by one
empowered by him to that service, or by the president of our council,
and the trustees, professors, tutors and other officers before the
president of said college, for the time being, who is hereby empowered
to administer the same: an entry of all which shall be made in the
records of the said college.

And we do for us, our heirs and successors, hereby will, give and
grant full power and authority to the president, hereafter by us
named, and to his successors, or in case of his failure, to any three
or more of said trustees, to appoint other occasional meetings, from
time to time, of the said seven trustees, or any greater number of
them, to transact any matter or thing necessary to be done, before the
next annual meeting, and to order notice to the said seven or any
greater number of them, of the times and places of meetings for the
services aforesaid, by a letter under his or their hands of the same,
one month before said meeting. Provided always, that no standing rule
or order be made or altered, for the regulation of said college, or
any president or professor be chosen or displaced, or any other matter
or thing transacted or done, which shall continue in force after the
then next annual meeting of said trustees as aforesaid.

And further, We do by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, create, make, constitute, nominate and appoint our trusty
and well beloved Eleazar Wheelock, Doctor in Divinity, the founder of
said college, to be president of said Dartmouth College, and to have
the immediate care of the education and government of such students,
as shall be admitted into said Dartmouth College, for instruction and
education; and do will, give and grant to him in said office, full
power, authority and right to nominate, appoint, constitute and ordain
by his last will, such suitable and meet person or persons as he shall
choose, to succeed him in the presidency of said Dartmouth College;
and the person so appointed by his last will, to continue in office,
vested with all the powers, privileges, jurisdiction and authority of
a president of said Dartmouth College, that is to say, so long as
until such appointment, by said last will, shall be disapproved by the
trustees of said Dartmouth College.

And We do also for us, our heirs and successors, will, give and grant
to the said trustees of Dartmouth College, and to their successors
forever, or any seven or more of them, convened as aforesaid, that in
case of the ceasing or failure of a president, by any means
whatsoever, that the said trustees do elect, nominate and appoint such
qualified person, as they, or the major part of any seven or more of
them, convened for that purpose, as above directed, shall think fit,
to be president of said Dartmouth College, and to have the care of the
education and government of the students as aforesaid. And in case of
the ceasing of a president as aforesaid, the senior professor or
tutor, being one of the trustees, shall exercise the office of a
president, until the trustees shall make choice of, and appoint a
president as aforesaid; and such professor or tutor, or any three or
more of the trustees, shall immediately appoint a meeting of the body
of the trustees for the purpose aforesaid. And also, We do will, give
and grant to the said trustees, convened as aforesaid, that they
elect, nominate and appoint, so many tutors and professors, to assist
the president in the education and government of the students
belonging thereto as they the said trustees shall, from time to time,
and at any time think needful and serviceable to the interests of said
Dartmouth College. And also that the said trustees, or their
successors, or the major part of any seven or more of them, convened
for that purpose as above directed, shall at any time displace and
discharge from the service of said Dartmouth College, any or all such
officers, and elect others in their room and stead as before directed.
And also that the said trustees or their successors, or the major part
of any seven of them which shall convene for that purpose as above
directed, do from time to time as occasion shall require, elect,
constitute and appoint a treasurer, a clerk, an usher and a steward,
for the said Dartmouth College, and appoint to them, and each of them,
their respective businesses and trust; and displace and discharge from
the service of said college, such treasurer, clerk, usher or steward,
and elect others in their room and stead; which officers so elected as
before directed, We do for us, our heirs and successors, by these
presents constitute and establish in their respective offices, and do
give to each and every of them, full power and authority, to exercise
the same in said Dartmouth College, according to the directions and
during the pleasure of the said trustees, as fully and freely as any
like officers in any of our universities, colleges, or seminaries of
learning, in our realm of Great Britain, lawfully may or ought to do.

And also, that the said trustees or their successors, or the major
part of any seven or more of them, which shall convene for that
purpose, as is above directed, as often as one or more of said
trustees shall die, or by removal or otherwise shall, according to
their judgment become unfit or incapable to serve the interests of
said college, do, as soon as may be, after the death, removal, or such
unfitness or incapacity of such trustee or trustees, elect and appoint
such trustee or trustees as shall supply the place of him or them so
dying, or becoming incapable to serve the interests of said college;
and every trustee so elected and appointed, shall, by virtue of these
presents, and such election and appointment, be vested with all the
powers and privileges which any of the other trustees of said college
are hereby vested with. And We do further will, ordain and direct,
that from and after the expiration of two years from the enrolment of
these presents, such vacancy or vacancies shall be filled up unto the
complete number of _twelve Trustees_, eight of the aforesaid whole
number of the body of the trustees shall be resident and respectable
freeholders of our said Province of _New Hampshire_, and seven of said
whole number shall be laymen.

And We do further of our special grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, will, give and grant unto the said trustees of _Dartmouth
College_ that they and their successors, or the major part of any
seven of them which shall convene for that purpose as above directed,
may make, and they are hereby fully empowered from time to time fully
and lawfully to make and establish such ordinances, orders and laws,
as may tend to the good and wholesome government of the said
_College_, and all the students and the several officers and ministers
thereof, and to the public benefit of the same, not repugnant to the
laws and statutes of our realm of _Great Britain_ or of this our
province of _New Hampshire_ (and not excluding any person of any
religious denomination whatsoever from free and equal liberty and
advantage of education, or from any of the liberties and privileges or
immunities of the said _College_ on account of his or their
speculative sentiments in religion, and of his or their being of a
religious profession different from the said _Trustees_ of the said
_Dartmouth College_), and such ordinances, orders and laws which shall
as aforesaid be made, we do by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, ratify, allow of and confirm, as good and effectual to
oblige and bind all the students and the several officers and
ministers of said _College_. And We do hereby authorize and empower
the said _Trustees of Dartmouth College_, and the _president_, tutors
and professors by them elected and appointed as aforesaid, to put such
ordinances, laws and orders into execution to all intents and
purposes.

And We do further of our special grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, will, give and grant unto the said _Trustees_, of said
_Dartmouth College_, for the encouragement of learning and animating
the students of said _College_ to diligence and industry and a
laudable progress in literature, that they and their successors, or
the major part of any seven or more of them convened for that purpose
as above directed, do by the _President_ of said _College_ for the
time being, or any other deputed by them, give and grant any such
degree or degrees to any of the students of the said _College_, or any
others by them thought worthy thereof, as are usually granted in
either of the _Universities_ or any other _College_ in our realm of
_Great Britain_; and that they sign and seal diplomas or certificates
of such graduations to be kept by the graduates as perpetual memorials
and testimonies thereof.

And We do further of our special grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, for us, our heirs and successors, by these presents give and
grant unto the _Trustees_ of said _Dartmouth College_ and to their
successors, that they and their successors shall have a common seal
under which they may pass all diplomas or certificates of degrees, and
all other affairs of business of and concerning the said _College_,
which shall be engraven in such form and with such an inscription as
shall be devised by the said Trustees for the time being, or by the
major part of any seven or more of them convened for the service of
said _College_ as is above directed.

And We do further for us our heirs and successors, give and grant unto
the _Trustees_ of said _Dartmouth College_ and their successors, or to
the major part of any seven or more of them convened for the service
of said _College_, full power and authority from time to time to
nominate and appoint all other officers and ministers which they shall
think convenient and necessary for the service of the said _College_
not herein particularly named or mentioned; which officers and
ministers we do hereby impower to execute their offices and trusts as
fully and freely as any one of the officers and ministers in our
_Universities_ or _Colleges_ in our realm of _Great Britain_ lawfully
may or ought to do.

And further, that the generous contributors to the support of this
design of spreading the knowledge of the only true God and Saviour
among the _American_ savages, may from time to time be satisfied that
their liberations are faithfully disposed of in the best manner for
that purpose, and that others may in future time be encouraged in the
exercise of the like liberality for promoting the same pious design;
it shall be the duty of the _President_ of said _Dartmouth College_
and of his successors, annually or as often as he shall be thereunto
desired or requested, to transmit to the Right Hon., Hon. and worthy
Gentlemen of the trust in _England_ before mentioned, a faithful
account of the improvements and disbursements of the several sums he
shall receive from the donations and bequests made in _England_
through the hands of the said _Trustees_, and also advise them of the
general plans laid and prospects exhibited, as well as a faithful
account of all remarkable occurrences, in order if they shall think
expedient that they may be published. And this to continue so long as
they shall perpetuate their board of Trust, and there shall be any of
the _Indian_ natives remaining to be proper objects of that charity.

And lastly, our express will and pleasure is, and We do by these
presents for us our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the said
_Trustees_ of _Dartmouth College_ and to their successors forever,
that these our letters patent or the enrolment thereof in the
Secretary's office of our province of _New Hampshire_ aforesaid, shall
be good and effectual in law to all intents and purposes against us
our heirs and successors, without any other license, grant or
confirmation from us our heirs and successors hereafter by the said
_Trustees_ to be had and obtained, notwithstanding the not writing or
misrecital, not naming or misnaming the aforesaid offices, franchises,
privileges, immunities, or other the premises or any of them, and
notwithstanding a writ of _ad quod damnum_ hath not issued forth to
enquire of the premises or any of them before the ensealing hereof,
any statute, act, ordinance or proviso, or any other matter or thing
to the contrary notwithstanding.

To have and to hold, all and singular the privileges, advantages,
liberties, immunities, and all other the premises herein and hereby
granted and given, or which are meant, mentioned, or intended to be
herein and hereby given and granted unto them the said _Trustees_ of
_Dartmouth College_ and to their successors forever.



In Testimony whereof We have caused these our letters to be made
_patent_, and the public seal of our said province of _New Hampshire_
to be hereunto affixed.

Witness our trusty and well beloved John Wentworth, Esq., Governor and
Commander in Chief in and over our said Province, etc., this
thirteenth day of _December_, in the tenth year of our reign, and in
the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and sixty-nine.

    J. WENTWORTH.

    By his Excellency's command
    with the advice of Council.
    Theodore Atkinson, _Secretary_.

                [Locus   ]
                [Sigilli.]




INDEX.


Abbott, 276.

Accum, F., 272.

Adams, D., 405.

Adams, Ebenezer, 90, 112, 126, 235, 239, 241, 243, 244, 287, 291,
  295, 404.

Adams, Eliza, 291.

Adams, Ephraim, 241.

Adams, John, 77.

Adams, Joseph, 16, 17, 18.

Adams, J. O., 165, 166.

Adams, R. L., 241.

Aiken, C. A., 337.

Aiken, J., 394.

Aiken, S., 337, 370, 394.

Akerman, A. T., 401.

Albany Medical School, 359.

Alexander, A., 233.

Allen, D. H., 403.

Allen, E. A., 166.

Allen, H., 400.

Allen, S. C., 97, 400.

Allen, Thomas, 35.

Allen, Timothy, 20.

Allen, W., 72, 76.

Alvord, J. C., 401.

Amherst College, 247, 389, 402.

Amherst, J., 23.

Anderson, R., 277, 396, 397.

Andover Theological Seminary, 169, 249, 277, 287, 304, 319, 321, 330,
  389, 396.

Andral, 361.

Andrews, G. L., 378.

Antietam, 407.

Appleton, J., 119, 127, 169, 276, 396, 402, 405.

Appleton, S., 162, 391.

Arnold, L. H., 400.

Arnold, T., 206.

Atkinson, G. H., 403.

Atkinson, T., 51, 52.

Auburn Theological Seminary, 330, 331, 336.

Austin, 222.


Backus, C., 233, 245.

Backus, S., 401.

Badger, J., 310.

Bailey, K., 397.

Bailey, M., 403.

Bailey, R. W., 337, 403.

Baker, W. L., 407.

Bancroft, C. F. P., 404.

Bancroft, J. P., 406.

Bangor Theological Seminary, 397.

Bannister, 165.

Barber, J., 20.

Barker, F., 360.

Barnard, W. E., 403.

Barrett, J., 186, 401.

Barstow, J. W., 354, 363.

Barstow, Z. S., 174.

Bartlett, E., 345, 366.

Bartlett, L., 114, 400.

Bartlett, S. C., 186, 190, 337, 358, 405, 408.

Bartlett, W. H., 401.

Barton, B. S., 350.

Bates College, 402.

Baylies, N., 401.

Beattie, 380.

Bedel, 76.

Bell, J., 400.

Bell, L. V., 406.

Bell, S., 394, 400, 406.

Bell, S. N., 400.

Bellamy, J. S, 8, 89.

Bellevue Hospital Medical College, 359, 366.

Berkeley, G., 3, 4, 9.

Bermuda, College at, 3.

Bernard, 361.

Bernard, Sir F., 49.

Betton, S., 400.

Bickmore, A. S., 403.

Bigelow, A., 400.

Bigelow, J., 265.

Bigelow, T., 107.

Bingham, 220.

Bingham, A., 13.

Bingham, C., 338, 404, 405.

Birney, 399.

Bissell, C., 390.

Bissell, G. H., 390, 407.

Bissell, W. H., 390.

Blaisdell, J. J., 403.

Blanchard, J., 400.

Blois, 79.

Boardman, B., 20.

Boardman, H. E. J., 403.

Bond, H., 162, 337, 392, 405.

Bonney, B. W., 401.

Bouton, J. B., 405.

Bouton, N., 171, 172, 394.

Bowdoin College, 159, 276, 277, 278, 351, 358, 362, 366, 402.

Boyle, R., 2, 3, 4, 12.

Bradford, 53.

Bradford, E. P., 100.

Bradford, W., 8.

Brainerd, D., 12.

Brainerd, J., 12.

Brant, J., 29.

Breck, D., 400.

Brewer, F. B., 407.

Briggs, 166.

Brigham, E., 400.

Brigham, L., 305.

Brigham, L. F., 401.

Brigham, M., 305.

Brown, A., 403, 407.

Brown, A. H., 403, 406.

Brown, B., 117.

Brown, E. G., 120, 260, 262.

Brown, F., 100, 108, 112, 117, 119, 120, 121, 123, 124, 126, 127, 213,
  242, 338, 408.

Brown, J., 337, 397.

Brown, J. P., 406.

Brown, P. K., 117.

Brown, S. G., 120, 186, 238, 248, 307, 308, 313, 315, 316, 321, 336.

Brown University, 212.

Brunson, D., 400.

Buffum, J., 400.

Bullen, H. L., 403.

Bull Run, 407.

Burleigh, W., 387.

Burlingame, 184.

Burnham, A., 392, 397.

Burr, A., 8.

Burroughs, E., 9, 212.

Burton, A., 397, 405.

Bush, G., 403, 405.

Butler, C., 338, 404.

Byles, M., 20.

Byrd, W., 3.


Caghnawaga Chiefs, 67.

Caldwell, H. M., 407.

California, College of, 403.

Calvin, J., 120.

Carroll, C. W., 407.

Carter, E., 257, 404.

Carter, N. H., 257, 258, 405.

Carteret, 3.

Casey, 365.

Centennial Celebration, 183.

Chamberlain, J. E., 256.

Chamberlain, S. L. G., 260, 262, 326.

Chamberlain, W., 256, 257, 260, 261, 262, 263, 280, 283, 326.

Chamberlain, W. M., 360.

Chamberlin, G. E., 407.

Chandler, 30.

Chandler, A., 367, 369, 381, 382.

Chapman, 350.

Chapman, G. T., 189, 397, 403.

Chase, B. P., 298.

Chase, C. C., 285.

Chase, D., 400.

Chase, E., 349.

Chase, J., 349.

Chase, M. C., 298.

Chase, P., 397, 402.

Chase, Sarah, 349.

Chase, Stephen, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 326, 327, 371.

Chase, S. P., 139, 183, 186, 392, 399.

Chenery, 6.

Cheney, O. B., 402.

Chesley, M. A., 329.

Chesley, S. P., 329.

Chicago Theological Seminary, 190.

Chipman, D., 400.

Chittenden, M., 400.

Choate, R., 117, 123, 185, 193, 240, 287, 337, 399, 405.

Church, J. H., 393.

Churchill, C. H., 403.

Clap, T., 8, 41, 58, 88.

Clare Hall, 6.

Clark, A., 31, 34.

Clark, Daniel, 186, 400.

Clark, Dorus, 247.

Clark, E. W., 397.

Clarke, A. W., 403.

Clarke, I. L., 407.

Clay, H., 400.

Cleaveland, C. D., 403, 405.

Cleaveland, E., 35, 37, 38, 217.

Cleaveland, M., 217.

Clyde, 79, 290.

Cogswell, F., 407.

Cogswell, J., 309.

Cogswell, J. B., 309.

Cogswell, J. G., 265.

Cogswell, W., 298, 309, 311, 312, 313, 315.

Coke, 116.

Colby, J. K., 404.

Cold Harbor, 407.

Collar, 289.

Collins, 222.

Collins' Peerage, 380.

Colman, 4.

Colman, H., 405, 406.

Columbia, 31.

Columbia College, 281.

Columbian College, 376.

Comings, G. P., 403.

Commerce, Journal of, 260.

Conant, J., 382, 383.

Conner, P. S., 406.

Converse, A., 405.

Cook, A. J., 404.

Cooke, G., 403.

Cooper, Sir A., 352.

Cotton, 1.

Cotton, W., 17, 18.

Craft, J., 6.

Crane, C., 337.

Crosby, 406.

Crosby, Alpheus, 141, 182, 276, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289,
  290, 316, 317, 405.

Crosby, Asa, 283, 354.

Crosby, A. B., 339, 345, 349, 363, 364, 366.

Crosby, A. G. J. C., 288.

Crosby, A. R., 283.

Crosby, D., 339, 345, 354, 355, 356, 357, 363, 364.

Crosby, M. J. M., 363.

Crosby, N., 182, 258, 388, 405.

Crosby, T. R., 375.

Culver, D., 374, 390, 391.

Currier, A. N., 403.

Curtis, A., 167, 405.

Cushing, J. P., 402.

Cushman, 43.

Cutler, A. C. G. J., 288.

Cutler, A. G. J., 288.

Cutler, J., 288.

Cutting, J., 401.


Daggett, 58.

Dana, C. B., 403.

Dana, D., 126, 127, 129, 131, 132, 310, 408.

Dana, E. C., 132.

Dana, James F., 256, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 278, 279, 344, 345.

Dana, Jonathan F., 271.

Dana, Joseph, 403.

Dana, Judah, 338, 400.

Dana, L., 271.

Dana, L. G., 271.

Dana, R., 271.

Dana, S., 271.

Dana, S. E., 132.

Dana, S. L., 271.

Dartmouth Controversy, 88.

Dartmouth, Earl of, 4, 23, 25, 27, 28, 31, 39, 41, 42, 47, 48, 72,
  78, 380, 381.

Dartmouth Hall, Erection of, 80.

Davenport, J., 71.

Davis, 272.

Davis, C. A., 407.

Davis, E., 247, 248.

Davis, M., 163, 164.

Deaf Mutes, College for, 402.

Dean, J., 57, 219, 257, 258, 337, 403.

De Berdt, 41.

Dedham, 6, 7, 55, 310, 313.

Delamater, J., 345, 366.

De Lancey, W. H., 282.

Delano, S., 394.

Dickinson, A., 397.

Dickinson, S. F., 402.

Dimond, D., 403.

Dimond, E. W., 374, 375.

Dingley, N., 401.

Dinsmoor, S., 400, 401.

Dixwell, J. J., 368.

Doddridge, P., 253.

Doe, C., 401.

Dorsey, 350.

Douglass, 283.

Dover Town Records, 15.

Downer, J., 401.

Draper, G., 403.

Dresden, 167.

Drury College, 403.

Drury, P., 246.

Drury, T., 246.

Dudley, T., 6.

Dumas, 77.

Duncan, W. H., 167, 183, 186, 392.

Dunham, J., 82, 338.

Dunning, B., 20.

Durell, D. M., 400.

Durkee, S., 405.

Duvall, 114.

Dyer, E., 41.

Dyke, H. M., 407.


Eastman, I. A., 171, 400.

Eastman, T., 213.

East Tennessee, College of, 403.

East Windsor Theological Seminary, 138, 397.

Eaton, J., 404.

Eaton, S., 6.

Edinburgh, University of, 35.

Edwards, J., 5, 10, 75.

Edwards, T. M., 400, 407.

Eells, N., 20.

Eliot, 1.

Eliot, John, 7, 263.

Ellis, J. M., 403.

Emerson, C. F., 337.

Emerson, J. S., 338, 397.

Emery, N., 401.

Emmet, T. A., 358, 360.

Emmons, N., 397.

Erskine, 41, 57, 71.

Estabrook, H., 20.

Estabrook, J., 403.

Evans, I., 82, 392.

Evans, W. M., 399.

Everett, Alexander, 265.

Everett, Augustus, 403.

Everett, D., 405.

Everett, E., 403.

Exeter Donation, 15.


Fairbanks, H., 337.

Fairfield Medical College, 351.

Farnsworth, B. F., 403.

Farrar, C. S., 403.

Farrar, T., 108, 394.

Fellows, S., 407.

Felt, J. B., 405.

Fessenden, T. G., 405, 407.

Field, H. M., 366.

Field, W. A., 400.

Fillmore, M., 253.

First effort to found a College in America, 2.

Fish, J., 20.

Fisk, M. H., 403.

Fiske, J., 397.

Fiske, M., 337.

Fiske, N. W., 337, 397, 402, 405.

Fitch, 41, 245.

Fitch, J., 7.

Flanders, B. F., 400.

Fletcher, I., 400.

Fletcher, Richard, 189, 386, 387, 393, 394, 400.

Fletcher, Robert, 376, 377.

Fletcher, S., 370, 394.

Flint, 360.

Fogg, G. G., 400, 401.

Folsom, N. S., 136, 138, 253, 260, 330, 403, 405.

Forbes, 380.

Forsythe, 79.

Foster, 20.

Foster, A., 397.

Foster, C., 407.

Foster, C. L., 407.

Foster, D., 407.

Foster, S., 403.

Fowler, D., 14.

Fowler, Jacob, 338.

Fowler, Joseph, 20.

Fox, J., 258.

Franklin, B., 58, 77.

Fredericksburg, 407.

Freeman, E., 53.

Freeman, J., 53, 394.

Frink, A., 241.

Frost, C. P., 366.

Frost, E. B., 407.

Fuller, 6.

Fuller, H. T., 404.

Furber, D. L., 303, 322.


Gale, N., 132.

Gallup, J. A., 406.

Gardiner, R. H., 278.

Gates, 76.

Geneva College, 281, 282, 283.

George II., 3.

George III., 380.

Gerrish, A., 387.

Gifford, A., 14, 71.

Gilbert, Samuel, 50.

Gilbert, Sylvester, 400.

Gillett, E., 397.

Gilman, Joseph, 260.

Gilman, Josiah, 262.

Gilman, N., 262.

Gilman, P., 22, 51.

Gilman, T., 120.

Gilmanton Theological Seminary, 311, 314.

Gladstone, 193, 206.

Goddard, C., 400.

Godding, W. W., 406.

Gooch, D. W., 400.

Goodell, W., 397.

Goodhue, A. B., 403.

Goodrich, C. B., 401.

Goodwin, I., 303.

Goodwin, J. N., 400.

Goodwin S. T., 303.

Gookin, N., 17, 18.

Gorham, 271.

Grant, U. S., 407.

Graves, M., 20.

Graves, R., 343, 402.

Gray, S., 59.

Greeley, A., 120.

Greenleaf, B., 404, 405.

Gregg, J., 330, 336, 337, 403.

Grennell, G., 400.

Griffith, R., 78.

Grimes, J. W., 400.

Griswold, 280.

Grosvenor, C. P., 403.

Grover, J., 57.

Gurley, E., 57.


Haddock, A. W., 248.

Haddock, C. B., 117, 120, 140, 241, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253,
  254, 255, 269, 329, 401, 405.

Haddock, W. T., 248.

Hadley, J., 403, 406.

Hagar, 287.

Hale, B., 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 283, 345.

Hale, T., 276.

Halifax, Lord, 41.

Hall, F., 337, 392, 403.

Hamilton College, 73, 119, 120, 186.

Hampden Sidney College, 402.

Handel Society, 318.

Hanover, Press in, 163.

Hardy, 14.

Hardy, C., 39.

Harris, W., 397.

Hartford Theological Seminary, 397.

Harvard College, 15, 48, 50, 73, 250, 263, 271, 272, 275, 316, 381,
  386, 389, 390, 392, 393, 402.

Harvey, M., 189, 400.

Harwood, T., 12.

Haskell, F. A., 407.

Haven, N. A., 100.

Haven, S., 17, 18, 20.

Hayes, F. B., 368.

Hayes, J. L., 405.

Hayes, J. M., 403.

Hayes, W. A., 338, 406.

Hazen, H. A., 167, 405.

Heath, R. R., 401.

Hebron, 8, 12, 20, 31.

Henry, C. S., 403, 404.

Hibbard, A., 57.

Hibbard, H., 400.

Hill, I., 142.

Hinckley, O. S., 337, 403.

Hitchcock, C. H., 337.

Hitchcock, H. O., 406.

Hobart College, 282.

Hoit, 354.

Hoit, B., 354.

Hollenbush, C. G., 407.

Holmes, J., 113.

Holmes, O. W., 345, 366.

Holyoke, 266.

Hood, J. E., 165, 166, 167.

Hooker, T., 7, 75.

Hopkins, E., 407.

Hopkins, S., 405.

Hopkinson, J., 113.

Hovey, A., 398, 405.

Hovey, C. E., 404.

Hovey, E. O., 403.

How, L. B., 345, 366.

Howard, 382.

Howard, T., 12.

Howe, 350.

Howe, G., 140, 336.

Hubbard, H., 400.

Hubbard, H. J., 225.

Hubbard, J., 225, 226, 228, 241, 401, 404.

Hubbard, O. P., 336, 345, 366, 378.

Hubbard, S., 393.

Hubbard, W., 263.

Hudnut, J. O., 403.

Hulbert, C. B., 402.

Hunt, J., 400.

Huntington, C., 7.

Huntington, D., 57.

Huntington Family Memoir, 7.

Huntington, J., 76.

Huntington, M., 7.

Huntington, R., 7.

Hurd, S., 403.

Hutchins, A. E., 407.

Hutchinson, 220.

Hyde, A., 397, 402.


Illinois College, 403.


Jackson, L., 230, 231.

Jackson, W., 397, 402.

Jacob, S., 394.

Jaffrey, G., 51.

James, 350.

Jarvis, R., 405.

Jefferson Medical College, 366.

Jefferson, T., 101.

Jewett, D., 20.

Jewett, L., 400.

Jewett, M. P., 403.

Johnson, D., 71.

Johnson, O., 316, 338, 404.

Johnson, Sir W., 29, 30, 219.

Joy, J. F., 402, 407.

Jubilee College, 402.

Judson, 222.


Keen, R., 39, 42, 70, 222.

Kelly, J., 370.

Kendall, A., 401, 402.

Kendall, T., 57.

Kendrick, J., 403.

Kendrick, M. T., 362.

Kendrick, S., 362.

Kent, G., 186.

Kenyon College, 402.

Kimball, G., 406.

Kimball, R., 255.

Kimball, R. B., 186, 405.

King, C., 278.

King, M. C., 278.

Kingman, Jeremiah, 392.

Kingman, Joseph, 290.

Kingman, M., 290.

Kirkland, J. T., 73.

Kirkland, S., 72, 73.

Kirkland, D., 20.

Kirkland, S., 55.

Kittredge, G. W., 387.

Knapp, S. L., 405.

Knox, 65.


Labaree, B., 402.

Laennec, 361.

Lancaster, D., 257, 260, 309, 312.

Landaff, 36, 70, 81, 83, 116.

Lang, R., 255.

Lang, S. S., 255.

Langdon, S., 17, 18, 20, 43, 65.

Lansing, A. J., 35.

Lawrence, A., 392.

Lebanon, Conn., 6, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 18, 25, 31, 35, 43, 53, 59,
  71, 76, 220, 223.

Ledyard, 45.

Leeds, S. P., 324.

Library, Origin of, 70.

Lincoln, A., 202.

Lincoln, N. S., 403, 406.

Little, A., 276.

Little, E., 20.

Little, J., 276.

Little, M., 276.

Lockwood, J., 52.

Long, C., 228, 316, 329, 330, 331, 336, 404.

Long Island Medical College, 366.

Long, M. C., 329.

Long, S., 329.

Lord, E. K. L., 176.

Lord, J., 168, 405.

Lord, J. K., 337, 397.

Lord, M. P., 168.

Lord, N., 131, 143, 157, 167, 168, 169, 170, 175, 176, 256, 293, 298,
  306, 308, 329, 331, 369, 391, 408.

Lothian, Marquis of, 14.

Lothrop, E., 20.

Louis, 347, 361.

Lowe, A. T., 348.

Lundy's Lane, 407.

Luzerne, Chevalier de, 77.

Lyman, J., 188.

Lyman, J. S., 400.

Lyman, P., 41.

Lyon, A., 400.


Macclion, 78.

Mack, A., 337, 404.

Malgaigne, 361.

Mann, T., 165.

March, C., 22.

Marsh, 9.

Marsh, C., 90, 96, 107, 392, 400.

Marsh, G. P., 400, 401, 405.

Marsh, J., 287, 337, 402, 404.

Marsh, L., 403.

Marshall, J., 113, 122, 189, 195.

Marston, G., 400.

Mason, 9.

Mason, D., 217.

Mason, J., 96, 114, 124, 125, 392, 400.

Mason, S., 217.

Mather, A., 37.

Mattoon, E., 400, 407.

Mayhew, 1.

McClure, D., 8, 58, 65, 221.

McDowell, E., 359.

McFarland, A., 105, 106, 107, 337, 394, 397.

McIntire, R., 400.

McKeen, J., 169, 402.

Meadville Theological Seminary, 136.

Medfield, 6.

Mendon, 6.

Merrill, T. A., 337, 397, 402.

Merton College, 203.

Metcalf, K., 403.

Metcalf, R., 401.

Miami Medical College, 351.

Michie, P. S., 378.

Michigan, University of, 366.

Middlebury College, 133, 241, 351, 402.

Miller, 407.

Miller, O., 401.

Mills, C., 403.

Milton, J., 6.

Minot, B., 241.

Monthly Anthology, 223.

Moody, J., 17, 20.

Moody, M. J., 357.

Moody, Samuel, 211, 214.

Moody, Stephen, 357.

Moore, J., 244.

Moore, M. S., 244.

Moore, Z. S., 90, 241, 244, 246, 247, 248, 256, 402.

More, J., 6, 12, 13, 40.

Morland, W. W., 405.

Morris, G., 40.

Morris, G. S., 403.

Morrison, N. J., 403.

Morse, 6.

Morse, H. B., 306.

Morse, S. F. B., 273, 274, 275.

Morton, 304.

Moseley, S., 12, 20.

Murch, E., 403.

Murch, J., 54.

Mussey, J., 349.

Mussey, R. D., 127, 266, 267, 272, 278, 339, 343, 344, 345, 349, 350,
  351, 352, 353, 354, 356, 406.


Narragansett Fort, 13.

Nason, B., 387.

Nelson, Jeremiah, 400.

Nelson, John, 308, 309.

New Jersey, College of, 13, 23.

Newman, M., 404.

Newton, I., 58.

New York Medical College, 358.

New York, University of, 273, 366.

Nicholl, Sir C. G., 380.

Nicholl, F. C., 380.

Niebuhr, 199, 206, 207.

Niles, J. B., 403.

Niles, N., 89, 394.

Norris, M., 400.

Northern Academy, Formation of Society of, 161, 311.

Norton, J., 6, 20.

Noyes, D. J., 336.

Noyes, E. F., 401.

Noyes, John, 337, 400.

Noyes, Josiah, 337, 403, 406.

Nutting, W., 404.


Oakes, V. B., 407.

Occom, S., 12, 13, 14, 23, 26, 27, 42.

Odlin, W., 17.

Ohio, Medical College of, 268, 351.

Olcott, B., 89.

Olcott, Mills, 393.

Oliver, B. L., 265, 266.

Oliver, D., 87, 256, 263, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 272, 278, 279, 281,
  345, 350.

Oliver, F. E., 405.

Oliver, H. K., 258.

Oliver, T., 263.

Oliver, T. F., 263.

Orange, Prince of, 78.

Orcutt, H., 404.

Ordronaux, J., 403, 406.

Orr, B., 400.

Osgood, 350.

Osgood, H., 350.


Pacific University, 403.

Packard, 277.

Packard, T., 397.

Packard, W. A., 337.

Paine, E., 105, 118, 392.

Palermo, Academy of, 270.

Palfrey, J. C., 378.

Palmer, B. R., 406.

Pancoast, 366.

Parish, E., 8, 225.

Park, J., 404, 405.

Parker, E., 162, 369, 384, 393.

Parker, E. H., 405.

Parker, H. E., 337, 365.

Parker, I., 162.

Parker, I. A., 403.

Parker, J., 162, 369, 370, 384, 385, 386, 394, 400.

Parker, W., 46.

Parkhurst, J. L., 287.

Parks, B., 404.

Parris, A. K., 189, 400.

Parsons, S., 18.

Parsons, U., 345, 366.

Patten, W., 10, 217.

Patterson, J. W., 186, 328, 336, 371, 400.

Payson, E., 241.

Payson, M. P., 393.

Payson, S., 394.

Peabody, D., 298, 304, 306, 307, 308, 330, 331.

Peabody, J., 304.

Peabody, L. B., 304.

Peabody, S., 310.

Peaslee, C. H., 400.

Peaslee, E. R., 339, 345, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 405, 406.

Peck, 365.

Pendexter, E., 329.

Pendexter, M. A., 329.

Pennsylvania, University of, 266, 268, 350.

Perkins, A. C., 404.

Perkins, C., 272, 343, 344, 404, 406.

Perley, I., 186, 337, 401.

Perry, J., 338.

Peters, A., 405, 407.

Phelps, A., 45, 46.

Phelps, E. E., 345, 366.

Philbrick, J. D., 404.

Phillips, J., 71, 81, 392.

Philotechnic Society, Formation of, 182.

Physic, 266, 350, 360.

Physicians and Surgeons, College of, 273, 364.

Pickering, J., 267.

Pierce, D., 51.

Pierce, P., 404.

Pike, J., 16, 17, 18.

Pinneo, B., 397.

Pinneo, J., 31, 34.

Pitkin, T., 52.

Pitkin, W., 52.

Plumer, W., 100, 101.

Pomeroy, B., 6, 12, 20, 30, 50, 51.

Poor, D., 397.

Pope, A., 235.

Pope, J., 235.

Porter, 222.

Porter, A. L., 406.

Porter, E., 132, 396, 405.

Portsmouth, Annals of, 15.

Potter, 222.

Powers, P., 20.

Preble, W. P., 265.

Prentiss, S., 394.

Prescott, B. F., 401.

Preston, J., 228.

Preston, R., 226.

Price, 79.

Prince, 53.

Proctor, J. C., 337.

Pulling, E., 267.

Pulling, M. R., 267.

Pumpshire, J., 12.

Punchard, G., 136, 405.

Putnam, A. B. F., 316.

Putnam, D., 403.

Putnam, I. W., 393.

Putnam, J. N., 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 326.

Putnam, S., 316.

Pynchon, W., 263.


Quimby, E. T., 337, 375.

Quimby, G. W., 407.

Quimby, J. H., 403.

Quint, A. H., 405.


Rand, A., 405.

Rawden, Lord, 79.

Redfield, I. F., 401, 405.

Redfield, T. P., 401.

Reed, E. C., 400.

Reed Hall, Erection of, 161.

Reed, W., 388, 394.

Rice, J. H., 304.

Richards, C. S., 404.

Richards, J. D. F., 403.

Richardson, D. F., 403.

Richardson, J., 400.

Richardson, W. M., 113.

Ripley, E. W., 401, 407.

Ripley, J., 217.

Ripley, S., 76, 211, 217, 218, 219, 220, 222, 233.

Roberts, J., 39.

Robinson, J., 271.

Roby, J., 345, 366.

Rockwell, A., 336.

Rockwell, R. E., 336.

Roffey, S., 39.

Rogers, J., 18, 22.

Rogers, L., 263.

Rogers, N. P., 405.

Root, E., 400.

Roots, P. P., 397.

Rose, 78.

Rosetter, A., 20.

Rosetter, E., 20.

Ruggles, E. R., 367, 371.

Rush, B., 266, 350, 353, 354.

Rush Medical College, 362.

Ruter, M., 120.


Salter, R., 20.

Sanborn, E. D., 163, 336, 405.

Sanborn, J. S., 401.

Sandys, Sir E., 2, 3.

Sargent, J. E., 401.

Savage, S., 14, 39, 70.

Sawyer, 211.

Sawyer, A. W., 403.

Schuyler, P., 31.

Scott, C. W., 70.

Scott, T., 381.

Scott, W., 407.

Scribner, J. W., 404.

Sedgwick, 365.

Sergeant, J., 4, 5, 11.

Sewall, M., 350.

Shattuck, B., 389.

Shattuck, G. C., 162, 389, 406.

Shattuck, W., 389.

Shaw, 393.

Shaw, L. S., 407.

Shepard, M., 397.

Shepard, T., 6.

Shepherd, F., 403.

Shepley, E., 401.

Shepley, G. F., 401.

Sherburne, H., 22.

Sherburne, J. S., 401, 407.

Sherman, W. T., 186, 189, 407.

Shillaber, B. P., 165.

Shirley, J., 258.

Shropshire, 6.

Shurtleff, A. P., 134.

Shurtleff, H. C., 228.

Shurtleff, R., 89, 90, 112, 133, 135, 140, 162, 213, 225, 228, 229,
  230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 336.

Shurtleff, W., 228.

Silliman's Journal, 272.

Simmons, G. A., 401.

Sinclair, J. E., 404.

Sketches of the History of Dartmouth College and Moor's Charity School,
  76, 90, 94, 95, 96.

Smalley, 9.

Smalley, J., 52, 73.

Smith, A., 339, 345, 362, 363.

Smith, A. D., 135, 136, 177, 182, 189, 377, 390, 408.

Smith, C. J., 24.

Smith, E., 397.

Smith, E. P., 211.

Smith, Jeremiah, 114.

Smith, Jesse, 406.

Smith, John, 27, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 223, 233, 397.

Smith, Joseph, 211.

Smith, L. A., 406.

Smith, M. G., 366.

Smith, N., 339, 340, 341, 342, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350.

Smith, N. R., 348.

Smith, S. A. A., 189.

Smith, W., 40, 41, 42.

Smith, W. R., 366.

Smythe, S. S., 39.

Snell, T., 246.

Social Friends, Formation of Society of, 85.

Souther, S., 407.

Spaulding, L., 397.

Spear, C., 163, 164.

Spooner, A., 167.

Spooner, J. P., 167.

Spotswood, 78.

Sprague's Annals, 72, 117, 211, 244, 303, 309, 398.

Sprague, P., 401.

Sprague, Z., 222.

Spring, 277.

Stacey, 67.

Standish, M., 8.

Stanley, R. C., 403.

Stanwix Fort, 37.

Stark, J., 76.

St. Clair, 166.

Stearns, F., 363.

Steele, B. H., 401.

Stevens, G., 286.

Stevens, S., 30.

Stevens, T., 398.

Stiles, E., 58, 88.

St. Mary's College, 268.

Stone, 365.

Stone, S., 6.

Storrs, J., 53.

Storrs, S., 53.

Story, D., 397, 404.

Story, J., 195, 264, 265, 385, 386.

Stoughton, E. W., 392.

Stowe, C. E., 10, 243, 283, 336.

Straghn, 78.

Strong, Joanna, 313.

Strong, Jonathan, 313, 397.

Strong, N., 58.

Sturtevant, J. M., 402.

Suhm, C., 99.

Sullivan, 80, 114.

Sullivan, G., 394.

Sumner, C., 385.

Swift, Dean, 3.


Taggart, S., 401.

Tarbell, 67.

Taylor, S. H., 186, 337, 404.

Taylor, T., 218.

Temple, D., 397.

Tenney, C. J., 397.

Tenney, S., 284.

Thayer, S., 182, 376, 377, 383, 384, 407.

Thayer, T., 316, 324.

Thomas, 360.

Thomas, I., 140.

Thompson, C. O., 404.

Thompson, J., 352.

Thompson, T. W., 105, 106, 107, 394.

Thornton Hall, Erection of, 256.

Thornton, J., 39, 78, 381.

Throop, B., 20.

Thurston, 165.

Ticknor, 9.

Ticknor, E., 338, 404.

Ticknor, G., 402, 405.

Tisdale, 9.

Tisdale, N., 60.

Torrey, J., 249, 253, 402, 405.

Townsend, L. T., 398, 405.

Tracy, C., 403.

Tracy, E. C., 337, 405.

Tracy, J., 405.

Treat, 1.

Trumbull, 9.

Trumbull, B., 9, 73, 337.

Tuck, A., 170, 171, 172, 401.

Twitchell, A., 362, 406.

Tyler, B., 126, 132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142,
  168, 254, 260, 393, 395, 408.

Tyler, E. S., 142.

Tyler, J. E., 133, 135, 136, 406.

Tyler, W. S., 402.


Uncas, I., 13.

Union Theological Seminary, 304.

United Fraternity, Formation of Society of, 85.

Upham, J. B., 186, 405.

Upham, T. C., 402, 404.


Varney, J. R., 337.

Velpeau, 361.

Vergennes, Count de, 77.

Vermont Medical College, 362.

Vermont, University of, 366, 393, 402.

Vindication by Trustees, 94.

Virginia, Stith's History of, 2.

Virginia, University of, 273.

Vose, J., 117, 404.


Wabash College, 403.

Wainwright, 275.

Waldron, E. Q. S., 403.

Waldron, T. W., 22.

Walker, C. A., 406.

Walker, J., 384.

Washburn, P. T., 401.

Washington, G., 77, 122, 354, 392.

Weare, M., 22.

Webber, M., 272.

Webber, S., 272.

Webster, D., 113, 114, 124, 163, 164, 185, 189, 202, 248, 254, 258,
  386, 393, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401.

Webster, Ebenezer, 80.

Webster, Ezekiel, 138, 248, 393, 400.

Webster, Josiah, 310.

Webster, J. C., 403.

Webster, J. D., 407.

Wellman, M., 13.

Wentworth, B., 16, 22, 29.

Wentworth Hall, Erection of, 256.

Wentworth, I., 387.

Wentworth, J., 22, 28, 35, 38, 39, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 51, 63, 65, 70,
  79, 81, 184, 211, 218, 380, 387, 392, 401.

Wentworth, M. H., 27.

Wentworth, P., 78.

Wentworth, T., 387, 388.

West, D., 39.

Western Reserve College, 330, 331.

Weston, N., 189, 401.

West Point Military Academy, 273, 378, 383, 407.

West Point Military Academy, Boynton's History of, 383.

Wheeler, J., 393, 402.

Wheelock, 222.

Wheelock, A., 220.

Wheelock, E., 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26,
  27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 35, 36, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 49, 51,
  52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72,
  73, 74, 75, 83, 115, 116, 209, 212, 217, 219, 220, 224, 395, 408.

Wheelock, J., 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 88, 89, 94, 96, 97, 99, 100,
  116, 118, 214, 233, 392, 408.

Wheelock, M., 224.

Wheelock, Memoirs of, 8, 10, 68, 84, 214, 219, 223.

Wheelock, M. B., 71.

Wheelock, M. S., 79, 99.

Wheelock, Ralph, 6, 7, 35, 337.

Wheelock, Rebecca, 6.

Wheelock, S. D. M., 71.

Wheelock, Vt., 80.

Whitaker, N., 20, 23, 26, 27, 35, 42, 45, 221.

White, C., 403.

White, D. A., 100.

White, J. H., 387.

White, P., 401.

White, S., 20.

White, W., 337.

Whitefield, G., 25, 26, 27, 30, 56, 222.

Whitehouse, B., 392.

Whiting, 36.

Whiting, S., 8.

Wight, J., 20.

Wilberforce, W., 381.

Wilcox, L., 401.

Wilde, S. S., 400.

Wilderness, 407.

Willard, 30.

Willard, C. W., 401.

Willard, J. D., 337, 392.

Willey, S. H., 403.

William and Mary's College, 3.

Williams College, 120, 245, 247, 311, 402.

Williams, E., 4, 8, 12, 40.

Williams, H., 401.

Williams, J., 67.

Williams, S., 60.

Williams, S. W., 345, 366.

Wilson, W., 401.

Windham, 7, 8, 12, 13, 20, 31.

Wines, A., 397.

Winthrop, 263.

Wirt, W., 113.

Wistar, 266, 350.

Wood, A., 405.

Wood, H., 337, 405.

Wood, S., 397.

Woodbridge, T., 35.

Woodbury, B., 397.

Woodbury, L., 398.

Woodhouse, 350.

Woodman, A. H. C., 326.

Woodman, J. S., 316, 326, 327, 328, 329, 371.

Woodman, N., 326.

Woods, A. S., 401.

Woods, L., 135.

Woodward, B., 58, 80, 211, 220, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226.

Woodward, D., 53.

Woodward, H., 220.

Woodward, I., 31, 34, 220.

Woodward, M. S., 220.

Woodward, W. G., 401.

Woodward, W. H., 112, 114.

Woolley, J., 12, 13.

Worcester, E., 337.

Worcester, N., 406.

Worcester, S., 233, 310, 396.

Wright, A. H., 397.

Wright, J., 37, 53, 54.

Wright, N., 53.

Wyllis, 45.

Wyllis, G., 42.


Yale College, 4, 8, 12, 41, 48, 50, 58, 59, 88, 220, 223, 250, 349,
  358, 371.

Young, C. A., 337.

Young, C. K., 255.

Young, I., 276, 290, 291, 293, 294, 295, 296, 298, 329, 330.

Young, J. K., 387.

Young, R. B., 290.

Young, S., 290.