WORKS ISSUED BY

                          The Hakluyt Society

                           THE WAR OF QUITO

                             SECOND SERIES
                               No. XXXI

                            ISSUED FOR 1913




                                COUNCIL

                                  OF

                         THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.


     ALBERT GRAY, Esq., K.C., _President_.

     THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD BELHAVEN AND STENTON, _Vice-President_.

     SIR CLEMENTS ROBERT MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., Ex-Pres. R.G.S.,
     _Vice-President_.

     THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD PECKOVER OF WISBECH, _Vice-President_.

     ADMIRAL SIR LEWIS BEAUMONT, G.C.B., K.C.M.G.

     SIR THOMAS B. BOWRING.

     LIEUT.-COLONEL CHARLES FREDERICK CLOSE, C.M.G., R.E.

     BOLTON GLANVILL CORNEY, Esq., I.S.O.

     MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, late R.E., late Pres. R.G.S.

     WILLIAM FOSTER, Esq., C.I.E.

     F. H. H. GUILLEMARD, M.D.

     EDWARD HEAWOOD, Esq., _Treasurer_.

     SIR EVERARD IM THURN, K.C.M.G., C.B.

     JOHN SCOTT KELTIE, LL.D.

     ADMIRAL SIR ALBERT HASTINGS MARKHAM, K.C.B.

     ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY, Esq.

     LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR MATTHEW NATHAN, G.C.M.G., R.E.

     ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET THE RIGHT HON. SIR EDWARD HOBART SEYMOUR,
     G.C.B., O.M., G.C.V.O., LL.D.

     H. R. TEDDER, Esq.

     LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR RICHARD CARNAC TEMPLE, BART., C.I.E.

     BASIL HOME THOMSON, Esq.

     J. A. J. DE VILLIERS, Esq., _Hon. Secretary_.




                           THE WAR OF QUITO


                                  BY
                        PEDRO DE CIEZA DE LEON


                                  AND


                            INCA DOCUMENTS


                         TRANSLATED AND EDITED

                                  BY

                    SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B.
                 VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY


                                LONDON:

                    PRINTED FOR THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY

                              MDCCCCXIII


                              Cambridge:

                      PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.

                        AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

INTRODUCTORY NOTE                                                     ix

The War of Quito by Pedro de Cieza de Leon
(LIII chapters), with notes                                            1

Letter from the Bishop of Cuzco to the King                          132

Indictment of the Judges against the Viceroy                         143

Sequel                                                               152

Letter from Carbajal to Gonzalo Pizarro                              160

Gasca’s voyage                                                       162

Murder of the Inca Manco narrated by his son                         164

Mission of Figueroa to the Inca                                      170

Note on Molina                                                       200

INDEX                                                                201




INTRODUCTORY NOTE


Cieza de Leon, besides his two chronicles (translations of which already
form part of the first series of the Hakluyt Society’s volumes),
completed a history of the conquest and civil wars of Peru. The
manuscripts have not all been found, but Jimenes de la Espada edited and
published the first part of the “War of Quito” by Cieza de Leon in 1880.
It is valuable because Cieza was the most trustworthy of all the old
writers on Peru, and because he was on the spot and acquainted with many
of the actors in the scenes he describes. Cieza is always fair and
impartial.

The interest attaching to this recovered work of Cieza is that it
records the attempt of the Spanish Government, at the instance of Las
Casas, to befriend the Indians by enforcing laws for their protection.
It will be seen that the martinet who was sent as Viceroy to carry out
the policy of the Government was a hopelessly impossible person. The
hopes of the Inca Manco were raised on receiving the news of the
Viceroy’s arrival with the New Laws, and he died in the full
anticipation that there was a dawn of better things for his people.

The narrative of Cieza is well told and full of interest. But it comes
to an end just before the Viceroy’s murder of the Factor Illan Suarez de
Carbajal, which was the immediate cause of his overthrow. To the
narrative of Cieza is, therefore, added in the present volume a letter
from the Bishop of Cuzco to Charles V which describes the murder and
subsequent events. The letter is followed by the Indictment of the
Judges against the Viceroy, also giving their version of the murder and
of the events which followed.

To complete the story a Sequel has been written by the editor, narrating
the events from the assumption of the government by Gonzalo Pizarro to
his complete victory and the death of the Viceroy at Añaquito. From that
date, for too short a time, Gonzalo Pizarro was Governor of Peru, and in
possession of the only approach by Panama, with none to oppose him.

His Camp Master was Francisco de Carbajal, a veteran of the Italian
wars, now verging on his eightieth year, and very corpulent. His life
story, up to this time, will be found in the narrative of Cieza, in the
Sequel, and in notes. Carbajal is accused of great cruelty. It is true
that he showed no mercy to traitors and deserters, from policy not from
innate cruelty. The treachery of nearly every one in Peru is perfectly
astounding, as will be seen in Cieza’s narrative; and strong measures
were absolutely inevitable. But he was kind and indulgent to his own
men, and he had a wife who was attached to him, a Portuguese lady named
Leyton, of good family. Carbajal was a soldier with forty years of
experience in the wars of Italy and by far the ablest military man in
Peru. He was well educated, extraordinarily sagacious and far-seeing,
very witty and humorous, and possessed of almost incredible physical
endurance.

The wise old man saw that there could be no forgiveness for Gonzalo
Pizarro, and that it was quite futile to send envoys to Spain to explain
what had happened and to apply for the governorship for Gonzalo. He,
therefore, urged Gonzalo Pizarro to assume the kingship, to create
nobles, to grant _encomiendas_ in perpetuity, to marry an Inca princess,
and to enact judicious laws for the efficient protection of the Indians.
By these measures he would secure the support of all the Spaniards and
all the native population--there would be such unanimity that attacks
from without would be repulsed. The only safety was in a bold front. The
words of wisdom were only listened to with favour, but not adopted.

The Sequel is followed by an interesting letter from Carbajal to Pizarro
in which he refers to the kingship.

Pizarro hesitated and was lost. There was the basest treachery. Hinojosa
and Aldana delivered up Panama and the fleet to the cleric Pedro de la
Gasca, who had been sent out with full powers.

A translation of a curious document in the King’s library at Madrid
follows, giving an account of the storm encountered by Gasca on his
voyage to Peru.

Next there is a translation of Appendix No. 18 in Espada’s edition of
Cieza de Leon’s “Guerra de Quito.” It is only a fragment, but it
contains the account of the murder of the Inca Manco, given by his son
Titu Cusi Yupanqui, who was an eye-witness.

The last document is the exceedingly interesting Report by Diego
Rodriguez de Figueroa of his mission to Titu Cusi Yupanqui Inca, between
1565 and 1568.

[Illustration]




THE WAR OF QUITO[1]
BY
PEDRO DE CIEZA DE LEON




CHAPTER I

     _How the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela sailed from San Lucar, and what
     happened until his arrival at the city of Panama, which is in the
     kingdom of Tierra Firme._


The Viceroy Blasco Nuñez had been ordered to fit out ships to sail from
Spain, and to continue his journey to the kingdoms of Peru. When
everything was ready, he sailed from that port, with the knights who
were to accompany him, on Saturday the 3rd day of the month of November
in the year of our redemption 1543[2]. Navigating swiftly over the great
ocean sea, he sailed on until he arrived at Gran Canaria. Here he took
in fresh provisions and was joined by the Licentiate Cepeda, who was
going out as a Judge. Leaving that island, the voyage was continued
until the ships arrived at Nombre de Dios three days after Epiphany in
1544. Here he remained for 15 or 16 days, at the end of which time he
proceeded to the city of Panama with those who had accompanied him.

I deeply lament that a knight so accomplished as was the Viceroy should
have fallen into the hands of such wicked and perverse men. For his want
of judgment and lack of prudence in public affairs did not merit a death
so cruel as he met with at Añaquito near the equator. The things that
must happen cannot be prevented, and all is in the will of the most high
God.

The Viceroy arrived at the city of Panama without waiting for the Judges
who, for some reason, did not leave Nombre de Dios with him, but
remained there. The Viceroy found the Licentiate Pedro Ramirez de
Quiñones, now Judge of the Confines, in Panama. He was taking the
_residencia_ of Dr Villalobos and the Licentiate Paez, who had been
Judges of the Court established in that kingdom. Presently the Viceroy
took the royal seal, and placed it in a box with the veneration which
was its due, with several chapters of the Ordinances[3], intending to
carry out the orders literally. They required that all the men and women
of Peru should be sent to their native homes at the cost of those who
possessed them, it being the will of the King that they should be free,
as his subjects and vassals[5]. Notwithstanding that the order was just
and righteous, some of the Indians evaded it because they were married,
others because they liked their masters and were tolerably instructed in
the matters of our Holy Catholic Faith. Even of those who were ordered
to depart many merely went to hide in secret places so as not to go
whither they were sent, and others went to the churches, whence they
were taken by order of the Viceroy, and put on board ships, where many
died. So that very few returned to their native places, and those that
did went back to the rites and idolatries they had formerly been
accustomed to. There was thus no benefit derived from compliance with
this ordinance. Some Spanish conquerors, who returned to Spain, had
lived with Indian women for many years, and had children by them. These
were to be sent to the native places of the mothers at the cost of their
masters. If they disputed or complained they had to pay double for
freight and passage. Some had small children and prayed that they might
not be sent to die owing to having no mothers. These were ordered to pay
a still larger sum.

The authorities, appointed to enforce the new laws in Peru, were the
Viceroy and four Judges of the Royal Court of Justice[6].

When the Judges arrived at Panama there were some entertainments, and it
was reported that the Viceroy and the Judges were not on very good
terms, and that, in secret, neither he treated them well, nor they him.
Considering the severity of the new laws, and the difficulty of
enforcing them in Peru, owing to the resistance of those in that
kingdom, the Judges suggested to the Viceroy that an intention to
enforce them should not be shown until they were in possession of Peru.
When the Court was established there, it would be easier to enforce the
orders of his Majesty. The Viceroy had received news of what was passing
in Peru, of the great number of people in that kingdom, of the
proceedings of the Governor Vaca de Castro, and that there were many
charges for artillery and arquebuses and much gunpowder in the cities of
Lima and Cuzco. He was strongly advised to enter Peru quietly and with
consideration, for if he came in another way there would be a rebellion
against him. For besides the arms and people actually in the country,
more came every day, and are now coming. But the Viceroy, unmoved by
these reports, replied that his single cloak and sword would suffice for
all Peru. Many, hearing these boastings, foresaw what they must be
prepared for. As the ordinances were so severe against men who had lived
so freely as those in Peru, and so heavy for them, it was evident that
they would take up arms, for it was their custom to contend in war for
very slight causes.




CHAPTER II

     _Of what other things happened at Panama, and what the Governor
     Rodrigo de Contreras and the Judges said to the Viceroy respecting
     the ordinances._


There was no less commotion in Tierra Firme than in Peru on hearing that
the Viceroy intended to enforce the ordinances and to hold the kingdom
under a rule of such right and justice that no one should live in
licentiousness, as had hitherto been the case. Rodrigo de Contreras, who
had been Governor of Nicaragua, was at that time in Panama. He saw that
the Viceroy would not keep in his own bosom a single part of what he had
been ordered to do: but on the contrary declared publicly, so that all
might hear, affirming it with an oath, that he will not have landed at
Tumbez before the Indians had been informed that they were vassals of
the Emperor our Lord, and that the _Encomenderos_ had no authority over
them except for the collection of tribute which the Indians were bound
to pay: also that the ordinances would be enforced as the King had
ordered.

Contreras went to the Viceroy’s lodging, and said: “I cannot believe
that your Lordship is ignorant of the alarm caused by your arrival with
these new laws, among the Spaniards in this empire of the Indies, from
the islands to this part. Even if your ears are deaf to this, as the
tumult has not yet ended, you must have heard the clamour that is made
over it. Neither I nor those here complain that his Majesty has sent the
new laws for, like so very Christian a prince, he desires that affairs
here should be ordered with rectitude and moderation. For we hold for
certain that his ministers who come to execute laws, zealous for his
service, will see that the state of affairs renders it advisable not to
enforce them. I regret, therefore, that your Lordship has publicly
declared that you will not have landed in New Castille before the new
laws are published and enforced. The ordinances which I brought out, not
only did I not publish, but I was in the province a year and more and
had not promulgated them. Later, when it is clear that the provinces are
quieted and that there is no trouble, I shall decide what should be
done. For if the ordinances were hastily enforced it might cause great
evils. In this country the Spaniards are not of low degree, but all
consider themselves great lords of noble parentage, and would be ready
to die rather than submit to the new laws, nor would dissensions and
wars be wanting, the discontent being so great.”

When Contreras said this, the Viceroy replied: “If on all sides the evil
is preferred to the good, and tyranny comes before loyalty, and if the
King has no more part in these realms than those who are here like to
give him, I can believe that what you say is correct. But if you say
that his Majesty’s intention is not altered, how is it that they do not
wish to comply with the royal order? You know very well the poverty
under which our fathers came to discover this empire. It is not so many
years since Columbus sailed from Spain, and avarice has grown rapidly
among those who have settled here. To gain riches they have done many
evil things, almost totally ruining the provinces. If these laws had not
been enacted, in ten years there would be nothing left but ruins, and
the rivers and mountains. Let no one think that ministers of the King
will be guided by the appetites of those here, nor be surprised if I
behead them as traitors.” Saying this the Viceroy retired into his
chamber: and the Governor Rodrigo de Contreras departed.

Soon afterwards the Licentiate Zarate, regretting that the Viceroy
should have said that he would soon enforce the new laws, and not
wishing to speak of a thing which was so hateful to all, entered where
the Viceroy was. He then said that, hearing what was talked about
concerning the new laws, and understanding that they were to be
enforced, he thought it would be proper not to allude to the subject;
rather keep it at the bottom of a box until the land of Peru was
reached, and it was ascertained whether the laws could be conveniently
promulgated. To this, and to what the Judges Cepeda, Alvarez and Tejada
said, the Viceroy replied that he would do what he thought proper. As to
what the accountant Juan de Caceres affirmed, that, from the news he had
received from people in Peru, he gathered that if the ordinances were at
once enforced, the people would take up arms rather than obey, the
Viceroy told him harshly that if he was not a servant of the King he
would order him to be hanged.

These and some other things having happened, the Viceroy hurried his
preparations to go on to Peru, while the Judges continued to talk about
the ordinances, advising that before they were promulgated, time should
be given for the court of justice to be formed, so that then the orders
of his Majesty might be carried out, after mature deliberation. But the
Viceroy thought little of their advice; replying that his duty was to
obey his orders, and for doing so he alone sufficed. So the want of
confidence between him and the Judges was increased.




CHAPTER III

     _How Francisco de Carbajal arrived at the city of the Kings with a
     great desire to return to Spain, and how the Viceroy embarked at
     Panama for Peru._


Francisco de Carbajal, desiring to leave the kingdom, had obtained the
consent of the Governor Vaca de Castro and of the municipality of Cuzco,
and, with the help they gave him, he set out from that city with all the
money he could collect, wishing to return to Spain and obtain some rest.
Antonio de Altamirano and Lope de Mendoza and many others would have
lost nothing by his departure[7]. But it was already decreed by God, for
our very great sins, that this man should become a cruel scourge, as the
narrative will presently give you to understand. Leaving the city of
Cuzco, Carbajal travelled until he reached the city of the Kings, and
dismounted at the house of the Treasurer Antonio Riquelme. The Treasurer
feared that he had come to kill him by order of Vaca de Castro, by
reason of the enmity between them; so next day, by all the cunning ways
he could think of, he sought how to get rid of such a guest. But
Francisco Carbajal was very tiresome and, seeing what the Treasurer
wanted, he continued to lodge in his house. At the end of some days
after his arrival at the city of the Kings, he gave the letters he
brought from Vaca de Castro to the members of the municipality, touching
his voyage to Spain. The letters represented the advantages the kingdom
would derive from his departure, because his Majesty, through him, would
be well informed of the affairs of Peru, and of the injury that would
be done to the conquerors, if the new laws were enforced in their
entirety. Vaca de Castro wrote in the same way, and requested that
Carbajal should be empowered to negotiate in Spain, in the interests of
Peru. The members of the municipality, having read the letter of Vaca de
Castro, and heard what Francis Carbajal had to say, gave an evasive
answer. As the Governor, by his letter, announced that he would shortly
arrive at the city of the Kings, they told Carbajal that he should wait
until Vaca de Castro came, as he would give orders as Governor for the
King. They gave this answer at an official meeting in the municipal
building. Carbajal thought that he was looked upon by them as an
unimportant person to whom they could give a frivolous answer. He came
out of the building with a feeling of having been insulted; while those
within were laughing, and making a joke of it. For they thought that
when Vaca de Castro did come to the city of the Kings the country would
already be under the new Viceroy, who would not molest them for not
having cared to send Carbajal to Spain[8].

At this time the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela was very anxious to leave
Tierra Firme and, embarking on the South Sea, to navigate in haste to
the coast of Peru. He desired to establish the court of justice in the
city of the Kings with as little delay as possible, considering that it
would be easy to enforce the ordinances. He was very angry, and was with
difficulty induced to listen, if any one expressed a different opinion.

Leaving the Judges at Panama, and taking with him the royal seal, he
embarked at the city of Panama on the 10th of February of the same year,
and arrived at the port of Tumbez in nine days. This was the quickest
voyage that had ever been made. From Tumbez he wrote his letters to the
city of San Francisco del Quito, to Puerto Viejo, and to Guayaquil, to
announce his arrival in the kingdom and the duty with which he was
charged by order of the Emperor our Lord. He added that his desire was
to do good to all, and to administer justice; that for this he had come,
and that when he arrived at the city of the Kings he would establish a
royal court of justice and chancellory where those would receive justice
who sought for it. He concluded with the announcement that, although he
sent to tell them this, he also came with certain ordinances for the new
government and respecting the treatment of the Indians which might
appear heavy and causes for anger. Hitherto justice had been
administered as between friends. They murmured at the announcement of
the Viceroy, and when the news of his arrival reached them, they were
not a little annoyed, so that the Viceroy’s name was abhorred by most,
while all, from fear of the new rules, thought of no other thing than to
extort as much gold as possible from the Indians and their chiefs.




CHAPTER IV

     _How the Governor Vaca de Castro wrote from the city of Cuzco to
     the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro, and touching his departure from
     Cuzco._


The tumults and disturbances, caused by the news of the ordinances in
Cuzco, were continued. It is even said that Hernando Bachicao, Juan
Velez de Guevara, Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo, Cermeño and others
spoke to Vaca de Castro saying that he was the Royal Governor, that he
should continue in his command, and that all would serve and obey him.

Vaca de Castro answered in a way which showed that he understood how
changeable were the wills of men in Peru, and how inconstant. To gain
their ends they are ready to put any one at the head, leaving him in the
lurch if he failed. In this Vaca de Castro was not deceived. For those
who move in seditions and in wars coloured by justifications, although
they were accomplices in the demands of their leader, when the time of
failure comes, they sally forth, swearing with great oaths that they
were forced to join the tyrant.

Understanding this Vaca de Castro answered that he had taken charge of
the province by order of the King, and that he would now do no other
thing than proceed to the city of the Kings to wait upon him whom the
King had appointed as his Viceroy. Saying this, he ordered the
Secretary, Pero Lopez[9], to prepare the letters and despatches, as he
desired to set out from Cuzco without delay.

Some wish to say, and even men who were present have assured me, that
the Governor Vaca de Castro wrote to Gonzalo Pizarro to come with all
speed and take up the appointment of Procurator and Defender of the
kingdom while he, Vaca de Castro, after marrying one of Pizarro’s
daughters, would go to Spain and negotiate for his appointment to the
government of New Toledo, and other things, and urging him to proceed in
the matter.

I, being in the city of the Kings, was told by Don Antonio de Ribera
that among the letters which Gonzalo Pizarro had there--and I remember
that they were so numerous that three secretaries, continually reading
to the President La Gasca, did not finish in four days--was one from
Vaca de Castro to him, to which he answered that many had written to
incite him to come and lead them, but that he would not do so. On the
contrary, he would remain in his house, for his Majesty had sent his
Viceroy who had entered the country, and that he would do what the
royal service required. He wrote other things which were not intended to
be so evil as some have wished to make out. It may well be that both
letters were written by him.

After a few days Vaca de Castro set out from Cuzco, accompanied by
Caspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo[10], Antonio de Quiñones, Diego
Maldonado[11], the Licentiate Carbajal[12], Antonio de Altamirano[13],
Gaspar Gil, Pedro de los Rios, Hernando Bachicao[14] and other principal
people and some soldiers. With these he began the journey to the city of
the Kings.




CHAPTER V

     _How the Viceroy departed from Tumbez for the city of San Miguel,
     beginning to enforce the ordinances, which aroused a strong feeling
     in Peru._


The Viceroy Blasco Nuñez de Vela arrived at Tumbez accompanied by
Francisco Velasquez Vela Nuñez his brother, and the Captain Diego
Alvarez de Cueto his brother-in-law, with other knights, and his
servants. He was intent on enforcing the new laws. He sent out his
orders before he had been received as Viceroy, commanding all to receive
him as such, for in that way His Majesty would be best served. He
ordered that no extra tribute should be taken from the Indians, and that
no force or ill treatment should be used in dealing with them. These and
other orders were given which, although just, should have been carried
out with much order and prudence, and not with too much severity nor in
such haste. Nevertheless they did not give sufficient cause to justify
those in Peru in their revolt.

In Tumbez Diego Alvarez de Cueto and others who came with him, as well
as some residing in Peru, advised that the new laws should not then be
enforced, but that the Royal Court of Justice should first be
established, and the kingdom be in the Viceroy’s power. But the Viceroy
would never see things in that light. From this it seems to me that God,
by reason of the grave sins of those who lived in Peru, was served that
affairs should be guided in this way, that afterwards the sinners might
be chastised with His mighty justice. For certainly their pride and
their immorality in openly sinning, merited punishment from God’s hand.
The gravity of such great sins deserved the calamities and excessive
hardships which came upon them. The Viceroy answered, as he always did,
that he must obey the King’s orders even if it should cost him his
life.

He was fifteen days in Tumbez arranging these matters, at the end of
which time he determined to set out for the city of San Miguel[15]. He
accomplished the journey and was publicly well received, but really, at
the bottom of their hearts, every one was sorry to see him, because he
brought the new laws. Finally he was received as Viceroy, and at once
began to enforce the ordinances. He ordered a copy to be made of the
grants of Indians within the boundaries of San Miguel, asking the
Caciques how many they had given, and the Encomenderos how many they had
received, according to which he assessed the tribute which had to be
paid. He then gave the Indians to understand that his Majesty ordered
that they were to be free, and to be treated as his vassals.

The members of the municipality of that city, seeing how the Viceroy
enforced the ordinances, entreated him not to do so at once, but to give
time for the Emperor to be informed generally of the state of the
kingdom that, in consideration of the great service performed for his
Majesty, he might deign to show mercy and not to insist on the
ordinances being enforced in their entirety. Although they supplicated
in great sorrow, holding up their right hand in testimony that they
would always serve the King with loyalty, their prayers availed nothing,
nor the protests and representations they made. Further he presently
superseded Diego Palomino because he had been Lieutenant to the
Governor, and he gave complete liberty to the Indians, telling them not
to give anything to the Spaniards unless they paid for it first, and to
use weights and measures in their dealings.

News came to Truxillo and the city of the Kings of all these
proceedings, with much exaggeration. Besides the people who were coming
by land, a ship commanded by Juan Vazquez de Avila, who was her master,
arrived at Callao, the port of the city of the Kings. The master said
that he had landed the Viceroy at Tumbez. On the receipt of this news
there was a great tumult in the city, hearing what had passed where the
Viceroy was, and anticipating the enforcing of the ordinances. The
magistrates and officials assembled and consulted respecting the
approach of the Viceroy, and the trouble throughout the kingdom, to
decide what course to take. After the discussion they decided that some
learned persons of authority should go to meet the Viceroy and give him
a welcome, informing him of what was happening, and how all, with bosoms
on the ground, would do what their Lord and King commanded.




CHAPTER VI

     _How some knights set out from the city of the Kings to meet the
     Viceroy, and of his departure from San Miguel for Truxillo._


The members of the municipality of the city of the Kings having
determined to send persons to meet the Viceroy, they appointed the
Factor Yllan Suarez de Carbajal[16], the Captain Diego de Aguero[17],
both Magistrates, and Juan de Barbaran Procurator of the city. With
them there went Pablo de Meneses[18], Lorenzo de Estopiñam, Sebastian de
Coca, Hernando de Vargas, Rodrigo Nuñez de Prado and others. Among them
was the Friar Esidro of the order of Dominicans, who went by order of
the most reverend Don Jeronimo de Loaysa, Bishop of the city of the
Kings.

Leaving those I have mentioned to proceed on their journey, we will
return to Blasco Nuñez who, after he had done what has been related in
the city of San Miguel and its dependencies, determined to proceed to
Truxillo, and accordingly he set out accompanied by his followers.

The Factor, with those who went with him from the city of the Kings,
travelled on until they came to some buildings called “Las
Perdrices[19]” ten leagues from that city; intending to wait there until
they met the Viceroy. Presently a Spaniard arrived in great haste and
came to them. His name was Ochoa, and he said that he came with
despatches from the Viceroy to the municipality of the city of the Kings
and to Vaca de Castro. This was true, for the Viceroy had sent him in
advance. The Factor Yllan Suarez de Carbajal, the Captain Diego de
Aguero, as Magistrates, and Juan de Barbaran as Procurator opened the
parcel. They found in it a copy of the appointment which his Majesty
gave to Blasco Nuñez as Viceroy, and a letter for Vaca de Castro,
ordering him no longer to exercise the functions of Governor, and to
come to the city of the Kings. For the municipality of the city of the
Kings there was another letter, ordering the members to receive Blasco
Nuñez as Viceroy, by virtue of the order he sent, and no longer to look
upon Vaca de Castro as Governor. The report was that this Viceroy, from
the time he entered the kingdom, held the affairs of Vaca de Castro as
odious, and that he favoured those who had taken the side of Don Diego
de Almagro. These are vulgar rumours, and I do not know how much truth
there is in them[20].

These despatches having been seen by the Factor and the others, they
were delighted at the hostility shown in them to Vaca de Castro, and
they decided that Juan de Barbaran, as Procurator, should go back with
the news. He returned in all haste to the city of the Kings and, having
arrived, he rushed through the streets as if the land had rebelled
against the service of the King, shouting--“Liberty! the Lord Viceroy is
coming, see here are his despatches.” On hearing this there entered the
town hall the Treasurer Alonso Riquelme, the Overseer Garcia de Saucedo,
Juan de Leon, Francisco Ampuero, Nicolas de Ribera the lad, Alonso
Palomino, Nicolas de Ribera the elder, being Magistrates.

The royal provision of his Majesty ordered that, by its authority,
Blasco Nuñez should be received as Viceroy. But the document was merely
a copy, by which Blasco Nuñez could not then be received as Viceroy.
They met three times without being able to decide. At last, more on
account of the enmity to Vaca de Castro than for any other reason it was
resolved that the Viceroy should be received in the city in accordance
with the order. When they were in session they sent for the Licentiate
Esquivel, a native of the city of Badajos, who, wishing to further the
service of the Emperor, gave his vote that they should receive Blasco
Nuñez as their Viceroy. This being done the Licentiate proceeded to
Truxillo to join the Viceroy and offer his services. He sent a statement
of these proceedings to Vaca de Castro, with the letter of the Viceroy.
The Licentiate de la Gama[21], who was the lieutenant of Esquivel,
notwithstanding that the Viceroy had written to him in a friendly way,
left the city to meet Vaca de Castro, leaving the Magistrates in charge.
They gave the rod of office to Juan de Barbaran, and made public the
appointment of the Viceroy, which is as follows:

“Don Carlos by divine clemency Emperor, always august, King of Germany;
Doña Juana his mother, and the same Don Carlos, by the same grace Kings
of Castille, of Aragon, of Leon, of the Sicilies, of Jerusalem, of
Navarre, of Granada, of Toledo, of Valencia, of Galicia, of Majorca, of
Seville, of Sardinia, of Cordova, of Corsica, of Murcia, of Jaen, of the
Algarves, of Algesiras, of Gibraltar, of the Canary Isles, and the
Indies and Tierra Firme of the Ocean Sea; Count of Barcelona, Lord of
Vizcaya and Molina, Duke of Athens and Neopatria, Count of Flanders and
of Tyrol. We, seeing that it will be for the furtherance of our service
and for the good of our province of New Castille called Peru, have seen
fit to nominate a person who in our name and as our Viceroy will govern
and provide for all things appertaining to God our Lord, and to the
increase of our Holy Catholic Faith, and to the instruction and
conversion of the natives of that land; and also provide for all things
conducive to the maintenance, peopling, and securing the welfare of the
said New Castille and its provinces; for this purpose, confiding in you
Blasco Nuñez Vela, and because we believe that our service will be
furthered and the good of the said province of New Castille, and that
you will discharge the said office of our Viceroy and Governor with that
prudence and fidelity we expect from you, we, by these presents,
nominate you our Viceroy and Governor of the said New Castille and its
dependencies during our good pleasure. As such Viceroy and Governor,
both in all that appertains to the instruction and conversion of the
said Indians to our Holy Catholic Faith, and in the increase of
population and prosperity of the said land, you are to act as may be
convenient. By this letter we order the Licentiate Vaca de Castro our
present Governor of the said province, our President and Judges of the
Royal Court we have ordered to be established in our city of the Kings,
our Captain Generals and Captains of the said land, all Councillors,
Justices, Magistrates, Knights, Esquires, Officers, and Citizens in all
our cities, towns, and villages in the said New Castille, who are now or
shall hereafter be settled there, and each one of them, without any
delay and without further waiting for any other letter or command, to
receive and hold as our Viceroy and Governor of the said New Castille,
called Peru and its dependencies, and to freely consent that you shall
occupy and use those appointments during our royal pleasure, in all
things, and each one of them, that shall be for the good of our service
and good government, and all, while they hold their offices, shall obey
and comply with your orders while you shall give all favour and help
that they may seek for, and that may be necessary, and in all things
they shall obey you, and cause no obstruction to your orders. We give
you power to use and exercise authority over them. It is also our good
pleasure that if you the said Blasco Nuñez Vela are hindered in the
furtherance of our service, or in the execution of our justice, you are
empowered to banish any person who is now or may be hereafter in the
said province of New Castille or its dependencies. We further order that
you shall receive each year, for your two offices of Viceroy and
Governor of the said land, 5000 ducats counted from the day you make
sail from the port of San Lucar de Barrameda to proceed on your voyage
to our said province of Peru, and we order our officers of the said
province that they give and pay your due in the manner in use in the
said land, receiving your acknowledgment. Given in the town of Madrid on
the 1st day of March 1543 I the King.”




CHAPTER VII

     _How the Governor Vaca de Castro came from Cuzco, and what happened
     to the Factor Illan Suarez and the others who went to meet the
     Viceroy._


The Governor Vaca de Castro set out from the city of Cuzco to proceed to
the city of the Kings, with the intention of seeing the Viceroy,
notwithstanding that many of his friends advised him to go to the port
of Quilca, where he could embark in a ship without seeing the Viceroy,
and sail away to Tierra Firme. But he declined to take that course, and
started from Cuzco with some troops to guard his person, with arms and
artillery. There are some who say that he did this that he might
supplicate for the good estate of the kingdom with them. Others affirm,
and this is certain, that he took the artillery because he would not
leave it in Cuzco, foreseeing what might happen. For the clouds had
always originated in Cuzco to spread over all parts. He, therefore,
thought it prudent to take away the artillery and arms, as he did.

Leaving Cuzco he travelled onwards until he reached the city of
Guamanga, where some other persons had also arrived. Thence he went on
to the valley of Xauxa where he was met by the Licentiate de la Gama,
who told him all that had passed. After having discussed the ordinances
with some of his friends, and what was said of the Viceroy, he
determined to send his Secretary, Pero Lopez, to meet the Viceroy and
convey to him a welcome on his arrival, assuring him that he would serve
him in all things, seeing that he came in the name of the King our Lord.
Eventually he sent his servant Pero Lopez who started on his journey.

When the municipality of the city of the Kings knew that Vaca de Castro
was coming accompanied by a large number of people, they wrote to him to
leave his arms and his following, and to enter the city of the Kings
privately, without appearing as Governor of the kingdom, for he no
longer held that office, and that when he came they would guard his
honour as a Member of the Royal Council and as having been their
Governor and Captain General.

After Juan de Barbaran had returned to the city of the Kings, the Factor
Yllan Suarez de Carbajal, the Captain Diego de Aguero and the others
journeyed onwards towards the city of Truxillo. Travelling on Thursday
and Good Friday they arrived at a town of Indians called Huara, which is
18 leagues from the city of the Kings. Late on Friday they continued
their journey to another town called La Barranca, and on Saturday before
Easter of 1544 they came up with one Ruiloba[22] who was coming as a
messenger from the Governor Vaca de Castro. His coming caused no small
perturbation for, when asked whether he had seen the Viceroy, he
replied that he remained near Truxillo where he was liberating Indians;
and that at San Miguel he had left the Lieutenant Palomino and others
without any Indians, saying that he was going to do the same in all
parts, including the officials of the royal treasury. After giving this
news Pero Lopez went on to inform Vaca de Castro. The Factor Illan
Suarez, tired with the journey and enraged at the news, was leaning
against a pillar in his lodging when Captain Diego de Aguero said in a
loud voice: “I do not care to wait until we meet the Viceroy. If he
wants to take away my Indians let him do so at once, my son will not be
in want of food, for he has property on which he can live.” Saying this
he set out for Truxillo, accompanied by Rodrigo Nuñez a citizen of
Huanuco who was also at enmity with Vaca de Castro for having taken away
his Indians because he had been a follower of Diego de Almagro the lad.

Meanwhile the Viceroy had departed from the city of San Miguel
accompanied by settlers and soldiers, giving ear to anything evil that
was said to him against Vaca de Castro. For from the time of his arrival
in Peru he allied himself with the Almagro faction, and they spoke
without any restraint against Vaca de Castro.

The ancient name of San Miguel is Piura, of Truxillo Chimu, and of the
city of the Kings, Lima. The reader will remember this, for, forgetting
uniformity, I may sometimes put one name and sometimes the other.

The Viceroy travelled by the Royal Road of the Coast, gazing on the vast
deserts and the ruined edifices. He was told that they were once densely
peopled, and he felt regret, saying that the numbers of these people had
been so diminished through bad government. He admired the great and very
ancient edifices which were built along the road, with such lavish care.
In the valleys where some Indians remained, he made the lords and
caciques to understand that the people were vassals of the King of
Spain, that in future they were free, that their tribute would be
moderate, as well as the calls upon them for provisions and necessaries.
If more was wanted they must be paid for it. Arriving at Truxillo he had
a grand reception, though with mournful and pensive countenances. The
citizens received the ordinances as a sign of war bringing ruin and a
sad look-out, coming with words of peace but bringing war. Yet the
magistrates came out dressed in purple, and Blasco Nuñez Vela was
received as Viceroy in obedience to his Majesty’s command.

The Factor Illan Suarez de Carbajal and the other knights went back to
Lima, and they say that the Factor left a motto at La Barranca which
said--“_Each man knows what he has, and does not give up his property to
another. If he does he may be a laughing stock, but it will cost him who
takes it his life._” Others say that this motto was left there by
Francisco del Solar, a citizen of Lima, and this may be considered a
certainty[23].




CHAPTER VIII

     _How the Governor Cristobal Vaca de Castro saw the letter of the
     Viceroy, and how he was received at Lima having dismissed his
     followers and sent the artillery to the city of Guamanga._


It will cause great astonishment to hear the events of this narrative as
they unfold themselves, for many were the troubles that arose in these
kingdoms. Not only the hills and chains of mountains but also the rivers
and streams are full of gold and silver, so that a country with such
riches could not remain at peace. Most of those who had settled in it
gilded their iniquities with great treasons, throwing the blame on the
Captain Gonzalo Pizarro. Numerous were the letters that he received from
all parts, persuading him to come forth from where he was, as all would
join him, and assist him with their persons and their properties. Some
have wanted to throw the blame on those of Cuzco but they were those who
were least culpable, as further on I will clearly show.

The news of the arrival of the Viceroy in the kingdom, and his letter
having been received, Vaca de Castro was much disturbed in his mind, as
well from the things that his servant Ruy Lopez had told him, as from
the way he had been received. He would wish, according to what they
said, to enter Lima at the time of the reception, and make a petition
respecting the ordinances. He desired that his Secretary Pero Lopez
should see the Viceroy shortly, that he might be informed of all that
had been done. But he was perplexed as to what he should do, being
surrounded on all sides by anxious cares which greatly fatigue generous
minds. It is needful at first to consider what steps to take with much
prudence. For afterwards, if a mistake has been made, it is said to be
the fault of those who have not looked in advance, whereas if all goes
well they are regarded as prudent. In great affairs determination is
more needed than counsel. For when murmurs and discontents are converted
into wars it is better to follow a daring soldier than a noted scholar,
for they say that to gild a mistake they make a hundred.

Vaca de Castro considered that if he entered Lima accompanied by
artillery, arms, and arquebuses it would look bad and give rise to a
doubt of his loyalty; while if he entered privately the Viceroy might
ill use him, without regarding what was due to his position, nor
considering his services to the King, for it was notorious that the
Viceroy was coming with a prejudice against him. Notwithstanding these
dangers Vaca de Castro dismissed his followers and ordered the artillery
to be taken to Guamanga. At Guadachevi, 18 leagues from Lima, where he
received the news, he left the pikes and other arms.

The Licentiate, Benito Suarez de Carbajal[24], was with Vaca de Castro,
and a letter came to him from his brother the Factor, to let him know
that the Viceroy would deprive him of his Indians, as he had treated all
others who had been lieutenants, or officials. He was advised, on
receipt of the letter, to return to where he held the grant of Indians,
collect all the money he could, and to go to Spain, leaving the Indians
in trust to Rodrigo de Carbajal, Jeronimo de Carbajal, and Juan Vazquez
de Tapia. The Licentiate Carbajal, having received this letter, read it
publicly, and arranged the transfer with Vaca de Castro, although he was
no longer Governor. He then departed to do what the Factor advised. This
was one reason why the Viceroy was offended with the Factor, for he was
informed of the letter he had written, by Antonio and Juan de Leon, when
they went out to receive him.

After he had dismissed his people, Vaca de Castro went on to Lima with
very few attendants without trying, by any intrigues, to form new
friendships.




CHAPTER IX

     _How the Governor Vaca de Castro entered Lima, and what happened._


We cannot deny that Vaca de Castro was a distinguished statesman and,
barring his avarice, he truly governed the kingdom with prudence.
Although he had dismissed his forces, and only came accompanied by some
knights who were citizens of Cuzco, he consulted with them as to the way
in which he should enter the city. He knew that the municipality had
acknowledged the Viceroy only on the strength of the copy of a despatch,
and he desired they themselves should receive his resignation, so that
he might answer the Viceroy. He sent to the Licentiate de la Gama, who
had been his lieutenant, to precede him in entering Lima, to return his
rod of office, writing very friendly letters to numerous persons, full
of hopes, while, to some who had complaints against him, he sent
promises. Vaca de Castro never left off sending such missives until he
entered the city. Whether these despatches were written then or
afterwards he and his clerks alone know, for I cannot make out, though I
know what passed, nor will the reader fail to understand. We know that
Vaca de Castro parted with many Indians on this road, belonging to
himself or to the estate of the Marquis Don Francisco Pizarro.

The Licentiate de la Gama had to retain the staff of lieutenant, because
when Juan de Barbaran came with the despatches, he never liked to enter
the municipal building, nor did he find it at the reception of the
Viceroy.

O my God! how many deaths, robberies, insults, disgraces, destruction of
natives were caused by the jealousies of these men who sought to secure
commands. O that thy divine goodness had left Vaca de Castro among the
snows of Pariacaca never to appear again, that the Viceroy had fallen
so ill at Truxillo, where he then was, that it might have been his end,
instead of finding it with disgrace in Quito, and that another pit had
opened for Gonzalo Pizarro and Carbajal, like the one at Rome. Wanting
these leaders the miserable country might not have suffered such evils,
and the sorrowful fields of Salinas and Chupas might have sufficed. The
sins of these men were so enormous, and the charity among them so
minute, that it pleased God that they should meet with great calamities.

The Licentiate de la Gama set out for the city of Lima in advance of
Vaca de Castro, to know what was wrong with the Treasurer Alonso
Riquelme[25], and why he and the other magistrates had accepted the
Viceroy simply on the strength of a copy of the appointment. He
conversed with Lorenzo de Estopiñan, who had come out to give him
information, and to see if it could be arranged to give him some
Indians. For he was a friend of the Treasurer, and it might be
negotiated that he should have better Indians than those he had
dismissed. Estopiñan returned to Lima, but the reply of the Treasurer
was that he no longer had any friendship for Vaca de Castro who had
dismissed the Indians, and that if he came he would have his head cut
off. This Treasurer was very wise and cautious, keeping clear of being
committed to any side, and he knew afterwards how to remain outside.

The Licentiate de la Gama, when he arrived at Lima, went to the house of
the Treasurer Riquelme and persuaded him, as one of the principal
citizens, to call a meeting of the officials, adding that he would
return the rod of lieutenant, for when he had left the city he had not
surrendered it with the required customs and solemnities. Besides the
Viceroy had written to say that he would be in the city and that they
should receive him as his Majesty had ordered. Though this was true, and
the Viceroy had so written, the intention of the Licentiate de la Gama
was no other than that he should again take his place in the
municipality, and that when Vaca de Castro arrived he should again take
up the government and be governor. Having been lieutenant to former
governors his Indians would be taken from him, and he could not
negotiate anything.

Vaca de Castro continued his journey until he came to the city of Lima.
Although his arrival was known, there was no great reception, and no one
came out to meet him except a few of his friends and some servants. With
these he entered the city and went to the house of the Bishop Don
Jeronimo de Loaysa. There the citizens came to visit him, and talk over
the proceedings of the Viceroy and the rigour of the new laws.




CHAPTER X

     _Of the great disturbances in the city of Arequipa when tidings
     came respecting the new laws, and how Francisco de Carbajal
     departed from Lima._


When Alonso Palomino and Antonio de Ribera came to the city of Cuzco
with the news of the ordinances, the Governor Vaca de Castro sent one
Tomas Vasquez, with all the haste he could make to the city of Arequipa
with a letter. It desired the citizens not to be disturbed, and to make
no trouble whatever when they should hear the news about the Viceroy
and the ordinances because, when his Majesty was informed that it would
not be for the good of his service if they were enforced, he would very
shortly amend them. It ended by telling them to send representatives to
Lima to state their grievance. Tomas Vasquez set out from Cuzco and
arrived at the end of seven days, finding the principal citizens in the
church. After they had read the letter Vasquez showed them a copy of the
ordinances. When their provisions were understood there was a great
disturbance, and the bells were rung as if it were a signal for war. A
citizen of Arequipa named Miguel Cornejo took the ordinances in his
hand, went up into the pulpit where the preachers deliver their sermons,
and when all the people had assembled at the sound of the bell, he began
to read the new laws before them all. When he came to the place where
the King ordered that, when the _Encomenderos_ died, all their grants
were to revert to the crown, there arose great shouts of dissent, all
declaring that they would die rather than allow it to be enforced, and
they said the same with regard to all the other laws. Among those who
were there the tumult was as great as it had been at Lima, the people
going about sullenly, and discussing it one with another, saying that
they were all disinherited and ruined after having, with so much labour
and fatigue, discovered the province, and that they were ill paid for
it. The Captain Alonso de Caceres procured that the tumult should cease,
as such words could do them no good. So leaving this we come to the
arrival of Carbajal.

Francisco de Carbajal wished to return to Spain knowing, from his
experience in war, that there must be disturbances in all the provinces
on the arrival of the Viceroy. He tried hard to induce the municipality
of Lima to let him go, but he could not attain his desire, because the
authorities did not wish any ship to leave the port until the Viceroy
should come. Seeing that there was little chance of attaining his end,
he determined to go to the city of Arequipa, believing that he might
find a ship in the port of Quilca, on board of which he might take a
passage. He therefore departed from Lima in haste, with all the money he
possessed, divining the great calamity that was threatening the country.
For it pleased God that Carbajal should not leave the country but that
he should be the scourge for the punishment of many, as he was, for so
many perished by his order that it causes grief to think of it.




CHAPTER XI

     _Of the events in the city of Lima after the arrival of the
     Licentiate Cristobal Vaca de Castro, and of what the Viceroy did in
     Truxillo._


Now we should relate the departure of Gonzalo Pizarro from Charcas, but
it will be convenient first to relate what happened in Lima on the
arrival of the Licentiate Vaca de Castro. He was lodged in the house of
the Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa[26]. News was always coming to Lima of
the proceedings of the Viceroy in the city of San Miguel and more
recently in Truxillo, with the object of enforcing the ordinances. The
members of the municipality now very much regretted that they had
accepted the Viceroy before he arrived at Lima and established the court
of justice, without agreement with the judges, and they said one to
another that a mistake had been made in acknowledging him before he had
entered the city in person; for his Majesty had not ordered that he
should be received simply on the strength of copies, without the
original documents. It was also said that they should have waited until
the arrival of Vaca de Castro, who was the actual governor of the
kingdom. They say that Vaca de Castro spoke to the magistrates of the
city, saying that no blame attached to those who brought arms from
Cuzco, for it was only done so as to know whether the ordinances would
come, so as to cause injury to all. Another object was that, in the
absence of arms, there might be no rising at Cuzco and in the provinces
beyond, for it is known that the people of Peru do not lightly suffer
wrong. His people, knowing his wishes, and without considering their
past dignities and offices, had, with patience and good will, laid down
their arms and dismissed the troops, and the governor had entered the
city with few attendants and privately, as every one had seen. In all
this he had done what seemed most convenient for the service of the King
our Lord.

When the citizens and magistrates heard these words they wanted Vaca de
Castro to resume the government of the province and, being governor,
that he would see to the common good, and that his Majesty might be
informed that it was not for the good of his service that the new laws
should be enforced. In order to conclude this measure, they met in their
assemblies, requesting Vaca de Castro that he would be present, and
agree to what they desired. They represented that he should resume the
government. Vaca de Castro, thinking more of his position than of his
desire, replied with grave words. He said that they should hold their
official meeting where he was, for it was not reasonable that he should
go to them in person. Then various messengers were sent between them
Vaca de Castro not wishing to go to them and they not wishing to go to
him, both being suspicious of each other, for in times past they had
always opposed him. The result of these negotiations was that the
municipality ordered certain propositions to be drawn up for Vaca de
Castro to sign, but as all this was done secretly the whole intention is
not known.

The Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa intervened in this business and
induced Alonso Riquelme the Treasurer and Illan Suarez the Factor to
make friends with Vaca de Castro. When the documents were ready the
Treasurer gave them to Lorenzo de Estopiñan to take them to Vaca de
Castro for signature. After Vaca de Castro had read them, he said that
he would not sign any such thing, for that they needed both omissions
and additions. There passed negotiations between the municipality and
Vaca de Castro, but it ended in their not being able to agree to
anything. There is nothing more to be said about Vaca de Castro at
present, for they did not arrange anything they wanted with him. He
remained at Lima and they even say that he showed no anxiety about the
things that were said of the Viceroy.

Meanwhile the Viceroy was resting at Truxillo occupying himself with
such trifling things that, when the court of justice was established,
they could have been settled by a simple order to an alguazil. All those
whose duty it is to rule kingdoms, and govern provinces, and do so
without guidance are apt to think that they have achieved many things.
If the Viceroy had quickly left the suburbs, and had entered the cities
prudently, all the scandals and serious injuries he caused would not
have happened, and they were not few. All he did in Truxillo was to let
the Indians know what he had ordered and done at San Miguel. He took
away the Indians granted to the Captain Diego de Mora[27] because he was
lieutenant of the governor, and treated Alonso Holguin in the same way
because he had formerly held that office. In this city of Truxillo there
were the Viceroy’s brother Francisco Velasquez Vela Nuñez, a very noble
and virtuous knight, and his brother-in-law Diego Alvarez de Cueto, a
very prudent and steady adviser. Both these knights always gave good
advice to the Viceroy, as well as the others who had accompanied him
from Tumbez.

In the city of Lima Hernando Bachicao, Diego Maldonado, Gaspar
Rodriguez, Pedro de los Rios and others, when they understood what was
taking place in Truxillo, and how the Viceroy was enforcing the new
laws, discussed many things among themselves, and finally resolved to go
to Cuzco before the Viceroy arrived at Lima, to see what was going to be
done, touching these ordinances.




CHAPTER XII

     _How letters were sent to Gonzalo Pizarro from many persons, being
     in Charcas, brought by Bustillo, urging him to come as Procurator
     of the kingdom._


The Captain Gonzalo Pizarro had departed from the city of Cuzco, and had
gone to the town of Plata which is in the region of Charcas, where he
possessed a very productive grant of Indians. He was at a place called
Chaqui, arranging to work the silver mines of Potosi which had lately
been discovered. There came to him a servant of the Comendador Hernando
Pizarro, named Bustillo, sent to him by Antonio de Ribera, Alonso
Palomino, Villacorta, and many others, with letters. Luis de Almao, a
servant of Gonzalo Pizarro, also told me that Vaca de Castro wrote to
his master advising him to remain quiet although things were looking bad
with regard to the ordinances, for his Majesty would be informed of the
truth, and would order what would be best for his service.

But the letters of Don Antonio, of Palomino, of Villacorta, of Alonso de
Toro and others urged him to come forward promptly and relieve them from
so great an evil as that which was impending. They also sent him the
ordinances. The messengers arrived when Pizarro was hunting eight
leagues away, at a place called Palcocon, his servants being quite
unprepared for such a thing. When Bustillo arrived at the town, he found
Luis de Almao and asked him to go to where Gonzalo Pizarro was. Almao
replied that he would go with all speed, for he surmised that they would
cut off his head. He reached the place at the second vigil, and Gonzalo
Pizarro called for a light, asking who came there in such haste? Almao
answered: “Arise, for Bustillo has come bringing news and letters for
you, for they want to cut off your head.” Thinking that he spoke of Vaca
de Castro, Gonzalo Pizarro replied: “I will cut off his first, I swear
by our Lady.” Then he got out of bed without asking any more questions
and, before the dawn appeared, he galloped off to the town of Chaqui,
where he found the messenger. Taking the despatches he was reading them
all that day, until midnight; and when he knew the provisions of the new
laws he was much agitated. Without finishing their perusal he went out,
saying to those who were with him that such bad news had arrived that
neither they would understand it, nor did he know how to tell them.
Saying this he brought out the letters and the ordinances that they
might read them. He then despatched Juan Ramirez to the city of
Arequipa, that certain money might be detained which he had previously
sent for transmission to Spain. I know not whether his tears were
feigned or not, for those who intend to rebel and become tyrants deceive
those who follow them in many ways. After a few days Gonzalo Pizarro
went to the mines of Porco, where he collected all the money he could.




CHAPTER XIII

     _Of what happened in the town of Plata, and of the Procurators who
     set out to go to Lima._


After the Governor Vaca de Castro had defeated Don Diego de Almagro at
Chupas, he appointed Luis de Ribera as his lieutenant-governor of the
town of Plata. He was an important knight, native of the city of
Seville. At a time when the town was quiet and peaceful, without any
sign of disturbance, the news of the ordinances sent by his Majesty the
King arrived, and of the arrival of Blasco Nuñez as Viceroy. Besides the
news, there came letters from the municipality of Cuzco, and from Vaca
de Castro corroborating it, and advising that Procurators should be sent
so that, with others from all parts of the kingdom, they might protest
against the enforcement of the new laws.

The news did not fail to cause much agitation in the minds of the
people, as it had done in other parts where it had been received. When
the first tumult was over there was a meeting consisting of Luis de
Ribera, Diego Centeno, Antonio Alvarez, all three Alcaldes, and Lope de
Mendieta, Francisco de Retamoso, and Francisco de Tapia, perpetual
magistrates. They consulted in what manner they should receive these
laws and ordinances. After having thought well over it they came to the
conclusion that, as the King had decreed the ordinances, it would not be
proper to resist to the point of rebellion, but to obey and, as humble
vassals, pray that either some or all the ordinances might be suspended.
With this object they would send persons from their town, who, with the
voice of the people, would entreat the Viceroy not to enforce the laws
until his Majesty had been informed of the truth, when he would order
what would be most conducive to his service. Having considered who
should be their procurators, they nominated Diego Centeno[28] the
Alcalde and Pedro Alonso de Hinojosa[29], a magistrate who was also in
the town. They gave them full powers to concert with the procurators
who might come from other cities and towns the course to be taken in
their petition, but all was to be done with great humility. Luis de
Ribera spoke graciously to all the townspeople, assuring them that they
need not trouble themselves about the ordinances, as his Majesty would
be served by their revocation. Diego Centeno and Pedro de Hinojosa set
out from the town to go to the city of Lima, Hinojosa having first seen
Gonzalo Pizarro at Chaqui.




CHAPTER XIV

     _Of other things that were done by the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro, and
     how many letters came to him from all parts._


The Captain Gonzalo Pizarro was much agitated by what the people said,
and, being a man of little forethought, he did not calculate on future
developments. At one time he thought he would remain in his house and
not show the head of the wolf to the people as the saying is.
Afterwards, mindful that his affairs were prospering, he would refuse to
put himself within the lasso. At other times he thought it would show a
want of valour to consider only his own position, when the eyes of all
were turned to him, and felt that they would not be so ungrateful as not
to think of his welfare, if he entered upon the business. He also
considered that he had undertaken the discovery of Canela, whence he
had come out unsuccessful and so seriously embarrassed that $50,000
would not pay his debts. It would have been just if his Majesty had
named him as Governor, for all his services, alleging his claim as based
on the testament of the Marquis and on a royal provision, he being still
absent in Quito. These reflections aroused in him a desire to go to
Cuzco, and assemble forces to oppose the Viceroy. Meanwhile letters
continued to arrive from all parts, inciting him to set out speedily,
striving to excite his anger, and urging him to undertake the enterprise
as his own, for it was to liberate the province and befriend the people,
as their patron and as he who, jointly with the Marquis, had discovered
the kingdom. They told him that he should feel the misery and ruin which
his Majesty’s orders would bring upon them. That he might have a
stronger inducement to interfere, it was hinted to him that he himself,
with all who had been concerned in the recent troubles, were to be
beheaded and all their property confiscated.

Having considered all these things, and being a man of little knowledge,
Gonzalo Pizarro was inclined to approach the city of Cuzco, without
thinking that it was madness to oppose the royal officers. At Cuzco he
had faithful friends who would do what seemed best for his service. So
he wrote cheerful letters to all parts, saying that he would come and
attend to their wishes, adventuring his life for their welfare. Having
collected all the silver, of which there were such quantities that 100
_marcs_ or more were extracted daily, he determined to set out for the
great city of Cuzco, leaving orders that what more of the precious metal
was extracted should be speedily sent after him. About fourteen men, all
being his own servants, accompanied him, and one who was his brother,
having the name of Blas de Soto. As he approached Cuzco there came many
letters from Lima and other parts and he, keeping in his breast what he
intended to do, held his tongue, showing by his silence that he would do
that which had been urged upon him in the letters.




CHAPTER XV

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro sent a spy to Arequipa and further on to get
     news about the Viceroy, and how some soldiers arrived._


The Captain Gonzalo Pizarro was very anxious to know whether the Viceroy
Blasco Nuñez Vela had entered the kingdom and in what part he then was.
To resolve these doubts he secretly sent for a soldier named Bazan, who
was very diligent and knew the country well. He asked him to set out at
once for Arequipa and there to ascertain what the Viceroy said of him,
taking great care that it should not be known who sent him. If the
Viceroy should be in any province in the kingdom, Bazan was to come back
with great speed, but secretly, with the news. If he should find that
the Viceroy had not yet entered the kingdom, he was to go on to Lima,
where he would be certain to obtain definite news. Bazan, with the
desire promptly to comply with Pizarro’s wishes, started with letters of
introduction to many prominent persons in Arequipa and Lima, and after a
few journeys he came back because he had ascertained for certain that
the Viceroy was near Truxillo.

Meanwhile Pizarro arrived at the lake of Titicaca which is in the
province of Callao, where he met the Captain Francisco de Almendras[30],
who, with two youths who were his nephews, named Diego de Almendras and
Martin de Almendras, came to join him, having heard what had happened
and of his march to Cuzco. When they met, Gonzalo Pizarro was much
pleased, for there had been great friendship between them since the time
when they came for the conquest of Peru.

They continued their journey, talking of many things and, as it was told
in all parts that Gonzalo Pizarro was on his way to Cuzco, more citizens
came to meet him. At the town of Ylave he was joined by Gomez de Leon,
Noguerol de Ulloa, and Hernando de Torres, citizens of Arequipa, and a
soldier named Francisco de Leon. As soon as they had greeted each other,
all their talk was concerning the rigour and harshness of the
ordinances, and the violence with which the Viceroy was enforcing them,
without listening to the prayers of those who petitioned that they
should be referred back to the King their natural lord. Besides these,
many soldiers joined Pizarro, who were scattered over the country. The
first was Martin Monje who followed the war for a long time, and is now
a citizen of the town of Plata. The soldiers joined Pizarro because they
delighted in war and hated peace; for in war time they could rob at
their wills, and use their neighbour’s property as their own. They all
knew from their own experience that in changes some lost and others
gained. In the absence of peace and tranquillity in the kingdom poor
soldiers might become prosperous citizens, and knights with great
estates might become poor, and even lose their lives which is worse. So
they offered their services to Pizarro with great pleasure, showing
hearty good will to perform all that he required. He, who wrongfully
intended to oppose the legal authorities, answered them graciously, and
was pleased with the good will they professed.

As Gonzalo Pizarro continued his journey more letters reached him, sent
by Alonso de Toro[31], Francisco de Villacastin[32] and other citizens
of Cuzco, in which they told him the latest news. All the other settlers
in Cuzco and other parts of Peru, although they expressed their
sentiments freely respecting the new laws, did not forget to rob the
Indians and to take as much as they could from them, ignoring the rules
which were intended to put a rein on their avarice. Pizarro reached the
town of Ayavire, which is the end of the province of Callao in that
direction, and there he found waiting for him the _Encomendero_ of that
district, who was Francisco de Villacastin. He, as we said, had written
a letter, also Tomas Vasquez[33], a citizen of Cuzco, who was on his way
to certain mines of his, in Caravaya. He rejoiced at the meeting with
Pizarro and, abandoning his Caravaya journey, returned to the city of
Cuzco.

Gonzalo Pizarro, finding that the wishes and acts of all agreed with
what they had written in their letters, was very much pleased, and was
eager to reach Cuzco. In order to do this as quickly as possible, he
left his luggage in a town called Quiquijana, whence he went on to Cuzco
by forced marches, having first said to a soldier, named Espinosa, that
he was as certain that the Viceroy was now in Lima, as that Jesus Christ
was in heaven. They say that, many times on that road they heard Gonzalo
Pizarro say that if Blasco Nuñez did not provide a remedy for the
ordinances, he would have to play a game on which he must count, for no
one else in Spain wished to go out to enforce these laws. He added that
his Majesty the Emperor, our Lord, had made a mistake in not sending him
the title of Governor of the kingdom which he and his brothers had
discovered. Then he swore that either the ordinances should be revoked
or he would lose his life.

Further on he met Francisco Sanchez, a citizen of Cuzco, who with hearty
welcome and in a loud voice said that Pizarro had done well to come, and
that he should hasten to encounter Blasco Nuñez to pay him well for
having brought the ordinances. Further than this they say that he spoke
words against the powerful Emperor our Lord. Gonzalo Pizarro had met
Juan Ortiz de Zarate[34] in the province of Callao, and had tried to
persuade him to come with him to Cuzco. Juan Ortiz gave a prudent
answer, without wanting to follow him, for he gathered from his loose
and disgraceful words that he had no loyal intentions.




CHAPTER XVI

     _How the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro entered the city of Cuzco, where
     he found coldness and ill-will among most of the citizens; and what
     the Viceroy did in Truxillo._


At the time when these events were taking place Garcia de Montalvo was
Lieutenant-Governor of Cuzco for Vaca de Castro. He and the Alcaldes and
magistrates of that city knew of the coming of Gonzalo Pizarro and that
he was close at hand. After they had held a meeting to decide what they
should do, they decided that they would go out to meet him with some
show of pleasure, thinking that he would not boast or pretend to being
more than Procurator-General of the kingdom. So all went out to meet him
and gave him a joyful welcome. He went to lodge in his houses or
palaces. Many of the citizens visited him but little, and showed that
those who contemplated violence were not to answer for all. Others, on
the other hand, made him great offers, urging him, without minding
difficulties, to go on with what he had begun.

Before this I should have narrated the entrance of the Viceroy into the
city of Lima, for he did so before Gonzalo Pizarro arrived at Cuzco; and
we should have told what the Viceroy did while he was at Truxillo with
regard to the treatment of the Indians. But first I must mention the
flight of some of the citizens from Cuzco.




CHAPTER XVII

     _How some citizens of Cuzco fled from Lima without waiting for the
     Viceroy, and how he was advised of their going._


The tumult in Lima was very great when news came that the Viceroy was
coming and that he was enforcing the ordinances with extreme rigour.
Vaca de Castro deplored what the people said of the Viceroy, and how ill
they took his approach. He tried to appease them in public, saying some
good things that, as time went on, he might not have occasion to say
more evil: showing how all the provinces were tranquil and seeking the
service of God our Lord and of his Majesty, before the Viceroy arrived,
and that he was ill advised to come with so severe and rigorous a
policy. The citizens of Cuzco, Hernando Bachicao, Gaspar Rodriguez and
the rest also spoke in the same manner, showing a desire to leave Lima
before the arrival of the Viceroy. As they sent their plans to many
places, Santillana, the mayor-domo of the Viceroy, got news of it. He
hurriedly sent a messenger, urging how important it was to come to Lima
without delay, and not remain at Truxillo attending to trifling matters.
This was not suitable to his dignity and to the authority existing in
his person. Finally he gave an account of the tumults in the city and in
other parts.

One Mendieta, also a servant of the Viceroy, set out from Lima with the
letter, and, going with great speed, reached the city of Truxillo where
the Viceroy had already been informed of what was going on by Diego de
Aguero. After the arrival of the messenger, named Mendieta, the Viceroy
was rather disturbed, but he did not believe that the kingdom would
openly rise against him. He said that if he had fifty men of Aviles with
him, it would be sufficient to pacify the whole of Peru, never mind how
many kicks they aimed against the ordinances. Presently he gave orders
for the march to Lima, though his brother Vela Nuñez was ill. The
Viceroy was accompanied by Diego Alvarez de Cueto, his brother-in-law,
his brother, and the same knights and others who came with him from
Piura.

The events already mentioned having taken place in Lima, the citizens of
Cuzco, who had arrived, found that the negotiation between Vaca de
Castro and the municipality had fallen through, and that the Viceroy had
already set out from Truxillo. They reflected that here would be great
difficulty in enforcing the new laws, while it would be easy to oppose
the Viceroy and oblige him to leave the country. The Licentiate Vaca de
Castro might be restored to the government, for whom all felt great
friendship, especially Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo. They declared
as the truth that the Licentiate Vaca de Castro consulted in secret with
Camporedondo whether he should return to Cuzco, and, if the Captain
Gonzalo Pizarro had arrived there, should act with him. If not he might
be received as lieutenant of the Governor, the Viceroy not being
received. Afterwards it would be an easy thing to induce Gonzalo Pizarro
to return to his estate and to desist from what he had begun. All the
cities would then restore Vaca de Castro as Governor.

These and many other things passed between one and another. Gaspar
Rodriguez de Camporedondo came out into the square and, looking at those
who were there he recognized Santillana, a servant of the Viceroy. He
then said, in a loud voice, that he should go back to Cuzco to defend
his property, and that others would do the same, as the Viceroy so
cruelly intended to seize it. He then took leave of Vaca de Castro and
set out on his return to Cuzco, accompanied by Hernando de Bachicao and
Beltran del Conde. Diego Maldonado and Pedro de los Rios did the same,
taking the coast road with the intention of reaching the province of
Andahuaylas. They would not then be in the movements which they believed
would be sure to take place. At that time the clouds were so congealed
that, in no way could great calamities and troubles be diverted from the
kingdom.

When Gaspar Rodriguez and Bachicao, with the others, arrived in the
province of Huarochiri, they burnt the pikes left there by Vaca de
Castro and took the small field pieces and arquebuses to Cuzco. Father
Loaysa was following them with all speed. After they left Lima the
Licentiate de la Gama also departed, attended by a soldier named Olea.




CHAPTER XVIII

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro sent Mezcua as a spy to Lima, and how, not
     finding the equipment he expected in the city, he did not wish to
     leave it._


When the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro was established in the houses at Cuzco,
some of the citizens came to visit him, but they were not all disposed
to follow him in his policy of resistance. In order to gain them over,
he said that he would dispose all his forces for the public good, as for
his own brothers and companions; without saying a word that would give
them any suspicions of his evil intentions and tyrannical thoughts,
which were to seize the kingdom. The citizens had received news that the
Viceroy was coming from Truxillo to Lima (where he had been
acknowledged, as well as in all the other cities and towns of the
kingdom), in order to see that no harm arose in the future from the
proceeding of Gonzalo Pizarro. Those in Cuzco who believed this, agreed
not only to show him no favour, but seldom to visit him. He, seeing how
cold those had become who had invited him to come, became sad, saying
that he wished to return to Charcas. He sent for one of his servants
named Mezcua, and told him to go to Lima with all speed, to find out
what was happening there, and whether the Viceroy would soon enter the
city. Mezcua set out, and Gonzalo Pizarro waited for the result, and to
see whether the citizens of Cuzco would then receive him as their
defender and Procurator-General.

At this time there arrived in Cuzco the Licentiate Benito Suarez de
Carbajal, with a bad report of the Viceroy’s conduct and of the rigour
with which he was enforcing the new laws. Gonzalo Pizarro rejoiced at
his arrival. The Licentiate de la Gama travelled along the route of
Cuzco, very glad that he had been able to get away from Lima before the
arrival of the Viceroy, but enraged at that official’s proceedings,
telling every one he met that they should return to Cuzco and not go on
to Lima, because the cruelty of the Viceroy was great. The Licentiate
Leon, being apprised that the Viceroy was near Lima, left that city by
the coast road to Arequipa. He left a letter to the Viceroy saying that
he did not go to create any disturbance, nor against the service of the
King our Lord nor of his lordship; but merely to his own property. He
concluded with the assurance that he would never join any one who was
not a servant of the King. But he only kept this promise for the time it
took him to write the letter. As soon as he arrived at Cuzco he
expressed joy at Gonzalo Pizarro’s position in the city. He not only
joined him, but declared that it was lawful for him to petition against
the new laws, even in arms, with the title of Procurator-General, if the
Viceroy should insist on doing harm. The opinions of the lawyer and
others who did not fail to endorse what he said, induced many people to
join Pizarro, which did not cost them more than their lives and
estates, and being branded as traitors.

One thing I wish to affirm, that the citizens of Cuzco, as well as those
of Lima, merely desired nor had they any other wish than that his
Majesty the King our Lord should suspend the new laws because much evil
would arise from their enforcement. When they chose Pizarro as
Procurator, they nominated three or four conquerors to accompany him
with his petition but these, being sheep, had chosen a wolf for their
guard.

Those who have made kings out of tyrants have always done harm to
republics. Those of the isle of Cadiz who, in war with the Andaluces,
were constrained to send to Carthage for help, remained with all their
republics as vassals to their supposed friends. Ceasing to speak of very
ancient times in which there were many such examples as well among the
tyrants of Sicily as in Greece, all the cities of Italy were free and
exempt, but now are held by Lords and have lost their liberty, by what
means those who are curious well know and can clearly see. In the name
of liberty Pompey fought. Cæsar did the same, and Octavius and Mark
Antony. These remained Lords, and of those who opposed them, some were
killed and the others became vassals. As the Carthaginians did not give
Asdrubal and his brother-in-law Hannibal rule and power over their city,
their affairs went forward.

The citizens of Cuzco and Lima desired that their Procurator should be
Pizarro, who was to venture his life and honour for their liberties. It
was not remembered that he was the brother of Hernando Pizarro, the
other raiser of former wars, and that it was publicly known that, after
he came from Canela, many had heard him say that the King our Lord had
treated him badly in not having made him governor of the province after
the death of the Marquis, and, on many other occasions, that he would
govern though it was against all the world. From the time that Gonzalo
Pizarro knew that the Viceroy had arrived, and that he had received
letters urging him to undertake the enterprise, he had resolved to be
Governor, though he carefully dissimulated, saying that he only sought
the public good and his own rest, and that he only wished for the means
to live.




CHAPTER XIX

     _How the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela was coming near to the city of
     Lima, and how Don Alonso de Montemayor went out to meet him with
     the Secretary, Pero Lopez, and some others._


Having left Truxillo the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela continued to approach
Lima with a strong desire to find himself in it, feeling certain that
the disturbed state of all parts of the country would be softened down
by his presence there. Two men set out from Lima very cautiously, when
his approach was known, who had grievances against Vaca de Castro, named
Anton de Leon and Juan de Leon. They went on the road to tell the
Viceroy what was passing, and to gain his favour. Continuing his journey
the Viceroy came to a town called La Barranca. Here he met the Secretary
Pero Lopez who had come in advance from the province of Xauxa and told
the Viceroy what Vaca de Castro had told him to say. The Viceroy did not
look favourably on the affairs of Vaca de Castro, thinking he was a very
avaricious man.

Don Alonso de Montemayor had come from Cuzco with the Licentiate Vaca de
Castro. When he knew that the Viceroy was coming near Lima, he went out
to meet him. As Don Alonso was a principal person, the Viceroy was very
glad that he had come and received him very well. Don Alonso told him
of the citizens of Cuzco having departed from Lima, and even what Gaspar
Rodriguez de Camporedondo had said publicly. The Viceroy deplored this,
and lamented that men should so easily be moved to oppose what his
Majesty ordered. He feared that it would cause scandals and disturbances
and increase his difficulties. For he also had news of the letters which
Gonzalo Pizarro had sent to all parts. As he came nearer to Lima other
knights came out to meet him. Some urged him not to enforce the new
laws, as they would cause serious detriment to the service of his
Majesty. He said that he could not delay what his King had ordered. From
the time that he arrived, he had seen the provinces disturbed at the
Indians being taken from widows. He would not submit the protest to the
Emperor as Don Antonio de Mendoza and the other governors did, which
would have saved this kingdom from passing through such great miseries
and calamities. But still worse! What do I say! That the coming of the
Viceroy, as I have already said many times, was a scourge of God, sent
to chastise this kingdom for its sins. They say how great was the
prosperity of the citizens of Quito in those times. In their feasts and
banquets some of them put on their tables salt cellars full of gold dust
instead of salt, and all had $30,000 or 40,000 some more some less,
which they had got out of the mines in a short time. They themselves
were for the Viceroy and took him to their city where, on the field of
Añaquito, he was killed with many of them. The cause of what happened in
Peru on the coming of the Viceroy was the great sins committed by the
settlers in that land. I myself knew some citizens who by their
concubines had fifteen sons. Many leave their wives in Spain for fifteen
and twenty years, living with an Indian girl: and so, as both Christians
and Indians sinned greatly, the punishment was general.




CHAPTER XX

     _How it was known at Lima that the Viceroy was near, and how the
     Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa and the Governor Vaca de Castro, with
     other knights and citizens, went out to meet him._


When it was known that the Viceroy was near there were great
disturbances and tumults in Lima, and all the people wanted to take up
arms. There was a meeting of the municipal officers to decide what
should be done, and they exhorted the people not to make a disturbance
when the Viceroy arrived and entered the city, and until it was seen
whether he still intended to enforce the laws. For in the meeting they
held, they spoke of not obeying the detested ordinances even if the
Viceroy insisted upon compliance. The Archbishop of Lima[35] told me
that the Alcalde Alonso Palomino, the Treasurer Alonso Riquelme, and the
Overseer Garcia de Salcedo came to induce him to come out to receive the
Viceroy and require him not to enforce the ordinances. The Archbishop
said that if he went out to receive the Viceroy he would require nothing
from him, and that they, in like case, could do what seemed most
advisable. It is also said that they spoke to the Archbishop on what
they wanted to be done, calling him to hear their desires by ringing a
bell. This enraged the Archbishop who said it was more like a village
bell than anything else. It is even said that those who wished to
resist, actually proposed to seize the Viceroy in the municipal
building, and others relate that, in the lodgings of the Archbishop it
was proposed that the Viceroy should be poisoned. The Father Baltasar de
Loaysa told this to me, adding, that he knew it for certain. Talking of
this not many days ago, to the Reverend Friar Domingo de Santo
Tomas[36] of the Order of St Dominic, a person of great learning and
sanctity, he swore to me that nothing of the kind ever happened as
regards the Archbishop. The Archbishop has said the same to me himself,
explaining that those who contemplated such things may well have been in
his house, but that he knew nothing about it. It is certain that they
plotted amongst themselves, and that they detested the very name of the
Viceroy, but it cannot be supposed that either the Bishop or Vaca de
Castro were concerned in the matter.

These tumults and rages having been appeased, the Licentiate Rodrigo
Niño[37] was elected and appointed as Procurator to petition for three
things, first the suspension of the new laws until his Majesty should
take some other order, and receive information of the grave injury to
the kingdom if they were enforced. The first petition should be
presented with great humility. The second should be accompanied by a
representation of the serious evils which would be caused by enforcing
the new laws, for all the kingdom was disturbed, and the citizens of
Cuzco who were in Lima had left it. For it was certain that Gonzalo
Pizarro had received many letters from all parts urging him to allow
himself to be named as the procurator and defender of all. The third
object was to protest against the troubles and deaths that would be
caused. The Captain Diego de Aguero had returned by order of the Viceroy
and came to where the municipality was assembled. He told the
magistrates that they should receive the Viceroy willingly, and that
there was no occasion for any demands. Owing to this speech of Diego de
Aguero they consented and gave orders for the reception.

At this time Don Jeronimo de Loaysa, Bishop of Lima, who had also been
Bishop of Cartagena, and the Licentiate Vaca de Castro, with the Factor
Illan Suarez, the Captain Juan de Saavedra, Pablo de Meneses, and the
Factor Juan de Salas, with other citizens, knowing that the Viceroy was
near the city, went out to meet him. They proceeded on the road until
they met, and they were well received. The Viceroy was pleased to see
the Bishop, and some discourse passed between them, respecting Vaca de
Castro, to whom the Viceroy showed much cordiality. After some
courtesies, the Bishop said he was glad that the Viceroy had arrived,
because his presence would check the departure of citizens to Cuzco. He
submitted that it would be profitable and show a Christian spirit to
suspend the laws and advise his Majesty of the trouble they were
causing. The Viceroy would know that anything which advanced the service
of the King would be desirable. The Viceroy replied that his Majesty
felt confidence in his lordship, and himself no less, and that he would
comply with what the King had ordered. As for the ordinances he would
see what was best, and that he would do. At this point the Factor Illan
Suarez de Carbajal joined in the conversation. He said: “Give me,
Viceroy, your hands.” The Viceroy was pleased and embraced him, for he
had known him in the court of Spain, and he said: “I only regret that I
can do you no good whatever.” The Factor was dismayed at hearing such
words. He turned back with the Viceroy and they reached a place called
Xaguey. Here the Bishop, Vaca de Castro, the Factor and the others
prayed the Viceroy to sleep there that night for though it was early it
would be convenient, and next morning they would enter the city. The
Viceroy cheerfully consented.

Many citizens and knights presently arrived to see the Viceroy and to
kiss his hand, and he received them all very well. He took the
Archbishop aside, so that no one else could hear, and told him that,
being in Spain, without a thought of coming to these parts, nor knowing
anything of Peru, nor having had any intercourse with the people settled
there, his Majesty had ordered him to go out as Viceroy and enforce the
new laws. He said that it was much against his will to come out and take
away what others had given. Though he was assured that his Majesty would
be well served if the new laws were revoked and more favour was shown to
the conquerors, yet he prayed the Archbishop to apprise him of what had
passed, for he had been told that certain citizens of Cuzco went about
to cause disturbances in the land. The Archbishop said, in reply, that
many days had passed since news had come respecting the ordinances, and
that they had given rise to troubles throughout the country. It,
therefore, behoved the Viceroy to act cautiously. These discourses took
place between the Viceroy and the Archbishop. The Viceroy had also
conversed with Vaca de Castro and the other knights who were present.

Lorenzo Estopiñan had come out to meet the Viceroy, and seeing in him a
disposition not to enforce the ordinances until the arrival of the
Judges, went forward to take the news, and so did others. But though
they announced this, they did not fail to feel much sadness, and the
same was in the minds of all. They saw that the entrance of the Viceroy
into Peru would give rise to a new war which would be worse and would
last longer than former wars because it would be brought about from a
more important and weighty cause.




CHAPTER XXI

     _How the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez de Vela entered the city of Lima._


The members of the municipality of Lima did not rejoice at the arrival
of the Viceroy nor did what he brought with him give them any
satisfaction. So that they had made no preparation to receive him in the
way that was required with one coming with so important a charge from
his Majesty. Then Estopiñan arrived and told them that the Viceroy did
not come to enforce the new laws before the arrival of the Judges. Then
they took from the church the canopy which was used to hold over the
most holy sacrament, the body of our God, when it was taken to the sick:
and there assembled the Alcaldes Nicolas de Ribera, Alonso Palomino, the
Captain Diego de Aguero, Francisco de Ampuero, the Overseer Garcia de
Salcedo, the Factor Suarez de Carbajal, Nicolas de Ribera (Junior), Juan
de Leon, and the Procurator Rodrigo Niño. The Treasurer was laid up
with the gout. All the city was sad and tearful with the knowledge that
the new laws would so soon be enforced. The magistrates were dressed in
robes, and a crimson cloth was placed on the canopy. For as the arrival
was disliked, no orders had been given for the reception, except the
presentation of the three demands adopted by the advice of Diego de
Aguero. The Alcaldes held the poles of the canopy and were accompanied
by a crowd of people. They came as far as the river, making a show of
public rejoicing at the arrival.

In the morning the Viceroy set out from the place where he had passed
the night and soon came to where they were waiting for him. He spoke to
the members of the municipality with much love, and they answered in the
same way and put him under the canopy. He was on a black horse covered
with black velvet adorned with gilded nail heads. Then the Factor Illan
Suarez de Carbajal said, in a loud voice: “Your Lordship, as Viceroy, on
entering this city, we supplicate in all humility that you will confirm
our liberties and privileges as is just.” The Viceroy looked at his
breast, and not seeing the cross he replied: “By the habit of Santiago I
promise to guard and maintain those privileges which are in conformity
with his Majesty’s service.” They conducted him to the church, where
there were two balconies which the Bishop had ordered to be put up, one
for the Viceroy, the other for the Bishop and Vaca de Castro. Mass was
said, and the Viceroy was then conducted to the house of the Marquis Don
Francisco Pizarro. When the Indians saw the Viceroy entering under a
canopy, an honour which they had never seen to be shown to any other
Spaniard, but only when the most holy sacrament was taken from the
church: they spoke one to another, and asked some of the Spaniards
whether it was the son of God to whom such honour was done. They were
told who he was, and evinced much pleasure at his arrival.

In Pizarro’s house, over the door of the Viceroy’s bed chamber, they had
painted an inscription--SPIRITUS SANCTISSIMUS SUPERVENIAT IN TE, and
over the door of the hall or saloon, another--VELOCITER EXAUDI ME DOMINE
QUIA DEFECIT SPIRITUS MEUS. Leaving the Viceroy in his lodging, the
Alcaldes and Magistrates went to hold a meeting where they could consult
as to what they should do.

The Viceroy, finding that the Secretary Pero Lopez was well liked in the
kingdom, had sent him on the road to Cuzco with the royal ordinances, to
notify them to the municipality and citizens.




CHAPTER XXII

     _How the members of the municipality of the city of Lima arranged
     to send messengers to the city of Cuzco advising that there should
     be no disturbance; and how when Pedro de Hinojosa, Diego Centeno
     and Lope Martin were coming to Lima Hinojosa turned back; and what
     happened between the Viceroy and the Treasurer Alonso Riquelme._


The Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela remained in his house, while the Alcaldes
and Magistrates met to consider the best course to take. The Treasurer
Alonso Riquelme was so learned that he now asked to speak to the Viceroy
for them all, with a view to sending a messenger to Cuzco. As he could
not walk by reason of the gout, he was carried in a chair, heard their
intention, and willingly undertook to get it carried into effect. The
Viceroy, when the Treasurer came to him, rejoiced to see him and
embraced him. The Treasurer said: “Your Lordship is welcome as one who
comes by order of the King our natural Lord. Would to God that you had
come with more despatch, for the municipality, with its letter, informed
you of the evil that would result from delay and of the advantage from
arriving with speed. No one who goes to do business in any province
should linger in the suburbs, but should come at once to the principal
city, seeing that the small streams and brooks eventually lose
themselves in the great rivers. Your Lordship must be very tired. Enjoy
yourself and rest for a few days. There will be time afterwards to do
what is needful, and we will serve you loyally, which I promise in the
name of the municipality and the citizens.”

The Viceroy cheerfully replied that he could not doubt the loyalty to
their King of the numerous knights who were in the city. He would take
some repose, while he waited for the Judges, when a court of justice
would be formed, which would establish order in matters relating to the
King’s service and the peace of the kingdom. The Treasurer departed in
great joy at this good answer. He gave an account of his interview to
the municipality who were well pleased and considered that it would be
well to send a message to Cuzco advising that there should be no
disturbance, and sending the good news of the desire of the Viceroy to
give satisfaction to all.

The Alcalde Diego Centeno and Pedro de Hinojosa, Magistrates of the town
of Plata[38] which is in a corner of Charcas, were coming near to Lima,
to arrange about doing what had been ordered with regard to their town.
With them came Lope Martin, a citizen of Cuzco. Gaspar Rodriguez de
Camporedondo and Bachicao, with others, had left the city of Lima, and
told things concerning the Viceroy which certainly were not just, saying
that he was enforcing the ordinances and taking away the Indians to let
them go where they liked, from those who had been lieutenants. When
Centeno and Hinojosa heard this, they agreed that Hinojosa should go
back to Cuzco to report everything, while Centeno continued his journey
to Lima with Lope Martin. When Centeno arrived at Lima he was very well
received by the Viceroy.

The members of the municipality of Lima being assembled, it was resolved
that messengers should be sent to Cuzco to counteract what might have
been said by Rodriguez and the others, and to advise the people to make
no disturbance, pointing out what great difficulties it would cause.
Alonso Riquelme and the Overseer Garcia de Saucedo were requested, on
the part of the others, to persuade Lorenzo de Estopiñan to go, with a
letter of credence to this effect. Estopiñan consented to undertake the
mission; and there was another meeting when it was agreed that the
business might be better settled if Diego Centeno returned to his town.
On his way he might give the citizens of Cuzco to understand what the
Viceroy desired to do for the good of the kingdom. Some went to Diego
Centeno, who had already asked leave of the Viceroy to return to
Charcas. He said that he had come to Lima as Procurator from Plata, and
that he rejoiced at what he had heard, for he understood that all would
receive favour in the King’s name. The municipality of Lima having
requested him to take certain despatches to Cuzco, he asked the Viceroy
whether he would be served by his accepting the mission. The Viceroy
replied that he had every confidence in Centeno, and that he would be
glad if he took the despatches that would be delivered to him by the
municipality; besides which he would give him a copy of the royal
provisions of his Majesty, by virtue of which he should be received as
Viceroy in the cities of Guamanga and Cuzco. The Viceroy further asked
Centeno to tell the Spaniards in those cities to make no trouble for his
proceedings were in obedience to the King’s orders. Diego Centeno
promised to carry out these instructions and, after some further
business with the Viceroy he took leave of him, receiving the despatches
and provisions.

Diego Centeno was a native of Ciudad Rodrigo. His father’s name was
Hernando Carveo, and his mother’s Maria de Vera. He was a gentleman, not
very tall. He had a fair skin and pleasant countenance, with a red
beard. Of noble condition he was not very liberal as regards his own
estate, but expended that of the King largely. He had the usual vices
common among men in the Indies. He left Spain for the Indies at twenty
years of age, and had close affinity with the Captain Peranzules and
other captains in that kingdom. Having received the despatches and
provisions he left Lima accompanied by Lope Martin. On arriving at
Guamanga the provisions of the Viceroy were obeyed as his Majesty had
ordered.




CHAPTER XXIII

     _How, when Gonzalo Pizarro was feeling very sad because the
     citizens of Cuzco did not agree with him as he expected, there
     arrived Mezcua who had gone to spy with letters from several
     people, and what else happened._


The Captain Gonzalo Pizarro, on his arrival at the city of Cuzco,
notwithstanding that Alonso de Toro, Villacastin, and Tomas Vasquez
showed great willingness and declared themselves to be his faithful
friends, had found a strong disinclination to comply with his wishes
among the others. The reason was that they knew of the arrival of the
Viceroy in Lima, and they felt that it would not be right to oppose
themselves to the royal orders. Seeing this, Pizarro was discouraged and
somewhat enraged. He had been wrong and wanting in knowledge to be moved
by private letters and conversations. He ordered his Indians to depart
from Cuzco which they had done, and he was about to do the same when
Gomez de Mezcua arrived. He had set out from Cuzco, by Pizarro’s order,
to find out what was happening at Lima. He met Gaspar Rodriguez de
Camporedondo and Bachicao, with others, at Guamanga. These used very
ugly words against the Viceroy and the ordinances. When they heard from
Mezcua that Gonzalo Pizarro was in Cuzco, they rejoiced exceedingly,
telling him to return and report that they were coming. They gave him
letters from some of the citizens of Lima who spoke of their hatred of
the Viceroy. Pizarro was urged to drive him out of the country if he
would not suspend the ordinances until his Majesty the King was informed
of the grave injury they would do. Mezcua with great speed returned to
Cuzco to bring such joyful news, just at the time when Gonzalo Pizarro
was preparing to leave it.

When the coming of the citizens and the things they said of the Viceroy
were known, opinions in Cuzco altered a good deal. Men declared that
they would not suffer such injuries. Pizarro, sending for Alonso de
Toro, Villacastin and his other friends, showed them letters he had
received from Lima, and told Mezcua to state what he had been told by
Gaspar Rodriguez and his companions. The news made Gonzalo Pizarro
change his mind about returning to Charcas, and gave the citizens of
Cuzco a reason for electing him as Procurator-General to prevent the new
laws from being enforced until his Majesty had received and considered
the petitions of the conquerors of Peru.

Here the reader may see how fragile and slippery are the affairs of
this world, and that there are many changes in every hour that we live
in it. At one moment we find Gonzalo Pizarro about to retire into
private life, and the people of Cuzco in no mind to make him their
Procurator, nor to give him any other charge. In another, no sooner was
it known that citizens of Lima were coming to arouse those of Cuzco,
than Pizarro was accepted to take command over all others, march to
Lima, and drive out the Viceroy. Afterwards, by virtue of a clause in
the will of the Marquis his brother, Gonzalo Pizarro was to be received
as Governor. Pompey the Great, when Julius Cæsar passed the Rubicon, was
received as Captain-General against him and, being in Greece, at the
proposal of the Consul Lentulus he was given a commission to raise
troops, appoint captains, and fit out fleets against him who was looked
upon as an enemy. The simple people of all nations, when they saw the
mandate of the Roman Senate, and that Pompey was appointed as
Captain-General to defend the republic, easily came to the conclusion
that Pompey was fighting solely for the public good, which, God knows,
would be that he who conquered might do as he pleased.

Thus, in the kingdom of Peru the news spread that those of the
municipality and the other citizens had nominated Gonzalo Pizarro as
Procurator. Believing that his only object was their good, they rejoiced
and gave assistance. He had more time than Pompey had to mature the
tyrannical objects which he fostered in his bosom. Happy those who were
in the kingdom, and were able to desist from following the banners of
this tyrant. But what can I say, being far away in the dense cane brakes
of Quimbaya[39], yet this fury extended even to that distance, letting
us know how cruel are these civil wars.




CHAPTER XXIV

     _How Gaspar Rodriguez and his companions arrived at the city of
     Cuzco, and how Gonzalo Pizarro was received as Captain against the
     Inca._


Now it is time, O city of Cuzco, that we relate the movements which
occurred in thee, causing no small amount of clamour and mourning. But
boast not of that, seeing that the deeds of the citizens were the causes
of much bloodshed. The war which was commenced by thee spread beyond thy
confines, as the sad conflict of Huarina bears testimony.

The Spaniards in Cuzco were aroused to great anger by what they heard of
the Viceroy from Gaspar Rodriguez, Hernando Bachicao and the others.
They rejoiced to find Gonzalo Pizarro there, giving him an account of
all that had taken place at Lima, and how the Viceroy had taken the
Indians from Diego de Mora, Alonso Holguin, Diego Palomino and others;
and had declared that he would do the same in all parts, enforcing the
new laws with rigour. All then understood the great injury that would be
done to them. When this had been heard, all agreed to take Gonzalo
Pizarro, and to go with him to pray that the new laws might not be
enforced in all their rigour. Gaspar Rodriguez and Hernando Bachicao
declared that the people of Lima intended to seize the Viceroy if he
persisted in enforcing the new laws. Owing to these statements there was
much anxiety in Cuzco, and the people expected to receive very heavy
punishment. Yet there was a variety of opinions among them, the majority
being disposed to take any course rather than obey the new laws.

The tumult having subsided, which arose on the arrival of the news about
the Viceroy, it was decided to seek the best way in which Gonzalo
Pizarro, in the name of all, might represent the people. Yet it did not
appear certain that power could be given to him, seeing that Blasco
Nuñez had arrived at Lima, and had been received as Viceroy. On the
other hand to withhold the power would be madness and would cause
serious injury. Letters did not cease to arrive not only from Lima, but
also from the province of Andahuaylas. Pedro de los Rios and Diego
Maldonado had interviews with Francisco Maldonado, Hernando Bachicao,
and Juan Velez de Guevara with others. They concerted with the citizens
and the municipal officers that Gonzalo Pizarro should be appointed
captain against the Inca who was, according to rumour, arranging to
march against the city. As much reliance was placed on Pizarro, he
easily induced the citizens, jointly with their municipal officers, to
nominate and elect him as their captain against Manco Inca if he should
come with warlike intent; and powers were given to their captain to
collect arms and raise men.

But the desires of Pizarro did not stop there. He wanted to be
acknowledged as Chief Justice and Procurator-General, with which
authority he would be able to attain his ends. He wrote to the province
of Andahuaylas, asking Diego Maldonado, the perpetual magistrate there,
to come at once to the city. He also wrote to Pedro de los Rios to come
to Cuzco. And notwithstanding that they preferred to remain in that
province, and not to be present with those who were rebelling, they
could not abide by their wishes, for so many letters came, that they had
to go to Cuzco. When the news came that Gonzalo Pizarro was nominated
captain against the Inca, soldiers arrived from all parts well armed
with arquebuses and powder, eager that rumours should be converted into
war, that they might emerge from the poverty caused by peace.




CHAPTER XXV

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro and his friends induced the municipality of
     Cuzco to nominate him Chief Justice, which was done against the
     wishes of many._


Gonzalo Pizarro rejoiced at being appointed captain against the Inca,
because it was a step in the direction he wanted to go. Talking with the
principal people of Cuzco, they discussed together the intention of the
Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela to enforce the ordinances, Pizarro pointing
out that he had been induced to come from Charcas to help them, and that
they should unite to name him Procurator, that he might have power to go
and to supplicate in their favour. Letters kept arriving from Lima and
from other parts urging him to lose no time in marching from Cuzco. The
members of the municipality had a meeting where many speeches were made
touching this business. At length it was agreed that Gonzalo Pizarro
should be given authority, in the name of the city, to march to Lima and
see that the ordinances were suspended until they had been again
submitted to his Majesty the King. The people of Cuzco would risk their
lives, goods and estates to secure this.

Gonzalo Pizarro, after this resolution, went about with armed men, and
showed by his words and bearing that he expected something more than the
title of Procurator. The Licentiate Leon had now arrived at Cuzco and
rejoiced very much when he heard what had taken place. The Licentiate de
la Gama had written letters in which he said many bad things against the
Viceroy.

As soon as Gonzalo Pizarro was nominated Procurator, he began to talk
with Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo, Cermeño, Alonso de Toro, Tomas
Vasquez, and his other friends, to concert measures for turning the
minds of the citizens to receive him as Chief Justice, for if this was
done he would have complete control of everything. The members of the
municipality were much opposed, for it seemed to them that Gonzalo
Pizarro, against their wishes, wanted to raise the country in opposition
to the Viceroy. They would not give their consent, and some of them
murmured, saying--“Perhaps you do not see the consequence of such an
advance to contend against the Viceroy.” They cursed those who had
written from Lima, and that Gonzalo Pizarro, believing them too easily,
should have come to the city, leaving the town where he resided.

When Pizarro understood this attitude of some of the citizens, he said
that he did not wish to be Procurator of such an ungrateful city, and he
did not desist from going about accompanied by arquebusiers and
musketeers. There was then another meeting of the municipal officers,
who made the following proposal, copied exactly from the original, which
I saw in possession of a notary.

“In the city of Cuzco, 26th of June 1544, in presence of Gomez de
Chaves, public notary. The Captain Gonzalo Pizarro was there and said ‘I
will resign the offices of Captain-General and Procurator of this
kingdom because the magistrates and other officials of it do not wish to
include the office of Chief Justice. If they should wish to entrust me
with that duty I should not shrink from it, but would use and exercise
it as I am instructed by them. Because it will conduce to the
pacification of the soldiers, I desire to be chosen for that office,
that being my desire, and I sign this with my name.’ Witnesses--the
Captain Francisco de Almendras and the Captain Cermeño.”

When Gonzalo Pizarro said this, some of those who were at the meeting,
were very much disturbed. For while, on one side, Gonzalo Pizarro said
that he would resign the appointments of Captain and Procurator, on the
other the armed men who were with him seemed ready to elect and nominate
him as Chief Justice. So they were afraid to come to a decision. The
arquebusiers outside fired some shots to give those inside to understand
what would happen to them if they did not obey.

In conclusion, after some further discussion, the votes were given in
the following manner.

Juan Velez de Guevara, Magistrate for his Majesty, said that he would
vote, and give as his opinion that the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro should be
Captain-General and Chief Justice, and to this he signed his name.

Then Antonio de Altamirano, Alcalde, gave his vote that Gonzalo Pizarro
should be Chief Justice, and signed his name.

Next the Captain Diego Maldonado the rich said that as his desire was to
do what was best for his Majesty’s service, he requested his colleagues
to let him consult some one with more learning, after which he would be
prepared to answer.

Hernando Bachicao, a Magistrate, said that his vote and opinion was that
the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro should be Chief Justice until his Majesty
should otherwise provide, and he signed his name.

Francisco Maldonado said that his vote and opinion was that as the
ordinary Alcaldes were occupied in civil and criminal lawsuits, and as
there were many soldiers in the city, the number daily increasing, the
Captain Gonzalo Pizarro should be Chief Justice, and he signed his name.

Diego Maldonado de Alamos said that his vote and opinion was to seek
what was best for the service of God our Lord, and for that of his
Majesty, and for the good and service of the city and its people. He had
not learning to be able to certify that the request of Captain Gonzalo
Pizarro was right, nor whether he had the power to make him Chief
Justice as a Magistrate of that city, and to this he put his name.

Juan Julio de Hojeda said that his opinion was the same as that of Diego
Maldonado de Alamos, and to this he signed his name. Then followed a
document as follows:

“And presently, the votes of the Alcaldes and Magistrates having been
seen, they said that the Captain Gonzalo Pizarro was chosen and
nominated Chief Justice, and powers were given to him which appertain to
that Office. They received the oath in due form, and he promised to use
and exercise the Office according to law, and these names were signed”:

  Gonzalo Pizarro
  Juan Velez de Guevara
  Francisco Maldonado
  Diego Maldonado de Alamos
  Hernando Bachicao
  Juan Julio de Hojeda.

They say that, at this time, the Licentiates de la Gama, Carbajal, Leon,
and Barba and the bachelor Guevara, gave votes and opinions that Gonzalo
Pizarro should go with an armed force to supplicate respecting the
ordinances, and that they would show that this was legal and right. Even
worse things than these were said, and votes were given which caused no
little harm, many simple people, believing what was told them, following
the tyrant in his rebellion.




CHAPTER XXVI

     _How the Alcaldes Antonio Altamirano and Diego Maldonado the rich
     left the meeting, but finally had to sign, and how the Procurator
     Alonso Carrasco declined to provide a petition on the arrangement
     in the name of the city._


At the time when the members of the municipality give their opinions and
votes at their place of meeting, the Alcalde Antonio Altamirano, seeing
that the intentions of Gonzalo Pizarro were tyrannical and evil, left
the building to avoid voting. Diego Maldonado the rich did the same.
Gonzalo Pizarro came out with the wand of office, and all obeyed him as
Chief Justice. Diego Maldonado being in his house, Captain Cermeño with
a company of arquebusiers came to take him to the house of Gonzalo
Pizarro who was very angry because Maldonado would not sign. Pizarro,
with a haughty countenance, ordered him, having the first vote in the
municipality, to sign before he left the room, that all might see it. He
was told that his life would be taken if he did not sign, so he signed,
but in a false hand, and different from his usual signature. Antonio de
Altamirano also signed. Diego Maldonado asked all to witness, he and
Pedro de los Rios making a secret protest that they did not join with
Gonzalo Pizarro, nor would they be found acting against the service of
his Majesty.

Notwithstanding what had taken place, those who were committed to
Gonzalo Pizarro, in order that his reception as Chief Justice might be
more pronounced, advised that he should speak to Pero Alonso Carrasco,
the Procurator of the city, and induce him to present a petition to the
municipality stating that the people rejoiced at the election, which was
for the public good. Pero Alonso, acting prudently, and seeing that such
a proceeding was not right, would neither make such a petition, nor
present it to the municipality. Gonzalo Pizarro, indignant at his
opposition, gave orders that his property should be confiscated. Pero
Alonso Carrasco, fearing that they would kill him, took refuge in the
church and, thinking that he was not safe there, he went to the house of
Alonso de Mesa[40], a citizen of Cuzco, where he was concealed for two
days and two nights.

Gonzalo Pizarro was so enraged because Pero Alonso Carrasco would not
send the petition in the name of the city that, as some say[41], he
ordered some of his servants to kill the Procurator. One night Pero
Alonso ventured out to go to his house, and was badly wounded in three
places by those who were waiting for him. They left him, thinking he was
dead. This is the reason that Pero Alonso Carrasco did not go with
Garcilasso and Graviel de Rojas when they left the city to join the
Viceroy.




CHAPTER XXVII

     _How a letter came from Lima, written by the Factor Illan Suarez de
     Carbajal, in cypher, and how the Captain Garcilasso de la Vega was
     asked for his vote for the nomination of Pizarro._


The blessed Gregory says[42] that a great reward cannot be obtained
without great labour, great knowledge and understanding, and long
vigils, passing many nights and days in them. Solomon says that great
riches cannot be got or held without great watchfulness and much working
of the spirit. This narrative is a notable example for me, for in
putting my hands to write a work so difficult as this upon which I am
now engaged, in no way can I avoid passing long vigils, to make sure
that the stories agree one with another, and that I do not in any way
depart from the truth. But I know that the work I have undertaken, with
the divine help, is worthy of the expenditure of such labour, yet in no
part have I found myself so perplexed as at this point. I have felt that
my weak judgment is insufficient to decide such great questions,
insomuch that I have thought I must bring my narrative to an end,
leaving the field open to an abler pen. However, the hold I have taken
of it gives me courage to proceed onwards.

The city of the Kings having received the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela, and
the conversation I have mentioned having taken place between him and the
Treasurer, the Factor Illan Suarez de Carbajal, a direct servant of the
King, wrote a letter in cypher, which I have had in my possession, to
his brother Benito Suarez de Carbajal, in which he said that he should
loyally serve the King, and if there were rebellions in the provinces,
he should not consent to them, but come at once to Lima, where he would
find the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela, with other advice to the same
effect. The licentiate received the letter, and replied in cypher to the
Factor declaring that he would act in conformity with his brother’s
advice in all things, and he wrote to the Viceroy, telling him what was
taking place in Cuzco.

Gonzalo Pizarro, finding that the Captain Garcilasso de la Vega[43] had
not approved of his election, being a Magistrate of the city, he sent to
notify to him that he must give his vote. He replied that he was
unlearned, and did not know whether he could certify to the nomination
of Chief Justice. He did this to avoid either voting or signing a
document which was clearly opposed to the King’s service. Gonzalo
Pizarro then sent for the Licentiate Carbajal to require him to say
whether Garcilasso could, with justice, give his vote in this matter.
Carbajal replied in the affirmative. Garcilasso had given his answer
with circumspection. In order to evade the necessity, he went to the
place of municipal meetings and stated, in presence of the other
magistrates who were assembled there, that he was not a magistrate by
vote of the municipality, but by reason of the absence of a citizen,
whose duties he had undertaken, which he now resigned, and that he
protested he would do so no more. Saying this he left the room.

Gonzalo Pizarro, and those of the municipality, then sent Pedro de
Hinojosa to the city of Arequipa to summon Francisco de Carbajal, the
same who was the Serjeant Major in the battle of Chupas, to bring what
arms and troops he could collect, and to come to Cuzco. Pedro de
Hinojosa set out for Arequipa, where Francisco de Carbajal was residing,
very anxious to return to Spain but unable to obtain a passage. When he
understood the position of Gonzalo Pizarro and that he called for him,
it is said that he was sad, wishing to keep clear of these
complications. But he was a man experienced in war, and brought up in
the profession of arms. He said: “I was very unwilling to put my hands
into the warp of this cloth, but now that things are as they are, I
promise to be the principal weaver.” He then got ready to go to Cuzco,
using ugly words against the ordinances, and saying that he had been
like the cat that was so teased and ill treated that at length it turned
to scratch its own master. If his Majesty sent such laws, he added, it
was a decent thing to oppose them. Pedro de Hinojosa returned to Cuzco
after delivering his message. The Lieutenant or Corregidor of Arequipa
absented himself, and Hinojosa met with no hindrance or ill treatment.
He occupied himself solely in collecting as many men and weapons as he
could.




CHAPTER XXVIII

     _How the Captain Lorenzo de Aldana wrote and told the Viceroy what
     the people at Cuzco were saying, and how it was rumoured in Lima
     that Gonzalo Pizarro was nominated Governor of Cuzco._


The Captain Lorenzo de Aldana[44] was in the province of Xauxa where he
had a grant of Indians, and he heard what was being said, and how easily
people had been moved to treat of affairs, from the citizens of Cuzco
coming from Lima. He also had news how Gonzalo Pizarro had come from
Charcas and marched to Cuzco, where he had claimed to be received as
Procurator in opposition to the Viceroy. Aldana was anxious that there
should be no disturbance nor war in his province, and that the Viceroy
should act prudently. The business he took in hand was difficult and
needed wise counsel. He wrote to the Viceroy giving him welcome on his
arrival: and said that it should be known how Gaspar Rodriguez de
Camporedondo, Bachicao, and the other citizens from Cuzco had related
with what severity he had acted on entering the kingdom, and how little
sympathy he had shown, rejoicing that he should have come to enforce the
ordinances, taking their Indians away from those of San Miguel and
Truxillo, and how great disturbances were the consequence. In order
that it might go no further, and that those who were fostering the
discontent might not be entirely believed, the orders of his Majesty
should be carried out with much prudence. He said that he had been long
in the land, and that he knew by experience the levity of those who
settled there, and their willingness to see war break out, that they
might profit by the disorders. Besides this, Lorenzo de Aldana wrote
other things to the Viceroy, telling him that Gonzalo Pizarro was in
Cuzco with the intention of being nominated Procurator. A few days after
he had written this letter, Aldana left the province of Xauxa, and set
out for Lima to join the Viceroy who rejoiced at his arrival. At this
time the Captain Juan de Saavedra asked permission to go to Huanuco,
which the Viceroy granted.

Many days had not passed in Lima before it was understood and known for
certain that Gonzalo Pizarro had been received in Cuzco as Procurator to
come and appeal against the ordinances. It is easy to understand this,
for letters had always passed between Lima and Cuzco, the messengers
going and coming. The news was now certain. They said joyfully among
themselves, as it is reported, “Have you by chance not heard the good
news?” “Well, Gonzalo Pizarro is nominated Procurator to come against
this audacious man, the Viceroy!” Others, when they heard it, shrugged
their shoulders and pressed their hands, unable to repress the laugh
that came from their mouths. In short, great was the rejoicing among all
the people.

The news came that Gonzalo Pizarro was at Cuzco assembling an armed
force, and when the Viceroy heard it he was much disturbed in his mind.
He could only say that Gonzalo Pizarro was a knight and a servant of the
King, brother of the Marquis who discovered those provinces, and that
he would not wish to merit the name of traitor. He desired that the
Judges would arrive, that the court of justice might be established.
Many times he came to the resolution of going at once to Cuzco
accompanied only by his brother and his brother-in-law Diego Alvarez de
Cueto, with a few citizens. There were so many inconveniences that the
Cuzco expedition did not take place though, if he had been there, the
disturbances would have ceased, and the war would not have commenced.
But to speak of these things is to attempt divination: for God had
determined to punish that kingdom, it even seems to me that the unusual
lightning was a sign of it, and that it had to pass through more
calamities and miseries. According to what Plutarch says in his life of
Lucullus, referring to certain questions which the Cyreneans put to the
divine Plato, there is nothing more arduous than to bring under special
laws the men who possess great wealth, for they are like men intoxicated
and beyond their ordinary senses, transported by the favours of
prosperous fortune. The same Plutarch, on the other hand, says that
there is nothing easier than to dominate the minds of similar men who
are depressed by many reverses of fortune, because their reverses had
crushed down all their pride and lofty thoughts. In truth it is a
notable sentence. For at the time when the unfortunate Viceroy entered
Peru, he found the minds of men, owing to their wealth, not only ready
to protest against the laws, but to oppose them. Yet when the same
tyrant’s proceedings had led them to disaster and misfortune, Gasca was
able not only to enforce the laws but to enact others more heavy, and to
carry out the will of the Emperor our lord who is now so powerful and so
feared in these parts that his authority is not equalled in any other
province in the world. I have said this, because it should be understood
that his Majesty was able, as sovereign lord, to pardon when his
commands had been obeyed, although there is, from Spain to Peru, more
than four thousand leagues of land and sea.




CHAPTER XXIX

     _How his Majesty sent a royal order to the Adelantado Sebastian de
     Belalcazar commanding him to execute the new laws and how the
     Procurators met in the city of Popayan and agreed to a
     supplication._


After the death of the Captain Francisco Garcia de Tobar and the arrival
of the warlike Juan Cabrera at the town of Timana, the chain of
mountains was crossed which separates one region from the other, and the
Adelantado Belalcazar came to the town of Popayan where he remained for
some days. At that time, being in the city of Cali, the news arrived of
the royal ordinances and of the coming of the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela
to enforce them. There was a great disturbance, but the people all
believed that their neighbours would refuse to obey the ordinances. They
said that please God, they would agree to what their neighbours did, for
the injury was so great. Then came the news that the Viceroy had been
received in Lima which was displeasing to them, and made them think that
those in Peru had little resolution. Then a ship arrived at the port of
Buenaventura which brought the new laws in a letter from the very high
and illustrious Prince our lord Don Felipe, ordering the Adelantado
Belalcazar to execute and enforce the new laws and ordinances issued for
the government of the Indies, in doing which he would perform a great
service. When this royal order arrived, all the people were disturbed,
saying that they could not submit to such a serious injury being done to
them; and that their services did not merit such treatment.

Belalcazar acted with prudence, telling the people not to be disturbed,
for his Majesty would certainly show favour to them. He sent orders to
all the towns and cities in the province to send Procurators, that they
might consider what it would be best to do, in the matter of the
ordinances. Having arrived at the city of Popayan, the Adelantado wanted
to execute the new laws, having first put a great number of Indians
under the head of his sons, because, at the time of compliance, it would
not then be for him to give them up. The Procurators, when they saw that
he wanted to comply, besought him, in the name of all the province, to
support their protest. This was agreed to, the execution of the laws was
postponed, and they named one Francisco de Rodas to go as their
Procurator to Spain. His Majesty had already named the Licentiate Diaz
Amendariz as Commissary General and examining Judge. In this way that
province was kept quiet and there was no serious disturbance.




CHAPTER XXX

     _How, after Gonzalo Pizarro had been received in Cuzco as
     Procurator and Chief Justice, he named captains; and how Diego
     Centeno arrived at Cuzco and delivered despatches to Pizarro._


Gonzalo Pizarro, being received as Chief Justice in the city of Cuzco,
made haste to collect men, manufacture powder, and prepare arquebuses,
while letters continually came, generally in cypher, speaking ill of the
Viceroy, and urging Pizarro to come down to Lima without delay. Now that
he had got the command which he desired, he considered that it would be
well to nominate captains and officers for the war. He thought of giving
the appointment of Ensign General to Diego Maldonado the rich, but he
declined it with ingenious excuses, showing that it would be more
advisable to leave him in the city. The members of the municipality also
spoke to Pizarro, advising that Maldonado should be left as Alcalde and
captain in Cuzco. Consenting to this, Gonzalo Pizarro appointed Alonso
de Toro to be Master of the Camp. He was a native of Truxillo. For
Ensign General Antonio de Altamirano, a native of Hontivéros was named.
The captains of infantry were Diego Gumiel, a native of Villadiego, Juan
Velez de Guevara of Malaga, Cermeño, who came from San Lucar de
Barrameda, was captain of arquebusiers, Hernando Bachicao had charge of
the artillery, and Pedro de Puertocarrero commanded the cavalry.

A few days after Gonzalo Pizarro had made these appointments, these
rebels left Cuzco and those who wished to wage this wicked and atrocious
war formed their camp. Thus the drums and fifes proclaimed its
commencement. How rejoiced must have been the tyrant Gonzalo Pizarro to
find that now he had the power to oppose the Viceroy, thinking that it
would be easy afterwards to seize the government of the kingdom.

Lope Martin arrived at the city, publishing all the news of the Viceroy.
Diego Centeno also arrived with the despatches and provisions which the
Viceroy had brought. Some say that he delivered them into the hands of
Gonzalo Pizarro of his own accord, without making any conditions. They
say that Pizarro, when he saw the despatches, rejoiced at having got
them into his power, and ordered Centeno, on pain of death, not to tell
any citizen or any other person what he had brought. There was haste in
getting the arms ready, and providing everything for the march; and it
was resolved to send to the city of Guamanga for the artillery,
Francisco de Almendras, a strong adherent of Pizarro, undertaking the
duty.




CHAPTER XXXI

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro ordered the Captain Francisco de Almendras to
     go to the city of San Juan de Victoria which is in Guamanga to
     seize the artillery that had been sent there by the Licentiate Vaca
     de Castro._


When Gonzalo Pizarro conceived his evil design, he remembered that the
artillery with which the younger Almagro gave battle to Vaca de Castro
at Chupas, was in Guamanga. Having confidence in Francisco de Almendras,
who was a citizen of Plata, Pizarro sent him, with thirty arquebusiers,
to get possession of the artillery without doing any harm to that city.
On the contrary he was to talk to the citizens and municipality, telling
them that Pizarro had charged himself with the duty of answering in the
name of all touching the question of the ordinances, and as they had
written so many times and incited him to action, they should now be
prepared to help.

Francisco de Almendras set out from Cuzco with his men, and arrived at
Guamanga where, at that time, Vasco Suarez was Alcalde for the King our
lord. When the object of Almendras was known there was a meeting of the
Alcalde and magistrates to decide what steps should be taken to prevent
the artillery from being taken away. Vasco Suarez said that he desired
to defend the artillery, and to oppose Almendras and his men. Juan de
Berrio, a magistrate, declared that with his person, arms, horses, and
servants he would support the loyal intention of the Alcalde. Diego
Gavilan said the same. The Captain Vasco de Guevara feigned to have a
bad indisposition which increased so much at that time that he was
unable to leave his bed. Almendras, in a loud voice, asked how long they
would delay to give up the artillery? Those of Guamanga equivocated, not
wishing to tell where the artillery was deposited. Almendras waited,
for the soldiers said that he had little occasion to pass compliments,
for Gonzalo Pizarro had left home and estate to answer the calls of
these men, and now they pretended not to know where the artillery was.
Some say that Vasco de Guevara told Almendras where it was, but that is
false. The truth is that, with the most persuasive words he could use,
he deceived Francisco de Almendras and, when night came, he mounted his
horse and rode off to the country of Soras, where his grant of Indians
was, with the wish of helping and serving the Viceroy.

When the Captain Almendras knew of the escape of Vasco de Guevara, he
had a mind to destroy the town. In a great rage he went to the house of
Guevara, and tortured his servants until they confessed where the
artillery was. He took possession of it with great joy, saying to the
citizens of Guamanga that he had little to thank them for, that he would
return to Cuzco, and they would see what orders would come from there.
This done he loaded the artillery on the shoulders of Indians, and took
the road back to the city of Cuzco.




CHAPTER XXXII

     _How it became clearly known at Lima that there was a rebellion in
     Cuzco and that the artillery had been taken, which gave the Viceroy
     much anxiety._


At this time inconstancy began to show itself in Lima. The Devil walked
out freely, putting evil thoughts into those who were well disposed.
They talked secretly one to another, saying that the Viceroy would
enforce the new laws. Others said: “Wait a bit, Pizarro is in Cuzco, and
we have certain news that he will come with an armed force, and will
answer for all.” The whole city knew this, and the Viceroy no longer
ignored what he knew to be certain. Striking his forehead with his hand,
he exclaimed: “Is it possible that the great Emperor our Lord, who is
feared in all the provinces of Europe, and to whom the Turk, Master of
all the East, dare not show himself hostile, should be disobeyed here by
a bastard who refuses to comply with his laws?” The Viceroy was anxious
that the Judges should arrive to found the court of justice, and the
mind of this loyal man was torn with anguish at being unable to cause
the royal wishes to be obeyed. He felt a great hatred against Vaca do
Castro, and he found reasons for entertaining this feeling. For he knew
that Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo, Bachicao, and the others who left
the city were friends of Vaca de Castro, and he believed that they went
to Cuzco by his advice. He, therefore, intended to have his conduct
examined in order that he might be judicially punished, as soon as the
Judges arrived.

Many days did not pass before the news arrived that the artillery had
been seized at Guamanga, and it was said that Guevara had delivered it
to Francisco de Almendras. No previous news had caused such grief to the
Viceroy, and from his breast he hurled very angry words against Vasco de
Guevara, saying that he ought to be severely punished for such a serious
failure of duty. He was very suspicious of the people at Lima, not
believing a word they said. Consequently they felt great fear that he
would do them some injury.




CHAPTER XXXIII

     _How the Viceroy, seeing that the Judges were not coming, ordered
     the new laws to be publicly proclaimed, and of the imprisonment of
     Vaca de Castro._


From what has gone before the reader will remember that Blasco Nuñez
Vela arrived at Lima joyfully, assuring the people that he would not
execute the laws until the court of justice had been established, and it
will also be borne in mind what passed with the Treasurer. But as he had
come fresh from Spain where the majesty of our King is obeyed in such a
manner, that every provision or order, however hard it may appear, is
enforced and complied with notwithstanding any protests, he did not
understand how disloyal the people in this kingdom had become, and the
great looseness which had prevailed for some time. Notwithstanding the
news of the rebellion at Cuzco and the seizure of the artillery he
adopted a measure very suddenly which required much deliberation,
forgetting his promise, and not considering how complicated and
difficult the affairs of the kingdom had become, while the minds of the
majority were dangerous and filled with animosity against himself. He
suddenly ordered Juan Enriquez, the common crier, to proclaim the new
laws publicly, that no one might claim ignorance, and that all might be
public.

It is proper that the Viceroy’s intention should be understood, and not
be obscured. I truly believe that he understood the state of affairs to
be serious, and all now living know that what our Cæsar orders must be
obeyed, though compliance may be difficult, still the laws must be
published and enforced. No doubt the Viceroy wanted to execute them that
it might not be said, either in the present time or in the future, that
he desisted through fear from complying with the royal commands.

The great Alexander, founder of the third empire, and the most powerful
King of Greece, we are told by Quintus Curtius and Arrian, had an
excellent captain who passed with him into Asia, named Parmenion. This
Parmenion had three noble sons, Philotas, Hector and Nicanor. Being
Prefect of Mesopotamia, some of his letters appeared to be against the
service of the King. Alexander suspected his general’s son Philotas,
because he knew through Diminus that he had a grievance against the
King. He did not wish to communicate the matter to Alexander because it
was a matter of life and death; yet for this and for the letters which
were found from his father, Philotas was cruelly put to death.
Alexander, calling on Polidamas, one who was daring, ordered him to go
to where Parmenion was and to kill him, and after his death to show an
order he had given about the captains, that those of the army might not
mutiny. Polidamas, notwithstanding that he had received much kindness
and great honours from Parmenion, came to him with some letters, and
while he was reading them he stabbed him. Although the sight of his
venerable person moved him to compassion, he could only give attention
to the royal order[45]. In the same way the Viceroy was anxious that
his Majesty should know that, with fidelity and good will, he complied
with the orders he had received, without concerning himself with the
scandals he must face, in proclaiming the laws. What I say is only to
show the Viceroy’s good intention, without contending that it was not
foolhardy, and that the service of the King would have been better
considered if the laws had been suspended and not proclaimed.

When the citizens of Lima heard the new laws proclaimed, they were much
disturbed in their minds, and said one to another, “How is this? How can
a Prince so very Christian as his Majesty seek to destroy us, when we
have acquired this province at the cost of our property and the death of
so many of our comrades. What will now become of our wives and
children?” Many lost all feeling, and from that time looked upon
themselves as bereft of Indians, and of all property. Being enraged they
wrote letters to Gonzalo Pizarro, telling him what had taken place, and
how the new laws had been proclaimed.




CHAPTER XXXIV

     _Concludes the former chapter down to the imprisonment of the
     Licentiate Vaca de Castro._


The Viceroy was not ignorant of what was passing in the city, and the
great tumult showed him that the citizens were very unquiet. He came out
of his room declaring that any who said that Gonzalo Pizarro had not
rebelled, would presently be given a flogging of a hundred lashes
publicly. In these days Vaca de Castro always went to visit the Viceroy,
who was so angry with him that one day he ordered him to be arrested and
imprisoned in the old room of the house of the Marquis, where the
Viceroy lodged. He was there for eight days, feeling the treatment he
was receiving from the Viceroy very acutely, and he regretted that he
had not gone at once to render an account to the King of his government.

The Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa was much distressed that the Viceroy
should have thrown Vaca de Castro into prison. He besought him to
release his prisoner, which the Viceroy did at the Bishop’s request. But
he proclaimed that anyone who had been aggrieved by Vaca de Castro was
to send in his complaints in order that he might be punished if he had
acted without justice. After a few days he again arrested Vaca de Castro
and imprisoned him on board a ship. This imprisonment, according to what
the Viceroy published, was due to a suspicion that Vaca de Castro
meditated something against the Viceroy’s person.

Lorenzo de Aldana had come from the province of Xauxa to see the
Viceroy, having first written the letter already mentioned. The Viceroy
thought that the letter had been taken from him and was in a furious
rage. For this and because his authority was great and he had always
been a friend of the Pizarros, the Viceroy ordered him to be arrested on
suspicion, and he was sent on board another ship as a prisoner. He was
there several days and then released, the reasons being given why the
orders had been issued for sending him on board.

At this time the Viceroy ordered that there should be a fleet on the
sea. He appointed his brother-in-law Diego Alvarez de Cueto to be
Captain-General, and Jeronimo Zurbano to be captain.




CHAPTER XXXV

     _How the Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa, regretting that these
     troubles should have arisen, spoke to the Viceroy of his desire to
     go to Cuzco, and what happened in consequence._


It was now well known to everyone at Lima that Gonzalo Pizarro was
received at Cuzco as Procurator and Chief Justice. Don Jeronimo de
Loaysa was Bishop in this city of Lima, which is the episcopal see. He
was anxious that a civil war should not arise in the kingdom and that
peace should be maintained. With the wish to serve God and his Majesty
he wished to go personally to where Gonzalo Pizarro was. He, therefore,
spoke to the Viceroy, representing the great movements that had taken
place at Cuzco where it was reported that Gonzalo Pizarro had been
appointed Procurator and Chief Justice, and was busy in getting arms
ready, making powder, and providing everything necessary for war, and
not convenient for supplications or protests. In order that the disgrace
might not go further it would be desirable that some prudent and
judicious man should undertake to move the discontented from such wild
and wicked demands. As in like times the King expects such services from
his vassals, the Bishop proposed to undertake the trouble, and to
proceed towards Cuzco in order to persuade Gonzalo Pizarro into a more
loyal course. They say that this passed between the Bishop and the
Viceroy, and there were other discourses on the subject. The Viceroy
showed himself well contented, saying the Bishop’s journey would be of
great service to God and to his Majesty, and a mercy to himself. It was
settled that the Bishop should start without delay, because there were
to be certain notaries to go with the royal provisions, to require
Gonzalo Pizarro and his followers not to move without consideration but
to obey the laws of their King and natural lord, and to induce him not
to come down to Lima with an armed force, and in the shameful way that
had been announced. In order that the Bishop might make an honest
agreement, the Viceroy gave him his word that he would agree to what the
Bishop was able to arrange. He did not give him powers, for reasons
which I will give at the time that the Bishop and Gonzalo Pizarro saw
each other. For it is very troublesome to have to write the same thing
many times. I shall give a detailed account of the Bishop’s journey,
because it led to very delicate negotiations, and I knew persons who
were then with Pizarro, and also some who came with the Bishop, and even
the Bishop himself affirmed that things happened as I relate them.

Some treat of this journey of the Bishop as if he went more for the good
of Pizarro and his advantage than for the King’s service. Well, I have
no wish to go by vulgar rumours, because they cause confusion and make
nothing certain. For we know that such rumours never contain the simple
truth, although sometimes they may not be very far from it.

The journey of the Bishop having been decided upon, he set out from the
city of Lima. He took with him a companion named Fray Isidro de San
Vicente, and departed on the 20th day of June of the same year. There
departed to accompany him on the journey Don Juan de Sandoval, Luis de
Cespedes, Pero Ordoñez de Peñalosa and two clergymen named Alonso
Marquez and Juan de Losa. They took the coast road and travelled until
they arrived at the town of Yca. Here they met one Rodrigo de Pineda who
was coming from Cuzco, and stated that Gonzalo Pizarro had already left
that city, so that if the Bishop continued along the coast he would miss
him. The Bishop, therefore, determined to ascend the mountains so as to
come out at the town of Gualle, in the grant of Francisco de Cardenas, a
citizen of Guamanga.

The Viceroy understood that the rebellion of the upper provinces was
public, and that Gonzalo Pizarro and his followers, after the many ugly
words spoken against the King’s service, were preparing to come in arms
to prevent the royal commands from being obeyed. After having taken the
opinions of his brother Francisco Velasquez Vela Nuñez, of Don Diego
Alvarez de Cueto, of Don Alonso de Montemayor, and the other principal
knights who were at Lima, he resolved to make a general call to arms
throughout the kingdom. In great haste he ordered messages to be sent to
all the cities and towns within his government, ordering all the
citizens to come to Lima to serve his Majesty, with their arms and
horses, without daring to show any favour to Gonzalo Pizarro or to any
other who may be denounced as opponents of the service of the royal
crown of Castille, on pain of being declared traitors and forfeiting all
their goods. This being done the Viceroy ordered the Secretary Pero
Lopez to get ready for a journey to Cuzco with the royal orders,
requiring Gonzalo Pizarro and those who were with him to obey them fully
with breasts on the ground as loyal vassals and subjects. Pero Lopez,
notwithstanding the great danger he incurred, seeing that it was for the
royal service, declared that he would go if the war was not commenced
until his return, so that they might not kill him. The Viceroy gave the
promise, yet if the ears of Pero Lopez were not deaf, he might have
heard the sounds of drums and fifes before he had crossed the bounds of
the city. In order that Pero Lopez might go more safely, the Viceroy
ordered that Francisco de Ampuero[46], formerly a servant of the
Marquis Don Francisco Pizarro, should go with him, and so they set out
from Lima. Simon de Alzate, Public Notary, also went with despatches and
provisions, intended to draw off the rebels and bring them to the King’s
service, on pain of being declared traitors, while those who became
loyal would receive favour and help.




CHAPTER XXXVI

     _How the Judges arrived at Lima and established the Court of
     Justice._


We stated further back that, from the city of Panama the Viceroy Blasco
Nuñez Vela went on, and the Judges remained behind, to come later. After
some days the Judges, with their wives, embarked in ships, landed at
Payta, and began the journey to Lima by land. The complaints they
received about the Viceroy were loud. They were assured that more than
forty Spaniards had died of hunger on the roads, because the Indians
would supply them with nothing. They replied that the Viceroy was a rash
man, but that when they came to Lima they would establish the court of
justice, that he might not indulge in such follies as he had done since
he entered the kingdom. Talking in this way they arrived at Lima, where
they found the place armed for defence, as the Viceroy had begun to
declare war against Gonzalo Pizarro. When they arrived they were well
received, lodged in houses of citizens, were well attended, and
received many visitors.

They went to see the Viceroy who told them that the whole province was
in a disturbed state, that Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo and Bachicao
with others had fled from Lima, and excited the people of Cuzco where,
without the fear of God or the King, they had nominated Gonzalo Pizarro
as Procurator, and that he had seized the artillery which was at
Guamanga, that, with it and the troops he had collected, he might march
to Lima against them. The Judges were surprised to hear this news. The
royal seal was brought under a canopy, the wands being carried by
magistrates. The court of justice was then founded, and notices were
sent to all parts. The Viceroy wrote an account of what was happening in
Peru to the royal majesty of our Lord the King, from the time he landed,
and how there was opposition to the ordinances which he had ordered to
be promulgated. He wrote the same information to the members of the
King’s very high Council.




CHAPTER XXXVII

     _How some citizens of Cuzco, seeing the evil intentions of Pizarro,
     wrote to the Viceroy to receive pardons and to say that they would
     help him._


It is very certain that when there are grievances leading to war, and
the first impetuous fury that gave rise to it has passed, reason resumes
its sway with some who begin to see the error they are committing. Many
who had joined Gonzalo Pizarro now began to receive this impression, and
hesitated to march with arms against the Viceroy. They said, “Who is
this that has deceived us into opposing the King? How can we supplicate
or protest with arquebuses and artillery. Besides this we see the
inclination of Pizarro to take command.” Others said, “Let us prudently
adhere to our King before worse comes.” Accordingly Diego Centeno,
Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo, the Camp Master Alonso de Toro, Diego
Maldonado the rich, Pedro de los Rios and others, with a clergyman named
Baltasar de Loaysa wrote to the Viceroy asking pardon for what they had
done without any penalty, and affirming that they were ready to serve
him loyally with their persons, arms, and horses. In order that Loaysa
might go without being impeded, under the guise of dissimulation, they
submitted to Gonzalo Pizarro that it would be a wise thing for the
clergyman to go to Lima as a spy, find out what was being done, and come
quickly back with the news. Gonzalo Pizarro, thinking that they advised
in good faith, agreed and gave Loaysa permission to go. So, with letters
from many persons, he set out from Cuzco to Lima[47]. At the same time
the Bishop, and the notaries and Secretary with the despatches, were on
their way to Cuzco.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

     _How the Secretary Pero Lopez, with Francisco de Ampuero, travelled
     along the road to Cuzco, how they arrived at Guamanga, and what
     happened to the Bishop after he arrived in that city._


We have related how the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela ordered Francisco de
Ampuero and the Secretary Pero Lopez to proceed to the camp of Pizarro
and proclaim the royal ordinances, believing that Pero Lopez, being well
known, would be safe, and Francisco de Ampuero would be in no danger
because Gonzalo Pizarro had a friendship for him, as a servant of the
Marquis his brother. Leaving the city with despatches, they pushed
forward with all possible speed and overtook the Bishop. Having given an
account of what their orders were, and received his benediction, they
pushed on to comply with the Viceroy’s wishes, and arrived at Guamanga
where the citizens, knowing the power of Gonzalo Pizarro, were unwilling
to receive them in the city. At last a meeting of the municipality was
called. After some speeches it was agreed to do what his Majesty ordered
and to acknowledge Blasco Nuñez Vela as Viceroy, in accordance with the
King’s command. When they received the demand that they should proceed
to Lima with their arms and horses, they begged that the citizens might
be pointed out, who were to go in company with the royal ordinances.
They were so much alarmed that they did not venture to point out any
one, and at last they asked the Secretary to name the citizens who must
accompany the royal ordinances. He chose Juan de Berrio, Antonio de
Aurelio and others, and continued his journey with them. The Bishop Don
Jeronimo de Loaysa had arrived at Guamanga before they started, and
they reported to him what had been done. He told them to wait, because
by coming together with him they might proclaim the ordinances with more
authority. But they did not wish to wait for the Bishop, preferring to
make the journey more rapidly, and so they set out for Cuzco.

The Bishop had received letters from the Viceroy in which he announced
that he could raise 800 soldiers, and that with them he intended to
encounter Gonzalo Pizarro if he had the insolence to come. The Bishop
answered that he should not raise troops, but continue to rule with the
court of justice, and despatch all business through it. He should await
the arrival of Gonzalo Pizarro in his house, accompanied by the Judges.
He gave this letter to Francisco de Cardenas who, they say, did not wish
to deliver it to the Viceroy. This done the Bishop left Guamanga and set
out on the road to Cuzco.




CHAPTER XXXIX

     _How the Viceroy treated with the Judges for their concurrence in
     taking the treasure which was in the ship to be sent to Spain; and
     how the Judges revoked the new laws._


The Viceroy was much afflicted at what he considered to be the shameful
conduct of the people, at having the audacity to rebel against a royal
order. He formed many resolves, sometimes he was for marching quickly to
Cuzco himself; at others he was for raising troops to defend Lima.
Finally he summoned the Judges to meet him. These were the Licentiate
Cepeda, the Doctor Tejada, and the Licentiates Alvarez and Zarate. They
had only arrived a few days before. Having assembled he said to them:
“It is as well known to you as it is to me that it is the will of his
Majesty that the ordinances shall be complied with and enforced in all
these kingdoms. If you should make any changes, or order anything
contrary to the wish of your prince, no doubt you will be looked upon as
well informed and wise men by those of Peru who have armed themselves to
defend their properties. But it is his Majesty the Emperor who, in this
case, must be served, and without fear. We should take up arms and be
ready to march against the rebels. Do not think that it is not seen what
these people desire. It is that Pizarro may be Procurator of these new
laws, and even if they are suspended he will not put out this cruel
fire. He is not ignorant that if the laws are not suspended it will
afterwards afford an excuse which will give colour to his treason. It
will now be necessary to obtain funds by taking out treasure which is on
board the ship with the rest that belongs to his Majesty, in order to
raise troops. Eventually it can all be repaid from the forfeited
property and estates of the traitors.”

While the Viceroy spoke thus, the Judges listened to him with their eyes
on the ground, and by their silence they showed great anxiety at the
state of affairs, although they were not all of one mind nor did they
all desire the success of the measures which their offices required. The
anxiety they showed was that the Viceroy should assemble troops to
resist Pizarro. There would be a battle, and if Pizarro was conqueror
the Judges would not be committed. If he was vanquished the honour would
rest with the Viceroy. Placing their own interests before everything
else, the Licentiate Cepeda spoke first, because he had the first vote.
He replied to the Viceroy’s speech in these words, “His Majesty
appointed you as Viceroy, and we were chosen as Judges. You, as the
principal person, came as President and Governor with orders to execute
the ordinances, but taking the opinions of the Judges in all things.
You are the head and the Judges are the members of the body politic, the
whole being a body representing the name of the King’s Majesty. It is
well known what took place at Panama, and what the Licentiate Zarate
said respecting your coming. You were aware of the considerations which
were put before you. But from the time you entered the kingdom you paid
no attention to them. You wasted much time at Piura and Truxillo, as is
well known, without much advantage, indeed things became worse. The
disloyal wanted to become tyrants. Their only cry was liberty, in that
name they have risen and acted. You were not ignorant how unsettled and
unrestrained were the people of this land. Princes often dissimulate
with their subjects until a convenient time comes to strike and punish.
The name of Pizarro certainly counts for much in the minds of many of
the inhabitants of this city, and little confidence can be placed either
in them or in those of Cuzco. It will be a loss, and will do harm to
spend the treasure of the King. The Bishop and the Regent[48] have gone
to treat for peace. You ought to wait for the result, and for what the
rebels say to the provision brought to them by Pero Lopez. You should
give orders for the revocation of the ordinances though it would have
been better if you had done this at Tumbez.”

The other Judges concurred.

Besides these discourses there were many others, because the Judges had
previously agreed to make a requirement to the Viceroy not to enforce
the new laws, but they did not dare to present it. As it was there were
words between Cepeda and the Viceroy. It was stated by the Viceroy that,
the court of justice having been founded, he did not need to take
counsel with the Judges.

After these discourses the Viceroy determined to take the treasure out
of the ships, as a means for resisting the treason which Pizarro had
commenced. A sum of $100,000 or more was landed and taken to the
treasury. The Viceroy then, with a valiant mind, began to hold Pizarro
and his forces very cheap, and animated those who were in Lima. He also
ordered the new laws to be revoked until his Majesty should order
otherwise, except so far as governors and royal officers were concerned.
Before the suspension he exclaimed, as a protest, that he did not do
this willingly but as the only means of putting down the rebellion. The
suspension was publicly proclaimed throughout the kingdom. If the people
wanted no more than the suspension, they saw this done. But they were
not worthy of that concession, for afterwards, by their mad
insurrections, many lives were lost to support him they had elected for
their defender, and certainly so much blood has been shed and properties
lost, that it is sad to think of it. The thoughts of those men who seek
the beginning without considering what will be the end should be stopped
before they enter upon that beginning. Diogenes Laertius, among the
sentences of the wise Plato, quotes this: “All men should first consider
the consequence of what they intend to do, that they may not do a thing
which is reprehensible and to be condemned.” Dionysius of Halicarnassus,
in the eighth book of his Roman Antiquities, says: “You will never find
that there has been a man to whom everything has always happened
prosperously and according to his wishes. At some time fortune will have
been against him. For this reason those who are more prudent than
others, having longer lives and more experience, tell us that when a
man is going to do anything, before he begins he should consider what
will be the end.” The tyrants of the city of Jerusalem, Simon and John,
according to Josephus in his _De bello Judaico_, who the people elected
as their defenders, did more harm than the Romans could have done. Those
of Milan chose Guelpone, Count of Angleria[49], as their captain, and
the end of it was that the opulent city of Milan was burnt to ashes by
Frederick Barbarossa[50]. The only real liberty is under royal
government. If this is not true ask Arequipa what happened at Huarina,
ask Quito about Anaquito. Ask them if it would not have been better
never to have known Gonzalo Pizarro, and always to have their lord the
King for sovereign, not with bright colours on the outside, and within
full of dirt and soot, to oppose the King’s ministers, and those he sent
as his delegates and lieutenants.




CHAPTER XL

     _How the Viceroy appointed captains and assembled troops._


I know well that I digressed in the preceding chapter, but I could not
do less in dealing with the materials. There are those who, when the
author is long in his chapters and tedious in relating events, throw the
book on the bench, not thinking well of the writer. On this I will quote
what the glorious Doctor St Jerome[51] says, in his treatise on the
instruction of virgins, “Keep thy tongue from evil speaking, and put the
bit and bridle of reason on thy mouth. If thou must speak because it
would be sin to keep silent, take care not to say anything that can be
blamed.” Leaving off any further remarks on this, we will proceed with
the course of our history.

The Viceroy, now having news of what was occurring in the city of Cuzco,
appointed Don Alonso de Montemayor to be captain of cavalry, a native of
Seville and a very loyal knight. His brother-in-law Diego Alvarez de
Cueto was also appointed a captain of cavalry. He was a native of Avila.
The captain of arquebusiers was Diego de Urbina, a Biscayan. Afterwards
he was appointed to the post of Camp Master, the captaincy of
arquebusiers being given to Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda, a native of the
Montaña[52]. Captains of infantry were Pablo de Meneses of Talavera and
Martin de Robles. Juan Velasquez Vela Nuñez was appointed Captain of the
Guard. After the Viceroy had made these appointments he addressed the
officers, saying that they were to be captains in the service of the
King our Lord in order that if any tyrant should rise in rebellion with
an armed force, they should give such a lesson that, the leaders having
been punished, the province might remain quiet. He had placed his eyes
upon them, taking them to be his companions and special friends into
whose keeping he confided his person and his honour. As a man arrived
from Spain in this new kingdom, he had not known who to trust. The
Captain Don Alonso answered, that for his part he would die in the
service of the Viceroy, and all the captains said the same, showing a
strong desire to serve him. There then began the beating of drums,
displaying of colours, and enlisting of men. Don Antonio de Ribera,
Alonso Palomino and other citizens sent news of all this to Gonzalo
Pizarro, putting their letters in very small calabashes, that they might
not be seen by anyone. They even say that when Don Antonio could not
send them, his wife did it. Sayavedra was appointed as Serjeant-Major,
and at the sound of the drum 500 men were assembled, their pay being
$300 or 400. Many horses were bought at $500 to 600 each, and more. In
the end about $100,000 were spent.

Vasco de Guevara, the citizen of Guamanga, came to Lima to clear himself
of what was said against him about the artillery. The Viceroy appeared
to be angry, but accepted his excuses, and took him into favour.
Francisco de Cardenas was at Huaytara, knew all that was happening, and
promptly sent the news to Gonzalo Pizarro. They say also that the
clergyman Juan de Losa, who went with the Bishop, when he arrived at
Guamanga sent a letter to Pizarro advising him to begin his march, as
the Viceroy was disliked, and he said other things not in accordance
with his profession. If I was to recount all the intrigues of friars and
clergy at this time I should never finish, and Christian ears would feel
pain in hearing them. This Losa also wrote advising the rebels not to
allow the Bishop to come to them, because he came to deceive them,
adding that he would advise them of everything that happened, with all
diligence.




CHAPTER XLI

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro prepared to depart from the city of Cuzco and
     how he ordered the Captain Francisco de Almendras to go and seize
     the despatches that were coming._


Gonzalo pressed forward his preparations for war, desiring shortly to
open the campaign. Letters came constantly from Lima and Guamanga
keeping him informed of what was taking place, and he knew of the
approach of the Bishop and also of Francisco Ampuero and Pero Lopez with
the royal provisions. Understanding all this he gave orders to Francisco
de Almendras, who, when he took away the artillery from Guamanga had
placed it in Abancay, whence he went on to see Pizarro, to go back and
take the royal provisions from those who brought them and to find out
from the Bishop what his wishes were in coming. Almendras proceeded to
carry out the instructions of Gonzalo Pizarro, with the help of the
arquebusiers who had been left to guard the artillery. He was to meet
those who were coming with the royal provisions, and not to allow them
to bring their despatches to Cuzco, lest they should disturb the minds
of those who already showed such readiness to change.

This business having been arranged, Gonzalo Pizarro sent letters to
Pedro de Puelles[53] who was Governor of Huanuco, and had come to Lima
where he had been received with all honour by the Viceroy who confirmed
him in the appointment he had held since the time of Vaca de Castro.
Pizarro sent the letter by a diligent runner named Vicente Pablo. In his
letter Pizarro sent to ask him to come and join him with as many as he
could collect, as the city of Cuzco had elected him as Procurator and
Chief Justice to proceed to Lima and protest against the ordinances.
Pedro de Puelles, having received the letter, sent his reply by the same
hand. He said that he had always held the affairs of the Pizarros in
high estimation, and that, notwithstanding that the Viceroy had ordered
him to be Governor of Huanuco, he would do what Gonzalo Pizarro asked.
But he asked for another letter informing him how and in what manner the
people of Cuzco had received Pizarro as Justice and Procurator. Gonzalo
Pizarro replied, and Puelles then deserted the cause of the Viceroy.

Francisco de Ampuero, the Secretary Pero Lopez, with the others who left
Guamanga with the provisions, travelled on until they came to the bridge
of Vilcas, where they found no one. They continued their journey and
received news that Francisco de Almendras was not far distant. Going on
as far as Lucumaes they had just crossed a small bridge when Almendras
came upon them, accompanied by his escort. He haughtily enquired who
carried the provisions. The answer was Pero Lopez. Then Almendras said
he was minded to kill him, and throw his body down a deep ravine. They
could make no resistance as Almendras had more than thirty men, with
arquebuses, under his command. He spoke to Pero Lopez, asking why he had
had the boldness and temerity to travel along such a difficult road as
this was. Pero Lopez answered that the Viceroy had ordered him to come
by that road with despatches, and by no means could he excuse himself
from bringing them, with some other words. Almendras, reflecting that
Pero Lopez had done some good work in times past, determined not to kill
him then, nor do more than ask for the despatches. Pero Lopez took them
from his bosom, not without much reluctance, and they both mounted after
having had some further conversation. Calling Francisco de Ampuero to
him, Almendras said that he was very much surprised to see Ampuero
coming with these things, from which no good was intended for Gonzalo
Pizarro, and that if it was not for the love which he knew that Pizarro
still felt for him, he would kill him there and then. He also asked him
what was passing at Lima.




CHAPTER XLII

     _What more passed between Francisco de Almendras and those who were
     bringing the royal provisions._


After what happened which I have described in the last chapter, the
Captain Francisco de Almendras and his arquebusiers returned a day’s
journey towards Guamanga. Almendras reflected within himself that it
would not be desirable to leave Pero Lopez alive, lest he should bear
testimony to what had been done. He ordered the messenger to be killed,
a shameful piece of cruelty. Finally he said that Pero Lopez and Simon
de Alzate should travel alone so that the Andahuaylas natives or others,
seeing that they were unprotected, might kill them. He ordered them to
depart, but he kept Ampuero until Gonzalo Pizarro should come. Pero
Lopez, quite understanding the intention of Almendras, said that his
horse was so tired that he could not go on, asking to be allowed to rest
for two or three days, and that then he would begin the return journey.
Francisco de Ampuero said that Pero Lopez and Alzate should not go
without him, and that he would not remain unless by force. Almendras, in
a great rage, said that if they remained for the night he would kill
them, and with this he went into his tent. Ampuero, seeing the great
danger in which Pero Lopez was, went to Almendras and, speaking
affectionately, entreated him to let him go back. Almendras was very
angry and menaced Pero Lopez with his words. Certainly it cannot be
denied that Pero Lopez did notable service in this expedition, for his
life was in great danger. He passed that night without any sleep
whatever, fearing that he might be killed, telling Alzate and the others
also to keep awake.

As Ampuero had so much friendship with the Pizarros he succeeded, in the
morning, in persuading Almendras to let them all return. So they all
went back together very joyfully, praising God for having delivered them
out of the hands of Almendras. Soon after starting they met Diego Martin
the clergyman, and with him the Father Provincial Friar Tomas de San
Martin[54], who told them of the evil intentions of Gonzalo Pizarro and
how he had appointed captains and was preparing to march against the
Viceroy. This Provincial was the Regent who had gone from Lima to Cuzco,
with a strong desire to induce Pizarro to abandon such a mad enterprise.
He had not succeeded in his good attempt though, by all means, he strove
to turn many principal adherents of Pizarro from continuing with him. He
understood that one Juan de Ribas, a native of Zaragoza, had been hanged
for taking messages to one and another, from the Regent.




CHAPTER XLIII

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro prepared to set out from Cuzco, and how he
     took the money that was in the royal treasury for the expenses of
     the war._


Gonzalo Pizarro rejoiced much when he saw the letter which, as they say,
the Father Losa wrote from Guamanga. He also had news of the coming of
the Bishop. He made great haste to complete his preparations for leaving
the city, frequently reviewing the troops. Bachicao went about in a
small litter because, in firing off a piece, he got a wound in the
thigh. The citizens assisted with some money, to pay the soldiers who
had arrived. Pizarro said that the money to pay the troops must be taken
out of the royal treasury. The citizens looked upon such a step as
indecent, and said that they preferred to guarantee their persons and
goods to make the payments; because it was not right that the property
of the King our Lord should be expended without his order. The citizens,
therefore, made the payments, for notwithstanding that they wished to
see the protest go forward and the laws revoked, few wished, at that
time, to do a disservice to the King nor, with an armed hand, to disobey
his commands, notwithstanding that all were on the point of making war.
For the learned men of letters said that this might be done without
incurring the crime of treason.

Some soldiers came from Condesuyos, with a citizen of Cuzco named
Navarro and bringing a few arquebuses. There also arrived, at Cuzco, at
that time, Felipe Gutierrez, while Serna fled to Arequipa with the
intention of joining the Viceroy. At Arequipa he conversed with the
Captain Alonso de Caceres, a valorous man who was Captain General in
the government of Cartagena, and held other honourable posts. Of this I
am a good witness, for in the discovery of Urute I served under his
banner. We passed through many hardships, suffering hunger and other
miseries, as the readers will see in a book which I have commenced
touching the events which occurred in the provinces bordering on the
ocean sea. After we had served with Juan de Vadillo in the expedition he
undertook, I passed into these provinces, Serna arrived at Arequipa and
knew, from the Captain Alonso de Caceres, the evil intentions of Gonzalo
Pizarro. They both agreed to take ship and proceed to Lima to join the
Viceroy. This was swiftly done and, arriving at Lima, the Viceroy
received them well. Meanwhile a youth named Martin de Vadillo[55] fled
from Cuzco, but was hanged by Alonso de Toro.

As soon as everything was ready, Gonzalo Pizarro ordered the Captains
Juan Velez de Guevara and Pedro Cermeño to Xaquixaguana. Alonso de Toro
and Don Pedro Puertocarrero made some objection, but finally all the
captains left Cuzco. Among them were Don Pedro Puertocarrero, Lope
Martin, Juan Alonso Palomino, Tomas Vasquez. Gabriel de Rojas,
Garcilasso de la Vega, and Jeronimo Castillas had excused themselves
from going with Gonzalo Pizarro. The Licentiate Carvajal had to go
against his will. From Xaquixaguana Pizarro ordered some captains to
advance and form a camp at Lucumaes.




CHAPTER XLIV

     _How the Bishop arrived at the place where Francisco de Almendras
     was encamped, what happened, and the letters which Pizarro wrote
     and which the Bishop answered._


After the Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa had been some days at Guamanga,
he set out with the desire of reaching Cuzco before Gonzalo Pizarro had
left that city. After several days’ journey he met, in an Indian village
called Cochacaxa, the Secretary Pero Lopez, Francisco de Ampuero, Simon
de Alzate and the others who had gone to announce the royal provisions.
He also found there the reverend Friar Tomas de San Martin, Provincial
of the Dominicans, and a clergyman named Diego Martin. They all advised
the Bishop to go no further, but to return to Lima, for that the affairs
at Cuzco were ill directed and worse conducted. Besides that, Gonzalo
Pizarro had stationed his captain Francisco de Almendras with no other
object than to prevent the Bishop from passing. This was shown by a
letter from the same Almendras in which he said that he was ordered to
let no one pass.

Although there were many considerations in favour both of returning and
of going forward, the Bishop determined to continue his journey, and he
went on until he arrived at the place where Francisco de Almendras was
stationed. That captain received him without that courtesy and civility
which the prelate’s dignity should have ensured him. Although the Bishop
felt this he put it aside and had some discourses with Almendras. Next
day he spoke more fully about his mission and how much he desired to go
on to Cuzco, to give counsel to Gonzalo Pizarro on the course which it
would be most proper for him to take. Upon this Almendras replied that
on no account could he pass onwards. When the Bishop understood the
position of Almendras, and that his prayers to be allowed to pass were
of no avail, he said that he took this contumacious conduct ill, and
that Almendras fell into grave discommunion, in using his power with
such violence. To this the rebel, with great pride and little fear of
our Lord God, answered: “This is no time for discommunions. There is no
God nor King but Gonzalo Pizarro.” The Bishop then asked to be allowed
to go on, quite alone, without any of his followers. But Francisco de
Almendras was inexorable, in truth he was obeying Pizarro’s orders. He
said that he would take the Bishop’s mule and that, if he went on he
must do so on foot.

The Bishop then wrote to Gonzalo Pizarro, letting him know of the
violent conduct of Almendras, and saying that the object of his journey
to Cuzco was to secure the good and peace of the country so that, having
rest and tranquillity, all should enjoy themselves. For this his counsel
to Pizarro was that he should disband his troops. When this letter
arrived Gonzalo Pizarro was already in the valley of Xaquixaguana. He
answered the Bishop by telling him not to trouble himself about
proceeding further, as he was about to march to Lima, and they might
meet on the road. When, he continued, he heard, in Cuzco, of the
Bishop’s journey, he rejoiced, holding it for certain that it would be
for the good of all. With a joyful mind he was waiting to do the Bishop
all service. But some knights who were with him, as well as friars of
white and even black habits, had since told him that under no
circumstances should he receive the Bishop in Cuzco, for reasons that
they would not mention. For it was not his affair alone, but that of all
the others to whose will he must conform. With this letter there came
another to Francisco de Almendras in which Gonzalo Pizarro instructed
him, by art and dissimulation, to ascertain what the Bishop’s own
feelings were towards him.

After some further letters had passed between the Bishop and Pizarro,
the Bishop dwelt on the service which Gonzalo and his brothers had done
to the King, and urged him not to obscure and nullify them by coming
with an armed force to act contrary to the King’s will. To this Gonzalo
Pizarro answered that he desired no disservice to the King, but to
procure the liberty of the kingdom, for which object he would use all
his power without swerving until that object was attained.

The Bishop then departed to Curamba on his return, and thence to
Andahuaylas where Juan Alonso Palomino, with some soldiers, were
stationed by Pizarro. In order not to hear the insolent gibes of the
soldiers, the Bishop went on to Uramarca, where he remained until the
7th of September writing reports to the Viceroy of what had happened and
what it was best to do. During the time that the Bishop was at Uramarca,
he received several letters from Pizarro, all urging him to return to
Lima.




CHAPTER XLV

     _How the Viceroy made preparations encouraging those who were with
     him in case Gonzalo Pizarro should come._


As the things that were passing at Cuzco were published and the news of
the preparations of Pizarro became known, the Viceroy said to Diego de
Urbina: “Captain, there can be no longer doubt. We must put on the
leathern doublets and cloaks, and shoulder our pikes.” Diego de Urbina
replied that it was very good, and from that time he doffed his peaceful
garb. He was appointed Master of the Camp. From boards of cedar they
made long pikes. Metal was collected to manufacture arquebuses, and the
master gunner was expected to turn out four daily. As there was not
sufficient metal, a bell which was placed in the principal church by the
Marquis Pizarro, for divine worship, and had pleasantly rung ever since
it was founded, was taken away and made into arquebuses. Oh miserable
land! Great must have been thy sins, that such evils should befall thee.
Prosperous and in great majesty in times of peace, it seems to me that
thou now sailest in tempestuous seas, and cruel fortune turns foul and
furious winds against thee, leaving thee in the high seas. Few of thy
sons will escape without colouring the sea with their blood. Those who
do escape will be left saddened, sombre, altered, thoughtful, and I see
them walking deaf to all around. In Cuzco they are arming, in Lima they
pull down the bell to make arms. In all the province they think of
nothing but the search for arms and armour, that the time of trouble may
come more quickly.

The Father Losa, who, as we have already said, left Lima with the
Bishop, went as far as the bridge of Abancay, where Francisco de
Almendras was stationed with the artillery. Thence he was allowed to go
on to Pizarro’s camp, and was well received by him and his captains.
Pizarro said that he rejoiced much to see him and thanked him for the
news he sent in his letters, asking him for the latest news from Lima,
and for the intentions of Blasco Nuñez with regard to the ordinances.
The clergyman Losa answered that Pizarro and his captains were all
knights who ought, with valorous hearts, promptly to assert their
liberties, considering well what honour they will lose if the ordinances
are fully enforced, and what profit will be gained if they are revoked.
Continuing his discourse Losa went on to say that for brave hearts, such
as those of the men he saw before him, many reasons were not needed. Let
them assemble as many men as possible, collecting all the arms, and
expending all the gold in the land. The Viceroy had not more than 300
men all armed, and few of them are his friends. This speech of the
priest did no little harm, for many of those who were with Pizarro,
their first anger having subsided, were beginning to regret that they
had made him Procurator, saying one to another, “Where are we going?
what do we want? are we to attack the King in arms?” and similar
questions.




CHAPTER XLVI

     _How the Viceroy sent Hernando de Alvarado to Truxillo, Jeronimo de
     Villegas to Huanuco and the Treasurer to Arequipa, and what
     happened._


The Viceroy was very active in assembling men and, although he had
suspended the ordinances, he did not cease to talk about the duty of
enforcing them. All sorts of intrigues and discourses passed in the city
of Lima at that time. The Judges, talking one with another, thought they
were lost while the Viceroy, with all the forces he could collect, would
be carrying on the war with Gonzalo Pizarro.

The Viceroy notwithstanding the despatches he had sent to all the cities
in the kingdom already, determined also to send persons in his
confidence to the cities, to summon all citizens to join him with their
arms and horses. He sent the Captain Hernando de Alvarado, brother of
Alonso de Alvarado who had gone to Spain, to the city of Truxillo. He
had offered his person and to bring men and arms. His statement may have
been good in intention at the time, as he was a person much esteemed by
his brother the Captain Alonso de Alvarado. But Hernando had heard the
Viceroy declare that he would enforce the ordinances when the time was
opportune, and this made him presently forget the offers he had made. If
the captains were thus cautious in their dealings with the unfortunate
Viceroy, on whom could he rely? If those around him were disloyal to the
King whose servant the Viceroy was, where was he to find help? Hernando
de Alvarado did get together some men and arms, but he took the road to
the mountains with them.

The Viceroy ordered the Treasurer Manuel dc Espinal to go to the city of
Arequipa, giving him powers to raise troops with the title of captain.
When he arrived there was a meeting of the magistrates who refused to
comply, saying that they were on bad terms with the Treasurer, and that
they would do nothing for him nor receive him as captain. But they added
that they would go to Lima to serve, of their own free wills. The
Treasurer returned alone. After him came Francisco Noguerol de Ulloa,
who was then Alcalde, and Hernando de Toro. Juan de Arvés and others
went to the city of Leon which is in Huanuco, where Pedro de Puelles, a
native of Seville, was in office, an astute leader in wars with the
Indians, a good citizen, and with much experience in administration,
having been lieutenant to the governor of Quito, besides other
appointments. He had corresponded with Gonzalo Pizarro and knew his
movements. He had also received letters from the Viceroy. He had also
sent an officer to collect provisions along the road from Cuzco to Lima,
for until then many were still neutral, not caring to declare themselves
either friends of Pizarro or servants of the King. Pizarro’s messenger
had brought Puelles a most gracious letter with great promises. The
Viceroy was anxious that help should come from those parts for the King.
He sent Jeronimo de Villegas, a friend both of himself and of Pizarro,
to proceed to Huanuco and tell Pedro de Puelles to come down to Lima
with all the arms and horses he could collect for the service of the
King our Lord. His loyalty had always been staunch, and the Viceroy
could not doubt that it was still and that he would comply with the
order with all possible despatch. Villegas was glad of the opportunity
of joining Pizarro, so that the Viceroy had sent good ambassadors. He
was given his instructions and he gladly promised the Viceroy to lose no
time, and that he would return with Pedro de Puelles and all the
followers he could collect. So Villegas left Lima very joyfully to do
quickly what he did do.

Arrived at the city of Leon, he spoke to Pedro de Puelles and to anyone
else who liked to listen, doing all the harm he could to the cause of
the Viceroy who he declared was severe and rigorous, and that he had
come to take away the property of every man. He said that Pizarro had
raised the cry of liberty. Pedro de Puelles was quite ready to take that
line. He arranged to start with twenty armed men, including Villegas.
This messenger had made known his intention before he left Lima to
Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda, one of the Viceroy’s captains, who was also
looking out for a chance to join Pizarro, who was likely to prevail in
the end. Juan de Sayavedra did not at once agree to what Pedro de
Puelles said. He had given an evasive answer and remained at Huanuco.
Rodrigo Tinoco, a native of Badajoz, Francisco de Espinosa, a native of
Campos, Garcia Hernandez of Salteras, Grado, and others up to the number
stated, then departed with Pedro de Puelles and Villegas.




CHAPTER XLVII

     _How the Viceroy was informed of the departure of Puelles and
     Villegas, and what he did in consequence._


We have already seen how the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela sent Jeronimo de
Villegas to Huanuco to convey the despatch to Pedro de Puelles, ordering
him to come with as many Spaniards as he could collect, to serve his
Majesty, and what else happened until they set out to join Gonzalo
Pizarro. Don Antonio de Garay remained behind at Huanuco, of which place
he was a citizen, and he wrote to tell the Viceroy what had happened. A
servant of the Viceroy named Felix, who, by his master’s order was
making pikes in the valley of Xauxa, also sent the news.

When the news came to Lima and was reported to the Viceroy he showed
much feeling, not ceasing to complain of the disloyalty of Puelles, and
the treachery of Villegas, praying to our Lord to show his justice by
not suffering them to go without punishment. He called the Judges and
captains together for consultation, and heard them all in silence, for
the sad news left little to say. The Viceroy, however, told them that he
sent Villegas, trusting to his honesty, for he had always shown so loyal
a disposition that he had no reason to suspect him. He further told them
that Pedro de Puelles, being a governor and captain in the service of
the King, had gone to join Gonzalo Pizarro. This grave offence and
treason should be punished, and he asked the assembly what steps should
be taken before the traitors had time to form a junction with Gonzalo
Pizarro. He added that he sent Hernando de Alvarado to the city of
Truxillo, having himself volunteered to go, and his conduct is already
known. He also sent the Treasurer of New Toledo to the city of Arequipa,
but neither would they obey him. These things show how little loyalty
there is in the land. If only those who were assembled in Lima were
really loyal, they would suffice to chastise Gonzalo Pizarro and the
traitors who had joined him. He meditated a march into the interior, not
only to deal with Villegas and Puelles but also to rally his supporters
and alarm the enemy.

The Judges and captains, assembled in council, after some debate,
decided upon sending a force of arquebusiers under the command of
Captain Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda[56] to the bridge over the river that
passes by Xauxa where, without doubt, they would intercept and kill the
traitors. In order to make this enterprise more effectual, General Vela
Nuñez was to go, with speed, as far as the river Xauxa. The Viceroy
enjoined great diligence, so as to prevent the traitors from carrying
out their evil intent. He reminded them that the King had sent him to
administer justice and execute the laws, that he suspended the laws
without the king’s orders, and yet the country was in a disturbed state,
only to be remedied by the punishment of those supporting such absurd
demands as those made by Pizarro. In thus doing his duty the Viceroy
said that he was obliged to put it before his wife Doña Brianda or his
sons[57]. Vela Nuñez prayed him not to go further in that discourse,
declaring that they would do all that was possible.

The Viceroy then called to Gonzalo Diaz and, after embracing him, urged
him to be a good knight and captain, that the Viceroy’s own brother went
as his soldier, and that he must so conduct the enterprise as that the
traitors who went to join Pizarro might be killed or taken. Gonzalo Diaz
answered well, but his real desire was to reach a position whence he
could most easily join Pizarro. He had told Villegas of his intention
when they were both in Lima.

Departing from Lima they took the road of Huarochiri, and during the
march Gonzalo Diaz, Juan de la Torre, Cristoval de Torres, Piedrahita,
Alonso de Aviles and others consulted together when would be the best
time to pass over to Pizarro. It may thus be seen what sort of loyalty
was maintained by the captains in Peru.




CHAPTER XLVIII

     _How the Captain Garcilasso de la Vega and Graviel de Rojas, with
     others, fled on finding that the proceedings of Pizarro were not
     straight._


Gonzalo Pizarro had left the city of Cuzco with all his troops, and
pitched his camp in the valley of Xaquixaguana. But several remained
behind, including Graviel de Rojas and Garcilasso de la Vega, who had
agreed to follow Gonzalo Pizarro but preferred to wait. After various
conversations one with another, seeing how badly the movement was
guided, and that Pizarro was not taking a straight course, they agreed
to escape to Arequipa. They were Graviel de Rojas, the Captain
Garcilasso de la Vega, Gomez de Rojas, Jeronimo Castilla, Soria,
Manjarres, Pantoja Alonso Perez Esquivel with others, amounting to
fourteen citizens and soldiers. They took the road to Arequipa whence
they could easily go on to join and serve the Viceroy. They promptly and
most loyally abandoned their homes for the King’s service. Leaving Cuzco
they travelled until they reached the city of Arequipa, when they were
joined by Luis de Leon y Ramirez. They went on to the seaport, fourteen
leagues from Arequipa, in a valley of Indians called Quilca. Here they
induced the Indians to provide some _balsas_ to take them to Lima. They
did not dare to travel by land from fear of Pizarro, and because the
only routes were either by the coast deserts or the mountains, and the
latter was the route which Gonzalo Pizarro was taking. Both roads were
made by the ancient Kings of these provinces. To go by the mountains
away from the road would have been to traverse an exceedingly frozen
region, covered with snow which could, in no way, be avoided.

Three times they embarked in the _balsas_, but each time they were
obliged to land again owing to the tempestuous weather. Finally they
mounted their horses and travelled over the coast deserts, sending
notice of their coming to the Viceroy.

Diego Centeno and Gaspar Rodriguez went to Xaquixaguana and informed
Pizarro of the flight of Graviel de Rojas, Garcilasso and the others. He
was much incensed, swearing that if he caught them he would put them to
death. The news also caused much excitement in the camp, and it is even
said that many who were there would rather have gone with Graviel de
Rojas and Garcilasso de la Vega than remain with Pizarro.




CHAPTER XLIX

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro appointed Francisco de Carbajal to be Master
     of the Camp, how it was notified to him that Gaspar Rodriguez
     wanted to kill him and what else happened._


After he had been encamped in the valley of Xaquixaguana for some days,
Gonzalo Pizarro determined to march onwards to Lima, and ordered the
tents to be struck. They marched by the main road until they came to a
place called Lucumaes. It was there that Pizarro, knowing how wise and
skilful Francisco de Carbajal was, in all matters relating to war,
determined to appoint him Master of the Camp. For truth to tell the
Procurator did not feel much confidence in Alonso de Toro. For these
reasons, after consulting his principal officers, he gave the post of
Master of the Camp to the Captain Francisco de Carbajal.

At about this time Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo, Alonso de Mendoza,
Alonso de Toro, Villacastin, Diego Centeno and the others who, as we
have stated, sent Beltasar de Loaysa for their pardons from the Viceroy,
began to exchange ideas by word of mouth or by the play of their
countenances, in such a way that Pizarro got wind of what had been going
on. They even affirm that it was intended to kill him, the author of the
conspiracy being Gaspar Rodriguez. When Pizarro came to know it he was
much disturbed and even frightened. At once, and without waiting, he
sent for the Master of the Camp, Francisco de Carbajal, and gave him a
detailed account of what he had heard, asking his opinion on so
important a matter. After Carbajal had given himself a little time to
think over the matter, he replied as follows. “Even before Blasco Nuñez
arrived at Tierra Firme, when I understood that he intended to enforce
the new laws, I knew that great troubles and disturbance would arise,
which are the armouries from which civil wars are equipped. Foreseeing
these things I tried by every means in my power to leave the country. I
conjectured that there would be two extremes in the business, one allied
to reason and the other to justice. The one allied to reason was that
which would lead those in Peru to defend their property, while that
allied to justice would be the duty to obey the order of the King, as
natural lord. I desired to take part neither with one extreme nor with
the other. But I was unable to find a ship to take me away, either at
the ports of Lima or Arequipa. This desire lasted until I found you to
be my friend. But it must be understood that if the demand you bring
leads to war, it will be a very cruel war, and its fury will extend over
the whole kingdom, like a very contagious pestilence. For if there
should be a battle in which the Viceroy is defeated, there can be no
doubt that another will arrive from Spain, while if the insurgents are
defeated they will have little chance of repairing their losses. There
is, however, a way out of the difficulty. Let the Viceroy be sent to
Spain while the Judges remain at their posts, all the past being
condoned, and no one being deprived of his property. Afterwards affairs
will be likely to progress more satisfactorily. Now, without considering
these things, having taken the demand to my heart, I shall be faithful
to the cause and to my comrades: as Lentulus said to Pompey--death makes
an end of all evil. Touching the question of Gaspar Rodriguez I am of
opinion that this is not a moment for severity. It will be best to use
vigilance. Gaspar Rodriguez should be secretly watched until Pedro de
Puelles arrives and further news about the Viceroy comes from Lima.”
When Pizarro had heard what Carbajal said, he told his friends to keep
an eye on Gaspar Rodriguez, and to prevent him from escaping, which was
done from that time.

At this time the events which took place in all parts were so numerous,
that I find great difficulty in conveying a clear idea of the general
course of history. The next occurrence was the arrival at the rebel camp
of Pedro de Puelles, Villegas, and Gonzalo Diaz, one of the Viceroy’s
captains who had joined Puelles. It is necessary that the curious reader
should remember what has gone before, and in payment for the trouble I
have taken in collecting the information and in writing, I expect that
amount of attention; I am forced to take one thread and drop another,
which I will do as methodically as I possibly can.




CHAPTER L

     _How Gonzalo Pizarro advanced very cautiously, and how there were
     some movements in Cuzco._


Gonzalo Pizarro advanced very cautiously and with much trepidation,
notwithstanding the news he had received of the adherence of Pedro de
Puelles. On all sides he seemed to be navigating a tempestuous sea. It
is said that he had thoughts of taking flight back to Charcas and
submitting privately to the Viceroy, for his mind, in the evil course he
had taken, was no longer firm. The people round him saw this by his
words, and even by the expression of his face, so that they did not all
proceed willingly on the enterprise, feeling that it was a rash thing to
attempt to treat with their King in arms, and it might well end in
disaster. They also feared that the Viceroy might have gathered together
a force sufficient not only to defend himself, but to exact summary
vengeance. Though it was late, some of the citizens began to say--“this
is a great piece of folly that we are committing, coming thus with such
a demand. For although our enterprise may have some colour of justice,
it must appear very ugly and bad to all. For Pizarro not only discourses
of the new laws but also of affairs of government. If we advance to
battle, for which there is no excuse, and we are defeated, few of us
will remain alive, and all without our Indians and without hope of
mercy. And if Gonzalo Pizarro and we succeed, so many evils will spring
up, that we shall be consumed in the wars.” The soldiers did not cease
to talk, looking upon themselves as ignorant in being moved by the
citizens to make war against the King.

Gaspar Rodriguez could easily have killed Pizarro at this time, if he
had entertained the idea, although Gonzalo Pizarro had been warned.
Pedro de Hinojosa, captain of Pizarro’s guard, continued to watch him.
Talking to Alonso de Mendoza, Gaspar Rodriguez was advised to act, and
Mendoza said that he would be the first to run his sword through
Pizarro, though he might pay for his treason by his death. It is said
that Gaspar Rodriguez, Alonso de Mendoza, and others went to the tent of
Gonzalo Pizarro who was on his bed, but the bed clothes being aside they
saw that he was armed and that he was not ignorant of the intentions of
Gaspar Rodriguez. Affairs were in such a state in the camp that, if the
news of the adherence of Pedro de Puelles had not arrived, the mutineers
would have risen, and Pizarro would have been killed or a prisoner. Of
this he felt assured, presently writing to the city of Cuzco that it
might be known.

After the departure of Gonzalo Pizarro from Cuzco certain provisions
appeared, sent by the Viceroy and to be obeyed by all, as well horse as
foot, on pain of being declared traitors. Pizarro had intercepted most
of them, but some got into the hands of a clergyman named Fortun Sanchez
de Olave who, after waiting for some days, fastened them on the door of
the church. Diego Maldonado, the King’s Alcalde, who had been left at
Cuzco by Pizarro to act as Justice in his place, had not approved of
Pizarro’s enterprise. He had made this quite clear from the time that he
gave his vote at the meeting of the municipality. He was, therefore,
anxious to serve the King, although he had great fear of the Viceroy,
because he had adhered to the Marquis Pizarro in the differences and
debates with the Adelantado Diego de Almagro, and because they said that
it was owing to him that Manco Inca rose in arms. He feared that for
these reasons some harm would come to him, though he had always shown
that, in the matter of the Inca, he was not culpable. But, uninfluenced
by these considerations, with a ready and loyal mind for the service of
the King, he announced that all who desired to go to Lima and serve the
Viceroy were quite free to do so.

There was a scrivener in the city of Cuzco named Gomez de Chaves who was
very cautious. They say that he spoke to a citizen named Alonso de Mesa,
insisting that he should raise the banner of the King. Alonso de Mesa
heard this very joyfully, because he thought that it would be sufficient
to gain him favour, and some soldiers who were there promised to help.
But the scheme came to nothing. Two soldiers, one named Rebdona, and the
other Santa Cruz, who were at Cuzco, looking upon the suggestion as a
thing actually done, said that they should take for their wives those of
Alonso de Toro and Tomas Vasquez who had gone with Gonzalo Pizarro.

The friends of Gomez de Chaves affirm that he went to Diego de Maldonado
to report what had passed, while Alonso de Mesa undertook to raise the
flag in the great square, shouting “Long live the King.” But things did
not happen as was intended and he found himself on the point of losing
his life. Rebdona and Santa Cruz were made prisoners, and Diego
Maldonado sentenced them to be hanged. After this Maldonado, believing
that the Viceroy was powerful, and that Gonzalo Pizarro would not be
strong enough to prevent him from complying with the royal orders, and
also because his desire was no other, came out into the great square,
saying in a loud voice “Long live the King, and I raise this banner for
his service. I again give permission to all who desire to do so to go
and serve the Viceroy.”




CHAPTER LI

     _How the King Manco Inca, seeing the dissensions among the
     Spaniards, summoned all the armed men he could collect to march
     against Cuzco, and of his death._


The cruel fire was breaking out in all directions and the Devil, enemy
of the human race, rejoiced at the cruel war that was waged among the
Spaniards, and at the cruelty with which fathers killed their sons and
sons killed their own fathers, and that there was perturbation among
them all. So he put the desire into the mind of the King Manco Inca to
march against the city of Cuzco and destroy it, for it was reported to
him that there were few Spaniards there, as most of them had gone to
Lima with Gonzalo Pizarro. Prompted by the Devil, and without the
knowledge of the Spaniards who were with him, the Inca sent some of his
captains, with as large a force as they could muster, to advance towards
Cuzco and kill all the Spaniards they could find, burning and destroying
the villages. Thus they marched from the province of Viticos in the best
order they could form, and arrived at the villages bordering on Cuzco.
As soon as the news reached that city, Diego Maldonado ordered one of
his servants to go and see if it was true, but when the man came to
where the Inca’s captains were, he was killed by them. They also killed
the natives of the provinces. When it was certainly known in Cuzco that
the news was true, there was great fear throughout the city. As Gonzalo
Pizarro had taken all the horses, Diego Maldonado ordered all the mares
to be brought. There is no fortress for resisting the fury of the
Indians equal to Spaniards on horseback. The Indians, robbing and
desolating as they approached, came within six leagues of Cuzco, but
they did not dare to advance, fearing the force of the Spaniards, their
own bodies being unarmoured and unprotected. The captain Diego Maldonado
ordered all the Spaniards, including the clergy, to muster in the great
square on their mares, with their lances in their hands. He intended
that this should show the Indians how ready and watchful the Spaniards
were. He also ordered the Licentiate Antonio de la Gama to advance with
some Spaniards to the bridge of the Apurimac to see whether the Indians
were coming from that direction, and to resist any damage they came to
do. The Licentiate de la Gama departed on this service.

At this time the King Manco Inca was in Viticos where he received
reports from his captains. There were with him Diego Mendez, Francisco
Barba, Gomez Perez, Cornejo and Monroy. They were followers of Almagro
the lad, were at the battle of Chupas and, flying from the severity of
Vaca de Castro, had taken refuge with the Indians. They were treated
well by Manco Inca but were unable to escape, so there, with no little
labour, they passed their time. When the news came to the King Manco
Inca of what was passing in the kingdom, and how all the provinces were
in revolt, the Spaniards were anxious to leave their cruel though
voluntary banishment. The King Manco Inca, taking Diego Mendez aside,
asked him to explain clearly and openly and without any reserve who was
the great and powerful captain who had arrived at Lima, whether he was
strong enough to defend himself against Gonzalo Pizarro, and whether he
would remain as universal governor of the kingdom. The Spaniard answered
that the captain referred to by the Inca came by order and in the name
of the great and powerful King of Spain, from which it may be believed
that it will not only be very easy for him to defend himself against
Pizarro, but that he would be able to punish the rebel and all his
followers, and that he alone would be supreme throughout the kingdom.

I received this account of what happened from a priest named Ortun
Sanchez, who, being in charge of Paulo Inca, brother of this Manco Inca,
heard all the history. For as soon as the events happened, many Indians
who were present came to relate them to Paulo Inca. These Indians said
that Manco Inca spoke to Diego Mendez and his companions, asking them to
go by a way so that their journey should be unknown to Gonzalo Pizarro
or his captains, until they came to where the Viceroy was. They were
then to obtain his grace for the Inca, so that no harm might reach him
owing to past rebellion. The Spaniards replied that they would gladly
undertake this mission. After some further discourse between the Inca
and the Spaniards, some Indians who were present say that, after
everything had been arranged, and the horses were saddled, there was a
dispute with the Inca who ordered his people to kill the Spaniards. The
Spaniards, who were valiant, did much execution among the Indians and
one of them, Diego Perez, attacked the Inca, and gave him so many stabs
with a dagger that he fell dead. This done the Spaniards wanted to mount
and escape, but at that moment an Indian chief arrived with a large
force, and all the Spaniards were killed with their horses[58]. The
Indian forces sent to threaten Cuzco then returned to Viticos, and the
Licentiate de Gama was informed of what had happened by some Indians he
captured. He, therefore, returned to Cuzco.




CHAPTER LII

     _What happened to the General Vela Nuñez and the danger he was in;
     and how Gonzalo Diaz and others passed over to Pizarro._


The reader will remember that the Viceroy sent Vela Nuñez and the
captain Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda to the bridge of Xauxa, to intercept and
capture or kill Pedro de Puelles and Jeronimo de Villegas, with the
others who set out from Huanuco to join Gonzalo Pizarro. Vela Nuñez
travelled with the object of reaching the bridge of Xauxa in time, for
by holding that position they could not escape. But that was not
Pineda’s wish. He wanted the party of Puelles to pass on before he
arrived, and then to join Pizarro himself. His was a vile and
treasonable act. The Viceroy’s trust in him, his nomination as captain,
and the noble character of Vela Nuñez who was his companion, should have
made him refrain. But he was not himself destined to succeed in his
plot, and soon we shall relate his miserable end, and how he paid for
his treachery with his life. On their journey they came to a church in
Huarochiri where, after prayers, Gonzalo Diaz intended to murder Vela
Nuñez. The conspirator was in concert with Juan de la Torre, Cristoval
de Torres, Piedrahita, Alonso de Avila, Jorge Griego. The murder was not
consummated because Alonso de Barrionuevo, a native of Soria, a
determined man who loyally served the King, would not part from Vela
Nuñez. The same loyalty was shown by Sebastian de Coca, Hernan Vela and
the others who intended to return to Lima, and not to join Pizarro.
Gonzalo Diaz and the other disaffected officers continually discussed
among themselves how they should kill Vela Nuñez, but as they could not
find an opportunity in Huarochiri, it was not done. They proceeded on
their journey until they reached the snows of Pariacaca where they
continued their schemes, seeking to murder the innocent and to desert to
the tyrant.

Vela Nuñez was always surrounded by Barrionuevo and the other loyal
knights. As they proceeded on their journey they met the Regent Friar
Tomas de San Martin, the Secretary Pero Lopez and the others who were
returning from their unsuccessful mission. They had encountered Pedro de
Puelles and Jeronimo de Villegas in the valley of Xauxa, who were going
with great speed to join Pizarro, and they had some conversation with
them. When the Provincial heard that the General Vela Nuñez was going to
attack Pedro de Puelles, he took him aside and told him that he should
not go further, and that he should be careful of his person, because
those who were with him had a plot to murder him. He had overheard words
to this effect, spoken by Gonzalo Diaz. Besides, Pedro de Puelles had
already passed the bridge of Xauxa. The General, much disturbed and in
great trepidation, said to Gonzalo Diaz and the other officers that, as
Pedro de Puelles had already passed Xauxa, there was no longer any use
in marching against him. He intended, therefore, to turn back and rejoin
the Viceroy. He there and then turned the bridle of his horse, though he
knew that Gomez de Solis, with ten or twelve others, would go on to
Xauxa to join Gonzalo Pizarro. With great speed and as much fear they
returned to sleep at Huarochiri in great terror of treachery and lest
any of their loyal friends should be murdered.

Gonzalo Diaz, arriving at Huarochiri late, after sunset, as one who
brought intended crime with him, did not see his way to accomplishing
the treason with the others who had conceived it. So they assumed a
careless appearance, saying they were much fatigued by the road. Vela
Nuñez with his friends went back to Lima with all speed. Gonzalo Diaz
and his accomplices spoke to the rest of the men who were there,
advising them to go with them to join Pizarro, as he would treat them
well, while the Viceroy was cruel and wanted to take away all their
properties. Several, having heard his discourse, replied that they
wished to serve the Viceroy, and not to go with him and lose their
lives. When Gonzalo Diaz heard this he was annoyed, and agreed with his
friends to disarm those who would not go, and to take away their horses.
This they did, and in this condition, disarmed and on foot, Rivadeneira,
Sebastian de Coca, Rodrigo Niño and others had to return to Lima.
Gonzalo Diaz and his friends took the road to Guamanga. They entered
that city and at first there was some disturbance, Pedro de Puelles
thinking they had come from Lima against him, but when the truth was
known they all rejoiced, saying one to another that Pizarro would
certainly be Governor, and from that time they would give him the title
of lordship. They ordered Cristoval de Torres to go with all this news
to Gonzalo Pizarro, who had then arrived near the valley of Andahuaylas,
and he rejoiced to know that Gonzalo Diaz was in Guamanga.




CHAPTER LIII

     _How the Viceroy, on receiving the news that Gonzalo Diaz had
     deserted, was much enraged, and what else happened._


We have related how Vela Nuñez returned from the snowy mountains of
Pariacaca in great consternation owing to the monstrous treason of
Gonzalo Diaz, fearing that the traitor might overtake him and murder
him. Having descended into the valley of Lima he reflected much within
himself, concluding that the evils which were coming on the land, by
reason of the wars, could not be slight. Certainly he would desire that
the Viceroy could check the disturbances arising in all parts, from the
time that he arrived in Peru, and even after the suspension of the
ordinances. On the other hand the evil character of the people, and
their bad faith, showed that, even if the ordinances had been suspended
from the beginning, the disloyal movements would not have ceased, for so
rich and prosperous a land could not remain at peace. These things and
others Vela Nuñez said to me in the city of Cali, when I wished to
inform myself respecting these events. So Vela Nuñez arrived at Lima in
the night, and gave the Viceroy a detailed account of what had happened,
including the great treason of Gonzalo Diaz, and how ill he had requited
the honour the Viceroy had shown him.

The Viceroy was deeply moved and his countenance could not conceal the
deep sorrow which filled his heart. He said--“This land is the Devil!
Great are the evils which surround it! Never are those who live in it at
peace one with another! If I had not seen it, I could not believe that
without reason, without the fear of God, without truth, without shame
they could thus abandon loyalty to their king! In whom can I put trust.
Not in those I chose as captains, and to whom I showed so much honour.
For they deny me and cease to be loyal, preferring to live as traitors.”
Saying this he went about, trying to show that he was not disturbed by
the desertion of Gonzalo Diaz, for he said that it was better to have
traitors outside the city than inside.

Great was the excitement in the city of Lima when the flight of Gonzalo
Diaz de Pineda was known. Though some felt regret, others rejoiced
exceedingly, both citizens and soldiers, because it brought the time
nearer when Gonzalo Pizarro would enter with his banners. They talked
one with another, and showed their delight by their words, saying “Now
Pizarro comes. This time he will be Governor, and we shall have no
Judges, and no rules about our Indians, nor ordinances, and Blasco Nuñez
Vela will go back to Spain.”

The Viceroy, after having been fully informed by his brother the
general, called an assembly of the Judges, captains, and principal
citizens, and as soon as they were all present, he said to them, “It
seems to me that Vela Nuñez has fortunately escaped. What think you of
the treachery of Gonzalo Diaz? Yesterday I sent letters to the principal
men of Cuzco who come as fugitives by way of Arequipa and will be here
shortly. I believe that there is want of agreement in the camp of
Pizarro, many regretting the course they have taken and desiring pardon.
But when those traitors approach we must show no want of firmness. It is
important that we all should animate the soldiers, remembering also that
with the captains lies the greater force in war. Do not be too much
depressed by the bad news. God our Lord often puts his hand in favour of
causes that appear lost, and they are won.” The Viceroy having said
these words to the assembly and made another speech to the captains,
they all replied that they would carry out his orders.

It had been arranged that Diego Alvarez de Cueto, with a light body of
horse, should go as far as Chincha on the coast, to meet Garcilasso de
la Vega, Graviel de Rojas, and the others who were coming as fugitives
from Cuzco. Although Captain Cueto got ready to start he did not go,
having been ordered to remain for fear of desertions.

Soon afterwards there was a general review of the troops. The infantry
mustered more than 500. Jeronimo de la Serna received the appointment of
captain of the company of Gonzalo Diaz. This was a great grievance to
Manuel de Estacio, ensign of that company, who had brought the banner to
the great square. He said, now that Gonzalo Diaz was a traitor to his
King in spite of the loyalty he owed to the Viceroy, he was the person
entitled to succeed to the vacancy, for his services were not so small
that he did not merit promotion. In a great rage he tore the banner,
saying that the flag of a traitor had no place in a loyal camp. It was
black with a red cross. So it was torn, and Gonzalo Diaz was declared a
traitor publicly with the reason, and naming his parents and place of
birth. The Viceroy said to Manuel de Estacio that he should not be
aggrieved at Serna having been appointed captain, as he had enlisted
more men; but Estacio still felt injured.

In the house of Illan Suarez de Carbajal there were many secret
proceedings. One of his slaves had been sent with letters to the
Licentiate Benito Suarez de Carbajal. But in sending the letters he did
little contrary to his duty to the King our Lord, for after the death of
the Licentiate Carbajal, I saw the letter in the city of Cuzco. It
contained nothing but exhortations to the Licentiate to leave the
company of Gonzalo Pizarro, and come to join the Viceroy and serve him.




LETTER

OF

FRIAR JUAN SOLANO, BISHOP OF CUZCO[59]

TO

THE KING


LIMA, _March 10th, 1545_.

I arrived in this kingdom, province of Peru, without waiting for the
bulls, as your Majesty ordered, for by the provisions in my possession
your Majesty orders me to occupy myself with the good treatment and
conversion of the Indians, and in teaching them our holy catholic faith,
bringing those who are warlike into the paths of peace. With this end
and object I ventured to accept this office. It appears to me that I
shall have great opportunities of usefulness, if the unsettled state of
the land gives me a chance. As a servant of your Majesty I am bound to
tell your Majesty the truth, without affection or passion, touching all
that has been passing, and that I have seen in this land, from my
landing until I reached the city of Lima, that your Majesty may apply
the remedy that is needed, for the necessity is great.

I landed at Tumbez, which is a port in this land of Peru, 200 leagues
from this city of Lima, arriving the last of the officials of your
Majesty for I met with many hindrances, especially in the South Sea. As
I came last, I had occasion to see all that had taken place along the
road. As the Viceroy is such a zealous and fervent servant of your
Majesty, as soon as he jumped on shore in this port of Tumbez, he put in
force the ordinances and new laws which your Majesty gave for these
kingdoms. Presently he gave freedom to all the Indians held to service
by the Spaniards in Tumbez, telling them that, being free, they could go
where they chose and act for themselves freely and according to their
wishes. As regards all other provisions in the ordinances, the Viceroy
went on executing them in accordance with your Majesty’s orders. With
this liberty given to the Indians, I saw that those who had been taught
our holy catholic faith and knew it, and were baptized Christians,
having returned to their chiefs and their homes as before, also went
back to their old rites and customs. Of this all the land is a witness.
I also saw that in the houses of Christians and in the _tambos_ on the
roads, where the Christian doctrine used to be taught every night, now
there is no such custom because there is no one to teach, all having
gone to their chiefs and their homes.

I arrived at the city of San Miguel, and I saw that in the church, where
there used to be 40 little Indian boys serving and learning the things
pertaining to the divine services, there did not remain more than two.
All the rest had gone with their parents to the old homes, to live under
their old laws and in blindness. I saw the same thing all the way to the
city of Lima. I could only weep to see the Christians returning to be
Infidels. For I know it is your Majesty’s wish that the Indians should
become Christians and be taught the holy catholic faith, and not that
they should abandon it. The reception their chiefs gave them was to
sacrifice them because they were Christians and had served Christians.
This was publicly stated on the roads. I am myself a witness as regards
one chief, for I scolded him and he confessed that he had sacrificed a
woman, and seeing this I could not but feel it much. For to have the
Indians subject to our holy catholic faith, and gentle and domestic as
regards our evangel and Christianity is not to deprive them of liberty,
but rather to give them that liberty that _Christus liberavit nos_ not
to make them slaves. They should be treated _non sicut servi sub lege
sed sicut liberi sub gratia constituti_.

In the cities of San Miguel and Truxillo I saw the citizens much
disturbed and rebellious, for they protested against the ordinances and
laws, and their petitions were not agreed to; indeed they complained
that the Viceroy had replied very harshly with menaces of their lives.

When I arrived at Lima my sorrow increased to find that all the labours
of the past had only brought trouble all over the country and no peace.
The Viceroy, on landing, at once began to enforce the laws and
ordinances, refusing to concede anything to the supplications. The
consequence was that the whole country rose when he reached Lima, where
they received him very unwillingly. When the news came to Cuzco that he
would consider no supplication, the people rose against the person of
the Viceroy, and took up arms, saying that they would come to protest
against the new laws, and they chose Gonzalo Pizarro for their captain.
The Viceroy, knowing this, began to collect troops. When I arrived I saw
that the troops were disorderly. Presently the Viceroy ordered 150,000
_castellanos_, which Vaca de Castro had on board ship for despatch to
your Majesty, to be landed. He spent it all on his troops for hosen,
doublets and other clothes. But though he paid them well, he did not
gain the good will of fifty, as was seen afterwards. When the three
Judges arrived, who had been left at Panama, they considered it
advisable to suspend the new laws so as to quiet and pacify the land.
But this did no good. It was too late. The people said that it should
have been done before.

The people had no confidence whatever in the Viceroy, for he publicly
talked of them as traitors and rebels, saying that when the country was
at peace he would hang them by sixties and sixties until there was not a
head left in the land. Hearing this, they were all afraid that he would
do as he said, enforcing the new laws without listening to any
supplication. In this your Majesty may believe that the fault was in the
Viceroy, for he knew not how to keep anything secret in his heart, and
he said publicly all that came into his head. What he thought at night
he said in the daytime, and this was the cause of his fall. For these
reasons the people of Cuzco prayed that the Judges of your Majesty’s
Court would remain, and that the Viceroy would go to report to your
Majesty.

[Sidenote: Sunday, Sept. 4, 1544.]

[Sidenote: Sept. 15, 1544.]

Things being in this state it happened that in the night of Sunday,
September 14th, about 17 to 20 men on horseback left Lima to join the
rebels at Cuzco, for the hearts and best wishes of all were with them,
and every day some men went to join them. Among others two relations of
the Factor Illan[60] Suarez went, and some men who lodged in his
house[61]. Whether the Factor knew of this or not, there is no one who
knows. When they went there was a call to arms at midnight, and as soon
as the Viceroy was told who it was that had gone, he sent for the Factor
and asked him whether this treason appeared good to him. The Factor
answered that he was a servant of the King and not a traitor. This was
told to me by a clergyman who was there all the time. The Viceroy was
going to reply when the Factor again said that he was as good a servant
of his Majesty as the Viceroy. When the Viceroy heard those words he was
enraged. Then he, or his servants by his order, killed him there without
confession, nor taking his statement nor anything else whatever. They
wrapped the body in a mantle, and ordered some soldiers to take it away
for burial, which was done. Great was the sorrow and amazement of the
people when it became known. All were plunged in grief. On the Monday
the 15th the Viceroy ordered the children of the Marquis Don Francisco
Pizarro to be put on board a ship; and on Tuesday the 16th he talked of
embarking the Judges and all the women, with what object I do not
know[62]. He also said that he would sack the town on that day, at least
that was the report, but I do not believe it. Yet all the people began
to hide their valuables and bury their treasure.

[Sidenote: Sept. 17.]

In the morning of Wednesday the 17th of September the city was in a
great state of commotion, and the people took up arms. The Judges came
with some followers[63], though not many. They ordered a banner to be
displayed, and caused it to be proclaimed that all should be on the side
of his Majesty and his Royal Court of Justice. They came to the great
square with this proclamation, and marched towards the troops of the
Viceroy who were in front of his house. As the Judges approached, the
Viceroy’s troops fired their arquebuses in the air, threw up their pikes
and all went over to the side of the Judges. The people then entered the
Viceroy’s house and arrested him without anyone being killed or wounded,
or a drop of blood shed. It was all done so quietly that it appeared to
me as if it had been arranged beforehand. It was either a miracle or I
cannot understand it. It is beyond me that a Viceroy, having so many
troops, should have been arrested and no one hurt. He was delivered to
the Judges who sent him as a prisoner to the house of one of them, and
thence he was taken to an island[64] near the port, until they could
send him in a ship to Spain as a prisoner.

I believe that, if there had been resistance, they would have killed the
Viceroy, there would have been many deaths, and the country would have
been in great danger. The course taken by the Judges, therefore, appears
to have been the best and to have averted worse evils. I know not. They
will give an account of their proceedings to your Majesty. What I have
been able to learn, and what I have seen is that the Viceroy was very
unpopular with the people of this land, and that they would rather see
him torn to pieces than be governed by him. All the fault lies with the
Viceroy, for he knew not the art of governing. If he had entered this
land dissimulating, and judging of the good and the bad in it until he
reached Lima, he would have been received by the whole land, would have
placed his own justices and officials, and would have dominated the
country. Then he could have done what he liked, and could have enforced
the new laws to the letter, without anyone attempting to thwart him. But
he did not wish to receive any advice from the officials and servants of
your Majesty. The only advice the Viceroy listened to, came from those
of Chile[65], opponents of Gonzalo Pizarro, men he brought from Panama,
whither they had been banished by Vaca de Castro. Thus he boldly entered
the country, ordering and talking, and it seems to me that all went
wrong because he did not listen to the advice of your Majesty’s
servants.

Also I will not omit to say another truth to your Majesty. All that
Blasco Nuñez Vela has done, he has done with the greatest love and
devotion, and with zeal to serve your Majesty, and he has not failed in
a single point in your Majesty’s service, and in the desire to execute
all that your Majesty has ordered.

The commander appointed by the Viceroy burnt two ships, and sunk
another. With the rest he made sail with the brother and brother-in-law
of the Viceroy, and with Vaca de Castro, who had for many days been a
prisoner on board, I know not for what reason. They went to a port 18
leagues distant[66]. There they put the Viceroy on board, in charge of
the Licentiate Alvarez, one of the Judges, who was to take him to Spain
under arrest. But on the voyage the two made friends, concerted
together, and landed at Tumbez. The Viceroy fled thence, by land, to the
city of Quito.

On the 24th of October Gonzalo Pizarro entered the city of Lima. Three
days previously his captains had arrived, with the Procurators of all
the cities. They and the captains demanded of the Royal Judges that they
should appoint Gonzalo Pizarro to be Governor and Captain-General of all
these kingdoms until his Majesty should order otherwise. The Judges did
this, and it appeared to the servants of your Majesty that this would be
in furtherance of your Majesty’s service, and pleasing to God[67].

Now it is positively stated that the Viceroy is in the neighbourhood of
Quito with 200 men to march against this city, and that he has taken
your Majesty’s rents in the neighbouring districts, to pay his troops. I
fear that this is so.

Your Majesty will be able to see how great are the evils in this land,
and will continue until your Majesty orders a remedy which will bring us
peace. Your Majesty may also see to the way in which the rents and the
gold of your Majesty are spent, and the great sorrow it is to see the
natives who remain, destroyed, lost, and dead, to the very great weight
on our consciences. Those who suffer most, as it seems to me, are your
Majesty and the natives. I, therefore, entreat your Majesty, for the
love of Jesus Christ, that you will have pity on them, and send peace
without delay, for all is in your Majesty’s hands, and the necessity is
urgent in the extreme. Do not permit this land to be lost, and the
natives to be destroyed, for now they are beginning to understand our
laws and to avail themselves of the things appertaining to our holy
catholic faith. With these troubles and wars all is dropped and lost.
Your Majesty should feel sorrow for them, because it is a very heavy
load on the conscience to leave them to perish. With peace and rest in
the land very great results would be seen in very few years, and their
conversion will be a very great service to your Majesty because they are
all inclined to be Christians.

I have also ascertained that the citizens of Lima have taken $25,000
from your Majesty’s treasury, and the citizens of Cuzco $12,000 for the
expenses of the war. When I knew this, I spoke to Gonzalo Pizarro on the
subject of having taken the treasure of your Majesty. He said that those
who took it had given acknowledgments and receipts, and had mortgaged
their persons and goods, that they were substantial men whose estates
are worth over $200,000 and that your Majesty would not lose a _blanca_.
All the others said the same, that your Majesty’s interests were safe.

I am also informed that the Judges, by a royal decree, have ordered
Gonzalo Pizarro to march north and drive the Viceroy out of the
country, that he may not continue devastating and destroying, but go to
give an account to your Majesty. All the troops are got ready to march
with him and all are starting. Gonzalo Pizarro has a great power, and I
fear that all are hostile to the Viceroy, while Pizarro has not taken
upon himself to defend the Viceroy that he may not be killed. By these
feuds the country is lost and destroyed, and the natives perish. I
entreat your Majesty to look upon it with eyes of pity, as the Prince,
Lord, and Father of all this land.

What I see and what I hear is that all are well with Gonzalo Pizarro,
that he is friends with all classes, and that all desire his rule. All
too desire mercy from your Majesty, and to serve your Majesty
transmitting much treasure, and paying all that the Viceroy spent, and
this is what is most desired in this land. Otherwise the country is in
very great doubt and danger. This is truth concerning all that is
passing here, and anything further will be told by the father who takes
this, and who can give your Majesty full information.

I have written to your Majesty because if I did not send a full account
of all that has passed, I should be left with a heavy load on my
conscience, and should not be doing my duty to your Majesty.

I have sent this father, who is a person of credit and a provincial
vicar in this land of Peru, a very religious man of good fame. To him I
refer your Majesty for all further particulars.

I again entreat your Majesty, for the love of Jesus Christ, to send us
peace, and not to allow these natives to receive such evil treatment,
which is a very great load on the conscience. For they were on the point
of becoming Christians, but these disturbances have caused everything to
be dropped. With peace all would be remedied, and so I hope in our
Lord.

May the Lord guard the imperial person of your Majesty, with increase to
your kingdoms and lordships, as is desired by your servants and vassals.
From this city of the Kings, the 10th of March 1545. Your devoted
servant and chaplain who kisses your imperial feet and hands, Fray Juan
Solano.




INDICTMENT

OF THE

JUDGES AGAINST THE VICEROY

BLASCO NUÑEZ VELA


Report made by order of the Judges Cepeda, Tejada and Alvarez on the
proceedings of the Viceroy Blasco Nuñez Vela, 19-23 Sept. 1544.

[Sidenote: Embargo on precious metals at Panama.]

1. As soon as the Viceroy arrived at Nombre de Dios and Panama, he put
an embargo on all the gold and silver coming from Peru, on the ground
that it had been taken from the Indians, and respecting this he made
public proclamation with heavy penalties. Owing to this many were forced
to return to Lima, following the Viceroy, having to expend considerable
sums on the voyage. This scandalized the country and disturbed men’s
minds.

[Sidenote: Native servants on the isthmus sent back to Peru.]

2. Many natives of Peru, men and women, who were in the service of
various citizens of Nombre de Dios and Panama, were collected by him and
sent back to their native places at the expense of their masters. Some
died on the voyage, others were put on shore at Tumbez and died of
hunger, others returned to their idolatry.

[Sidenote: Judges left behind.]

3. On leaving Panama, he would not take with him the Judges Cepeda,
Alvarez, Zarate, Tejada who had come with him from Spain, though they
were ready, and there was room in the ship.

[Sidenote: Judges arrive at Tumbez.]

4. This cost Cepeda and Tejada $3000 in hiring a ship in which they
embarked and sailed a few days after the Viceroy, arriving at Tumbez
some days after him.

[Sidenote: Viceroy would not wait for the Judges.]

5. He would not wait for them at Tumbez, before entering the country,
acting absolutely without counsel, before he had been officially
received.

[Sidenote: Acted alone instead of jointly with the Judges.]

6. He entered alone to enforce the ordinances, it being his duty to act
jointly with the Judges, and thus threw everything into confusion.

[Sidenote: Release of all Indians at Tumbez.]

7. In Tumbez he turned all Spaniards out of the place, deprived them of
the Indians who were in service there, ordered all the native chiefs of
the district not to give food to any Spaniard, whether resident or
travelling, which had been the custom since the conquest.

[Sidenote: Released all Indians at the _tambos_: not to supply food
without payment.]

8. He did the same at all the other _tambos_ as far as Lima leaving the
road desert, without men or food. Hence there was hunger, sickness and
deaths on the road. The passengers found no support, were generally
scandalized and cursed the Viceroy.

[Sidenote: Showing the ordinances to everyone.]

[Sidenote: Violent conduct at Tumbez.]

9. He wanted to show, even to the commonest people, the ordinances and
provisions he brought with him, and he swore that he would put them in
effect and enforce them even before he was officially received. In
Tumbez he took away the Indians from Cabrera (Don Pedro Luis de?).

[Sidenote: Violent conduct at San Miguel and Truxillo.]

10. From all the citizens of San Miguel and Truxillo and from all the
soldiers he took the Indians for service. Especially he left Pedro de
los Rios of San Miguel, son of the former governor of Nicaragua and
Panama, with none, and one Cordova, a highly qualified person.

[Sidenote: Violence at Truxillo.]

11. In Truxillo he took away the Indians from Diego de Mora and from
Garcia Holguin, one of the veteran conquerors who was 80 years of age
and who had nothing else, a proceeding which shocked the whole country.

[Sidenote: Provisions at _tambos_ to be paid for.]

12. The provisions which the Indians used to supply for nothing were
ordered to be paid for, a measure which troubled all travellers.

[Sidenote: Violent threats.]

13. In San Miguel and Truxillo, far from consenting to receive
supplications about the new laws, he used injurious words to monks and
others who brought them, telling one he would cut out his tongue, and
another that he would hang him, which was the cause that many went to
join the rebels in Cuzco.

[Sidenote: Loss to the revenue.]

14. By not suspending ordinance 3 or 4, your Majesty lost a million of
gold with which they would have done service, but afterwards these and
other ordinances were suspended by public proclamation.

[Sidenote: Treatment of Aldana. Violent threats made publicly.]

15. Lorenzo de Aldana, a principal citizen of Guamanga, had written two
or three letters with news, and came to offer himself. The Viceroy put
him on board a ship, and kept him a prisoner there for many days. This
caused general scandal. He was suspicious of everyone, and threatened
some with death. The worst of it was that he published his suspicions,
thus incurring the hatred of all, so that a great number went to Cuzco,
to join those who were marching against him.

[Sidenote: Threats to kill the Judges and Martin de Robles.]

16. The hatred against him was increased by his threats to kill the
Judges and many others, especially Martin de Robles, to whom the Viceroy
himself had given the command of 130 soldiers, and he would have done
it, if his brother Vela Nuñez had not interfered.

[Sidenote: Threats to kill several others.]

17. He wanted to kill Diego de Urbina, the Master of his Camp, Lorenzo
Mexia, and the Mayor-domo of Maria de Escobar.

[Sidenote: Treatment of Solar.]

18. He ordered Antonio Solar, the Mayor-domo or Overseer of Lima, to be
hanged because he did not wish to send a Portuguese to his Indians, and
said that the valuations would cause a rebellion. He ordered Solar to be
hanged, and though he desisted owing to the prayers of many people, he
was kept for 3 months in the public prison.

[Sidenote: Order for a shipmaster to be hanged.]

19. He ordered Baltazar Rodriguez, Master of a ship to be hanged,
without trial and without consulting the Judges, for having taken his
ship from the port of Arequipa to that of Lima without permission, and
this was only stopped at the last moment.

[Sidenote: More threats.]

20. He wanted to kill Don Baltasar de Castilla, son of the Count of
Gomera, who came to offer his services, and the same with Gaspar Mexia
and others, who for that reason fled to Cuzco.

[Sidenote: His wild talk in the _tambos_. Opinions of his character.]

21. To show his powers, in the _tambos_ and elsewhere he made a display
of them, recounting his severities in other posts he had held, with
details. All his hearers took him for an imprudent, injudicious, cruel,
violent man who neither wanted nor sought for counsel.

[Sidenote: Hated by all.]

22. Every one, even his brothers, relations, and servants detested and
were unable to endure him.

[Sidenote: Partiality and temper.]

23. In many lawsuits he showed himself to be passionate and partial.

[Sidenote: Corrupt practices.]

24. He gave powers of attorney of the Court of Justice to incapable
persons, to whom they were sold by his brother Vela Nuñez and his
brother-in-law Cueto.

[Sidenote: Nepotism.]

25. He ordered that all the Constables of the kingdom should contribute
half of fees to his brother-in-law Diego Alvarez Cueto as Chief
Constable and, in spite of the Judges, he caused them to be paid by the
court and the city.

[Sidenote: Despotism.]

26. Cueto despised the appointment, and a servant of the Viceroy acted
as his substitute, very violently, so that neither the Judges nor the
Alcaldes could do anything but what the Viceroy liked.

[Sidenote: Brother and brother-in-law lawless.]

27. Cueto and Vela Nuñez always took out of prison anyone they chose.

[Sidenote: Nepotism.]

28, 29. In spite of the citizens, he made them, by menaces, receive his
brother-in-law as Chief Constable.

[Sidenote: Misgovernment.]

30. He settled the tributes by the statements of certain persons who had
received grants, or only of Indians, without consulting the Judges,
without information, or keeping the rules of the ordinances, or the
instructions. For this he brought the chiefs and principal Indians to
Lima maintaining them and their followers, leaving their districts
without Indians or provisions, and thus causing troubles followed by
famines, robberies, and disturbance.

[Sidenote: Corrupt practices.]

31. He fixed the tributes with partiality and without knowledge,
doubling the tax on some, reducing it by a half for others who were
friends of Cueto and Vela Nuñez.

32. The Indians of Melchor Verdugo, a citizen of Truxillo, because he
came from Avila, were rated higher than those of all the other citizens
put together. The valuation of Verdugo was over 9000 _pesos_ of gold and
other things, and that of all the others put together did not amount to
that sum.

[Sidenote: Opinions against him.]

33. To those whom he dismissed from lieutenancies he increased the
tributes. For these reasons the people would not receive him in Cuzco,
Arequipa, Huanuco, Chachapoyas, Charcas and Quito. Many went to Cuzco
with arms and horses, wishing to march against him to kill him or drive
him out of the country, for they said that he was a man without justice,
proud, very cruel, one who neither kept his word nor promise, and one in
whom they could have no faith.

[Sidenote: Failure of his attempts to treat with rebels.]

34. He treated many times with Gonzalo Pizarro and others who had risen
against him, but they always answered that he must leave the country and
that they would not be governed by him.

[Sidenote: H. M. treasure spent on armaments.]

35. He proposed to the Judges and officials that 50 arquebusiers and 30
mounted soldiers should be raised for a guard for himself and the city,
and on this pretext he spent 150,000 _castellanos_ of your Majesty’s
treasure, by the hand of Vela Nuñez, whom he made Captain-General, and
of Cueto who has taken 30,000 _castellanos_ without giving any account,
for his servants.

[Sidenote: Soldiers disloyal.]

37[68]. Most of these soldiers, by reason of their bad treatment, say
that they do not want the Viceroy to win, nor to fight for him. Every
day some desert to the enemy.

[Sidenote: Bad appointments.]

38. He gave the captaincies to inexperienced men. A captain of
arquebusiers fled, and another he threatened to stab.

[Sidenote: Wild threats.]

39. He treats everyone as a traitor, threatening to kill them. At the
same time that he tried to treat with those of Cuzco, he publicly
declared that he would kill some and banish others; and that he wished
ill to all and would defeat them.

[Sidenote: Conduct of Judges a contrast.]

40. The Judges had lived at their own cost and honestly, had given
advice to the Viceroy and sent two bishops to treat with the rebels.

[Sidenote: Viceroy’s conduct cause of the rebellion.]

41. The Viceroy by his attempt to enforce the ordinances untimely and
without the consent of the Judges, and by his follies, evil speeches,
and cruelties has been the cause of the rebellion.

[Sidenote: Treatment of two women.]

42. He condemned a married woman, with Indians, on the ground that she
had perjured herself respecting an emerald cross which she said she had
given to the Licentiate Vaca de Castro, to imprisonment and to do public
penance in the church. He ordered another to be sent to prison for
sitting near him in church. As regards the first sentence he enraged
everyone. As regards the second all the relations rose in rebellion and
wanted to kill him.

[Sidenote: Acted alone in criminal cases and actions for debt.]

43. In criminal cases, and suits for debts he alone heard and sentenced.

[Sidenote: Favouritism.]

44. Under colour of the war he gave his servants double the pay received
by the other soldiers.

[Sidenote: Murder of Carbajal.]

45. In the night of Sunday the 14th of September Don Baltasar de
Castilla and Gaspar Mexia, with 18 others, fled from Lima, owing to the
abuse and bad treatment they had received. The Viceroy ordered the
Factor Illan Suarez de Carbajal to be summoned in the middle of the
night. When he came the Viceroy said: “Say cunning traitor! how is it
that you have committed this treason in allowing your nephews and some
servants to go to the rebels at Cuzco?” The Factor replied: “I know
nothing of it, and I am no traitor. On the contrary I serve his
Majesty.” On this the Viceroy stabbed him with a dagger[69], and ordered
Cueto and the servants to finish him. When he was dead they put the body
into the corridor, and thence, after an interval, two negroes took it
away for burial[70].

[Sidenote: Character of the murdered man.]

46. The Factor was a quiet and virtuous person who knew nothing about
the flight of nephews or servants. He had a very large house with four
doors and 40 or 50 persons living there. He was retired in his own room,
and took no notice of what was going on. He took a great part in
advocating the reception of the Viceroy, when the magistrates and people
were against it.

[Sidenote: Question of Judges remaining if the Viceroy left.]

47. The Judges convened a meeting in the morning of Tuesday, the 16th of
September, to discuss the questions whether the Viceroy should wait in
Lima for the arrival of Gonzalo Pizarro and the others who were coming
from Cuzco; and if he arranged to go, whether the Judges should remain.
It was decided that the Judges should remain for many reasons offered by
officials, magistrates and captains who were consulted.

[Sidenote: Decision repudiated by the Viceroy.]

48. But the Viceroy had resolved to embark and take the Judges and
officers of the Court, and all the citizens, and to kill anyone that
resisted[71]; while his brother Vela Nuñez was to march by land with the
soldiers, for Pizarro would not come across him. The Viceroy repudiated
the opinion of the majority, saying that he would wait in Lima to be
sure that all the others should not think that he wanted them to embark.

[Sidenote: Decision of the Judges to remain.]

49. It remained to deliberate on so serious a matter, and the two
Bishops of Quito and Cuzco who were then in Lima, joined in consultation
with the Judges and the officials of the municipality. The Judges then
published their resolution not to depart. The Viceroy called together
his captains with whom he consulted without the intervention of the
Judges or anyone else.

[Sidenote: Captains concur.]

50. The decision of the captains was that, although the Viceroy might
depart, the Judges ought to remain, maintaining the country in the name
of His Majesty.

[Sidenote: Wild conduct of the Viceroy. Taken to Cepeda’s house.]

51. Nevertheless the Viceroy resolved to take the royal seal, the Judges
and officials with all their property, and that of many citizens with
their wives, children, horses, farriery, &c. In the night of Tuesday the
16th of September the soldiers assembled under Vela Nuñez, and at dawn
of the 17th there was a call to arms at the Viceroy’s door with the cry,
“Sack! Sack!” The Judges wished to stop the sacking of the town, and
came to the Viceroy’s door with three banners. They did not dare to go
in to speak with him, because they had been told that he would kill
them. But they sent the choir master with some monks and clergymen to
entreat him not to insist on the destruction of the city and kingdom,
but to embark if he desired to do so, and to leave the citizens with
their property. He would not condescend to talk with them, but many of
the citizens had taken up arms and wished to oppose the Viceroy and his
soldiers. If it had not been for the Judges who ordered, on pain of
death, that no one should injure the person of the Viceroy, he would
have been killed. He took refuge in the house of the Licentiate Cepeda,
where he was quite safe from the citizens, and the soldiers who hated
him.

[Sidenote: Judges’ version of the Viceroy’s departure.]

52. The Viceroy was well served and attended all the time that he was in
Cepeda’s house. Of his own accord he said that he was hated, and that he
wanted to go to Spain. By his order they took him to embark. Those who
had command of the ships did not wish to receive him, and there were
mutinies on board six or seven that were in the port. Two were burnt and
two others were sent to the bottom by Geronimo de Zurbano, Martin de
Arauco, and Diego Alvarez de Cueto, the Viceroy’s brother-in-law, or by
their order. They did this to rob all that was on board the ships, of a
value of more than 130,000 _castellanos_. The ships were in charge of
Alvarez de Cueto, and it is believed that all this was done with the
consent of the Viceroy.

[Sidenote: Judges’ version.]

53. At the time when the Judges came out of the house of Maria de
Escobar, where they met that morning from fear of the Viceroy, the
Licentiate Alvarez said: “Be my witnesses that we go to entreat the
Viceroy not to kill us, take us, nor force us to embark, and to tell him
that the people have risen against him. We go neither to enrage him nor
to injure him and let it be punishment of death for any who acts
otherwise.” He repeated this at the corner of the street, and on the
steps of the church.

[Sidenote: Judges claim to have saved the Viceroy.]

54. Without doubt the people would have killed the Viceroy, if the
Judges had not intervened.

[Sidenote: Hatred of the people.]

55. But he was not safe on land, nor to govern. For he was so detested
that the people would have torn him to pieces rather than consent to his
government, as they publicly declared.

[Sidenote: Viceroy’s temper.]

56. When anyone opposed his decisions, he became so furious that he
seemed to have lost his senses, abusing and menacing the objector.

[Sidenote: A foolish talker.]

57. He was such a talker that he told the contents of the reports and
letters he received at his table, however secret they might be.

[Sidenote: Necessary that he should go.]

58. If he should be longer in Peru, there would be a thousand
misfortunes, so it was absolutely necessary that he should go back to
Spain, and that your Majesty should be informed.

[Sidenote: When he was gone peace restored.]

59. In effect, as the people know that he wishes to return to Spain, all
things are quiet and peaceful.




SEQUEL

(BY THE EDITOR.)


The first part of the _War of Quito_ closes just before the murder of
Illan Suarez de Carbajal. It was a final death-blow to the Viceroy’s
rule. He knew this himself and no doubt felt sorrow and remorse at his
sudden gust of passion. But it was too late. The deed was done.

On assuming the governorship of Peru Gonzalo Pizarro was advised to send
envoys to Spain to urge the greatness of his services, explain the
course of events, and obtain confirmation of his position. The wise and
far-seeing Carbajal alone opposed. He said that the best _Procuradores_
were many arquebuses, soldiers and horses. But it was resolved that Dr
Tejada, one of the Judges, should go to represent his colleagues, and
Francisco Maldonado for Pizarro. There was only one ship, the one on
board of which Vaca de Castro had long been kept a prisoner by the
Viceroy. Vaca de Castro was informed of the intention by his relation
Garcia de Montalvo. The crew willingly agreed to seize the ship and take
Vaca de Castro to Panama, for he was respected and beloved by all on
board. So she sailed away, leaving Gonzalo Pizarro furious, for there
was no other vessel to take his “Procurators.”

Luckily a brigantine arrived from the port of Arequipa and Dr Tejada,
Maldonado, and Bachicao embarked, sailing along the coast. At Payta they
heard of the release and landing of the Viceroy.

As soon as the vessel with the Judge Alvarez on board, taking the
Viceroy and his brothers to Panama, was well out at sea, there was
another act of treachery. Alvarez went to the Viceroy, declared he had
only taken charge of him to get him out of the power of his colleague
Cepeda, and that now he was free to do as he pleased. The Viceroy took
charge, very ungratefully covered Alvarez with abuse, and landed with
his few followers.

Bachicao went on to Panama. On his arrival Vaca de Castro, and the
Viceroy’s envoys--his brother-in-law Cueto and Zurbano--fled to Nombre
de Dios, and embarked for Spain. They were joined by Tejada and
Maldonado. But Tejada died during the voyage. Cueto and Maldonado
arrived, and went off to the Emperor in Germany to tell their stories.
Vaca de Castro landed at Terceira, and went thence, by way of Lisbon, to
the Court of Spain. He was falsely accused and imprisoned in the castle
of Arevalo for more than five years. Finally he was acquitted, and
declared to have been a good ruler. He was restored to his seat in the
Royal Council of Castille. Garcilasso saw him at Madrid in the end of
1571. His son Antonio was granted a large _repartimiento_ in Peru.

The Viceroy having landed, managed to get together 150 men and marched
to Quito where he was well received, and increased his force by 200 more
men. With this force, and a native of Quito named Diego de Ocampo as
general, he returned to Piura. The Judge Alvarez was always with him.
Gonzalo Pizarro sent Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda and Geronimo de Villegas
along the coast to Truxillo and Piura to collect men. They reached
Piura, but fled on the approach of the Viceroy and sent the news to
Pizarro. The Viceroy made a night march and surprised them, putting them
and their followers to flight. Pineda fled alone into the mountains and
died of hunger. Villegas escaped to Truxillo, while the Viceroy returned
to Piura.

Gonzalo Pizarro, when he received the news that the Viceroy was still in
the country at the head of a large force, resolved to attack him without
delay. He left Lorenzo de Aldana as Governor of Lima, with 80
arquebusiers. He went himself by sea to Truxillo, with 150 picked
officers and men, stores and munitions of war. The rest marched by land.
The Judge Cepeda had become a fighting man and a strong partisan of
Pizarro. The _Audiencia_ or Court of Justice had ceased to exist, for
Alvarez was with the Viceroy, Tejada had gone to Spain, and Zarate
remained at Lima, keeping aloof from all recent proceedings.

Pizarro took the royal seal with him, and embarked in March 1545.
Landing at Santa he marched to Truxillo, where all the troops were
assembled, going thence to the province of Collique. He had 600 men,
horse and foot, about the same number as the Viceroy but Pizarro’s were
more experienced soldiers. Supplies of all kinds were got together in
Collique, and arrangements were made for carrying water across the
deserts. On his approach to Piura, the Viceroy made a rapid retreat into
the mountains. Pizarro, without entering Piura, followed in pursuit.
Each day the work became more severe. Many stragglers from the
Viceroy’s force were captured. Reaching Ayahuaca Pizarro halted to rest
his men and obtain supplies. The Viceroy continued his march to Quito.
Pizarro resumed the pursuit, but the mountain route was extremely
difficult. At last he sent Carbajal ahead with 50 mounted men, who
reached the enemy’s camp at 4 A.M. The Viceroy got his men into some
order and continued his march. At dawn, when he saw the small number of
his pursuers, he turned to attack them. His men were perishing with cold
and hunger, and Carbajal declined the combat. Fresh troops joined
Pizarro under Juan de Acosta[72], and the Viceroy was so closely pressed
that he fled with 60 mounted men. He reached Tumibamba where he put his
Camp Master Ocampo and several others to death, on suspicion of traffic
with the enemy--the captains Geronimo de la Serna and Gaspar Gil.

The Viceroy marched from Tumibamba to Quito without difficulty, where
he put three more officers to death. Pizarro sent Juan de Acosta to
follow the Viceroy with 60 cavalry.

Gonzalo Pizarro had sent Francisco de Almendras to Charcas as his
Lieutenant, a staunch adherent. He put a citizen of Chuquisaca named
Gomez de Luna in prison for some speech against Pizarro’s rule. The
municipality ordered him to be released, upon which Almendras went to
the prison and had him strangled. Many people were furious, especially a
citizen named Diego Centeno. He made a plot with others (Luis de
Mendoza, Alonso Perez de Esquivel, Alonso de Camargo, Hernan Nuñez de
Segura, Lope de Mendieta, Juan Ortiz de Zarate) to murder Almendras[73].
This they did, and then declared for the King, appointing Diego Centeno
their Captain-General. Alonso de Toro marched against him from Cuzco.
When the news reached Gonzalo Pizarro near Quito, he sent Carbajal to
put down the insurrection. The indefatigable old man set out with an
escort of 20 men. He collected men on the way at Truxillo and Guamanga,
and then took the route by Lima to Arequipa, thence to Cuzco where he
found Alonso de Toro. He marched against Centeno who retreated before
him. Carbajal gave him no rest, and hunted him down to the coast.

Meanwhile Gonzalo Pizarro continued the chase of the Viceroy by day and
night, over a country purposely made bare of provisions by the pursued.
Pizarro was joined by Bachicao who came from Panama with 350 men,
artillery, and 20 ships. Pizarro’s force then amounted to 800 soldiers.
The Viceroy continued his flight to Pastos, within the jurisdiction of
Sebastian de Belalcazar. Pizarro, after a short stay at Quito, continued
the pursuit, and the Viceroy fled to Popayan. Pizarro then returned to
Quito. He appointed Pedro de Hinojosa to command the fleet which was at
Puerto Viejo, with 250 men. Hinojosa obtained information that the
Viceroy’s brother, Vela Nuñez, was coming to the coast on a mission to
Spain, with a natural son of Gonzalo Pizarro as a hostage. Hinojosa
captured them both, and proceeded with them to Panama. He arrived there
in October 1545, and took possession without interfering with the civil
government.

The Viceroy busily collected arms and assembled troops at Popayan and,
having received false news respecting the strength of the enemy, he
began his march southwards, hoping to destroy the forces of Puelles and
Pizarro. In reality Pizarro had 200 arquebusiers, 350 pikemen and 150
cavalry, with plenty of good powder.

  Captains of Arquebusiers    Juan de Acosta,
                              Juan Velez de Guevara.

  Captain of Pikemen          Hernando de Bachicao.

  Captains of Cavalry         Pedro de Puelles,
                              Gomez de Alvarado.

  Standard bearer             Francisco de Ampuero.

The fighting Judge Cepeda was there, and the Licentiate Benito Suarez de
Carbajal, brother of the murdered Factor, with thirty friends and
relations to avenge his death.

The Viceroy faced his enemies near Quito, thinking that he only saw the
detachment of Puelles, and that Pizarro was not there. His captains
advised a flank march over most difficult country to Quito. This took
all night, and at dawn they were a league from the town, worn out with
fatigue. The idea was to take the enemy in rear, but it was a fatal
mistake. The Viceroy came out of Quito, while Gonzalo Pizarro’s army
turned and advanced to meet him.

The Viceroy’s Captains

  of Infantry were   Sancho Sanchez de Avila[74],
                     Juan Cabrera his cousin[75],
                     Francisco Sanchez.

  of Cavalry were    Sebastian de Belalcazar[76],
                     Pedro de Bazan,
                     Francisco Hernandez Giron[77].

The two bodies of cavalry encountered each other but the Viceroy’s men
were worn out by the long night march. It was a desperate battle at
close quarters, both infantry and cavalry. The Viceroy received a blow
from Hernando de Torres of Arequipa, which brought him to the ground.
Puelles would have protected him, but the Licentiate Carbajal, after
searching for him, came up and caused a negro to cut off his head.
Gonzalo Pizarro was enraged at this treatment of the Viceroy, and caused
his body to be honourably buried, he himself being chief mourner.
Pizarro’s victory was complete: 200 of the Viceroy’s men were killed.
The Judge Alvarez died of his wounds a few days afterwards.

Gonzalo Pizarro sent the news of his victory to all the cities in Peru,
and Captain Alarcon brought the glad tidings to Hinojosa at Panama in a
ship. Pizarro trusted Hinojosa fully, as he owed everything to his
benefactor. Hinojosa’s treason was the cause of Pizarro’s fall. Alarcon
brought back Gonzalo Pizarro’s son, and Vela Nuñez, the Viceroy’s
brother: who received full pardon and went with Pizarro to Lima. Gonzalo
Pizarro was now at the height of his power. Always just and inclined to
mercy, he never put anyone to death without trial. On his return to Lima
he enacted some excellent laws for the protection of the Indians. Gasca
confessed that Gonzalo Pizarro was a good governor.

Old Carbajal had been hunting Diego Centeno, who hid himself in a cave
for eight months. Of his accomplices Lope de Mendoza and Nicolas de
Heredia were executed, the rest pardoned, including Luis Pardomo and
Alonso Camargo.

Carbajal wrote a long letter to Gonzalo Pizarro urging him to assume the
kingship of Peru. He said that no pardon could be expected after killing
the Viceroy, nor would it be safe to trust to any promises that might be
sent to him. He should divide all the vacant land among his supporters
as perpetual tenures, instead of two lives, with titles of Dukes,
Marquises, and Counts, and should create military orders. He strongly
advised Pizarro to secure the devotion of the natives by taking an Inca
Princess as his Queen. Puelles and Cepeda concurred. Pizarro had entered
Lima in triumph, accompanied by four Bishops, of Lima, Quito, Cuzco, and
Bogota, by Lorenzo de Aldana and all the municipal officers and
magistrates, and nearly all the citizens.

Vela Nuñez, the Viceroy’s brother, had been brought back to Lima. There
was also at Lima one Juan de la Torre who had married a daughter of a
Curaca near Puerto Viejo. He got with her a large treasure, and he
wanted to return to Spain to enjoy it. He proposed to Vela Nuñez to join
him and seize a ship to which Vela Nuñez agreed. The ruffian then
thought he might gain more by betraying his victim to Pizarro. Vela
Nuñez was beheaded.

When Carbajal heard of the arrival of Gonzalo Pizarro at Lima, he came
from Charcas where he had restored tranquillity. Pizarro came out some
distance to meet him. He brought with him great store of treasure, and
had a grand reception. Alonso de Mendoza was left as Pizarro’s
Lieutenant in Charcas.

All seemed hopeful for the future, with a good administration under a
most popular Governor. The treachery of Hinojosa and Aldana in
delivering up the fleet to Gasca at Panama, renewed all the trouble,
with six more years of civil war.




LETTER FROM FRANCISCO DE CARBAJAL TO GONZALO PIZARRO.


Most illustrious Sir,

As God alone is the true master of all things and knows what He says,
arranging all things according to His will and pleasure, although I
wrote to you the other day, by Diego Lopez de Segura, that we should
enter Guamanga on the day that you received the letter, He was not
served that we should do so. For on the following Tuesday, in the night,
after I had despatched Segura, we were to sleep at Lucumaes, I had a
pain in the stomach followed by a severe pain in the side, with which I
was unable to take the road, though there was no want of doctors and
medicines.

Feeling a little better I left Lucumaes where I was taken ill, and came
to Andahuaylas. I was there attacked again so severely that it would
have been desperation to continue the journey, so I remained to be
cured. I give your honour an account of this, that you may not think I
am enjoying myself.

Your honour’s page Burgos arrived at Andahuaylas, who gave me two
despatches sent by you, and I saw all that they contained. Your honour
need have no anxiety, for I have brought Cuzco to a healthy state as
well in one part as another, bringing with me all those who are
suspected and can do anything, that they may be known to you and serve
you, and leaving there the sowing that seemed convenient. In fine, until
I can see your honour, and can tell you all by word of mouth that seems
advisable for the security of all, it will be well to be as secret as
such affairs require.

From this same place I sent Burgos to Cuzco to accompany the escort
bringing some treasure from your Honour’s estate, and I shall send it
forward with the care that is necessary, doing all in my power to
forward your service.

With regard to the pikes which you ordered me to burn, I have sent for
them that they may be brought to Guamanga by little and little, and
thence they shall be sent to Lima. I beseech your Honour that you will
deem that I do well in this. For the kingly crowning with which we are,
in a few days, to crown your Honour there will be a great concourse of
people, and on that occasion I wish to have charge of such details as
may be convenient. I assure your Excellency that the most terrible war
that can be made for the security of your army and your person, and for
the rout of an enemy, is with pikes, and I know very well what I am
saying.

Rodrigo de Zamudio arrived here last night, who resides at Chuquiapu (La
Paz). He came with Father Ortun Sanchez from your Honour’s estates,
bringing 35,000 _pesos_ of gold from Chuquiapu and in silver from
Potosi, respecting which the Father informed me. I have sent it from
here with the best escort I could arrange. I pray that you will give the
bearers good treatment and presents, for it is true that much work is
done each day, backwards and forwards, in your Honour’s service, and I
will look upon it as a reward to myself. May the illustrious person of
your Honour be maintained with all the health and increase of prosperity
that you can desire. From this station of Andahuaylas to-day Thursday
the 17th of March 1547.

                        Your Servant who kisses

                          Your Honour’s hands

                        FRANCISCO DE CARBAJAL.




LA GASCA’S VOYAGE.

Document in the special library of the King of Spain (_16 f^{s} cuaderna
17_), in the handwriting of one of La Gasca’s secretaries, quoted by the
Palentino. Neither Prescott nor Barros Arana had seen it.


_Abridged._

We arranged that Lorenzo de Aldana should sail with two ships and a
frigate, and in his company Palomino and Juan de Illanes, and the
Provincial of the Dominicans with letters, provisions, and pardons, and
300 soldiers.

Finding all quiet in Peru, and himself popular, while Tierra Firme was
in his hands, for he was ignorant of the treason there, his Council
advised Gonzalo Pizarro to become King by an Act similar to that made at
Avila by Alonso, in the time of his brother Henry IV, to be approved by
all the citizens and principal persons in Peru. Carbajal, who was at
Cuzco, was ordered to Lima. Meanwhile the Licentiates Cepeda and
Carbajal, and Juan de Acosta a great favourite of Gonzalo, tried to
persuade Gonzalo that the Camp Master was a traitor and advised Gonzalo
to kill him. Carbajal set out, but was taken very ill at Andahuaylas. He
wrote to Gonzalo of the Kingship he was about to assume, and of the
great concourse of people there would be at Lima. The letter is dated at
Andahuaylas 17 March 1547.

Lorenzo de Aldana, Hernan Mexia, Palomino, and Juan de Illanes, and the
Regent Friar Tomas San Martin sailed from Panama with two ships and a
frigate 17 Feb. 1547. I made sail from Panama to Taboga 10 April 1547,
where there were 22 other ships. April 12 we left Taboga, I, General
Pedro de Hinojosa, Diego Garcia de Paredas, &c. in the _capitana_.

Aldana, joined by Paniagua with another ship, put into Guayaquil.

Gasca encountered bad weather and put into Buenaventura. The captain
wanted to return to Panama. There were very heavy seas, thunder and
lightning, and a downpour of rain, wet through fore and aft. Those with
him entreated him to let the captain shorten sail. He refused. At last
he went to his cabin to see how his papers had fared with the water.
Then Paredes and others told the sailors that I had ordered the mainsail
to be lowered. Having done my best to protect the papers from wet, I
came out and found the men on the yard and the sail being lowered. I
shouted that it was not to be done, but no one wanted to hear me. At
this juncture a number of lights of St Elmo appeared on all the yards,
which gave great consolation, all the sailors falling on their knees and
saying their St Elmo prayer. This led to silence, and I and Pedro de
Hinojosa, with some others, got the sail up again. This reminded me of
what Aristotle and Pliny said that when there are many of these lights,
it is a sign that the tempest will cease. Next day we were able to
anchor under the shelter of Gorgona. Don Pedro Cabrera’s ship reached
Buenaventura, where he and his people landed and marched by Popayan and
Quito, reaching Xauxa after seven months, in November. I found 12 ships
at Gorgona. The Bishop of Lima, Hinojosa, and Paredes went in the
galliot. April 30th all sailed from Gorgona, I also in the galley with
30 of the best arquebusiers, to go by rowing if sails were of no use.
Paniagua met me off Gallo with a letter from Gonzalo Pizarro. He dwelt
on the services of his brothers and himself, on the necessity for
expelling Blasco Nuñez, and on his care of the royal treasury.




MURDER OF THE INCA MANCO DESCRIBED BY HIS SON.


Titu Cusi Yupanqui, younger son of the murdered Inca Manco, being a
neophyte in the beginning of 1570, dictated to an Augustine friar named
Marcos Garcia, who was with him at Vilcapampa, the following “Narrative
of the entry of the Spaniards into Peru, and of what happened to him
when they were living with him.”

All these things having happened, both those which I have mentioned and
many others which I have not touched upon to avoid prolixity, my father
returned to Vilcapampa as head of all this province, where he rested for
some days. From this place, because he did not like to be without me, he
sent to Cuzco for me, where I was, until they took me to Viticos, in the
house of Oñate[78]. The messengers took me and my mother secretly to the
town of Viticos, where my father had come for fresh air, it being a cold
land. There I and my Father stayed for many days. At different times
seven Spaniards arrived, saying that they were fugitives owing to having
committed offences, and they protested that they would serve my Father
with all their power, for the remainder of their lives. They prayed that
they might be allowed to remain in that land and end their days there.
My Father, thinking that they came with good intentions, ordered his
captains to do them no harm, for he wished to keep them as his servants,
and that they should have houses in which to live. The captains would
much rather have put an end to them, but obeyed my Father’s orders. My
Father had them with him for many days and years, treating them very
well, and giving them all that they needed, even ordering his own women
to prepare their food and their beverage, and taking his meals with
them. He treated them as if they were his own brothers.

After these Spaniards had been with my Father for several years in the
said town of Viticos they were one day, with much good fellowship,
playing at quoits with him: only them, my Father, and me, who was then a
boy. Without having any suspicion, although an Indian woman, named
Banba, had said that the Spaniards wanted to murder the Inca, my Father
was playing with them as usual. In this game, just as my Father was
raising the quoit to throw, they all rushed upon him with knives,
daggers, and some swords. My Father, feeling himself wounded, strove to
make some defence, but he was one and unarmed, and they were seven fully
armed; he fell to the ground covered with wounds, and they left him for
dead. I, being a little boy, and seeing my Father treated in this
manner, wanted to go where he was to help him. But they turned furiously
upon me, and hurled a lance which only just failed to kill me also. I
was terrified and fled amongst some bushes. They looked for me, but
could not find me. The Spaniards, seeing that my Father had ceased to
breathe, went out of the gate, in high spirits, saying, “Now that we
have killed the Inca we have nothing to fear.” But at this moment the
captain Rimachi Yupanqui arrived with some Antis, and presently chased
them in such sort that, before they could get very far along a difficult
road, they were caught and pulled from their horses. They all had to
suffer very cruel deaths and some were burnt. Notwithstanding his wounds
my Father lived for three days. Before he died, he sent for me and all
his captains, and spoke these words....[79]

     All the above writing was done and ordered to give the information
     dictated by the most illustrious Lord Don Diego de Castro Titu Cusi
     Yupanqui, son of Manco Inca Yupanqui late natural Lord of these
     kingdoms of Peru, to the Reverend Father Friar Marcos Garcia, Friar
     Presbyter of the order of Saint Augustine, who resides in that
     province of Vilcapampa, having in charge the cure of all the souls
     within it, to the honour and glory of Almighty God.

     I Martin Pando, clerk, commissioned by the Illustrious Lord the
     Licentiate Lope Garcia de Castro, late Governor of these kingdoms,
     solemnly declare that all that is above written was composed and
     ordered by the said Father under the instructions of the said Don
     Diego de Castro, and which I myself wrote with my proper hands in
     the manner dictated by the said Father, being witnesses the
     Reverend Father Friar Diego Ortiz, professed presbyter of the said
     order, who jointly resides in company with the author of this, and
     three captains of the said Don Diego de Castro, named Suta
     Yupanqui, Rimachi Yupanqui, and Sullca Huarac. In token of the good
     faith of all the aforesaid, I signed my name. Done in the town of
     San Salvador of Vilcapampa, on the 6th of February 1570, which, to
     make it more authentic is also signed with the names of Father
     Friar Martin Garcia and Father Diego Ortiz.

     I Don Diego de Castro Titu Cusi Yupanqui, natural son of Manco Inca
     Yupanqui late Lord of these kingdoms of Peru declare that, as it
     is necessary for me to make this statement to the King Don Philip
     our Lord, containing things of importance to me and my successors,
     and not knowing the style and manner used by Spaniards in such
     reports, I requested the very Reverend Father Friar Marcos Garcia
     and Martin de Pando that, in conformity with the usage on such
     occasions, they would order and compose the above narrative, for
     the very illustrious Lord, the Licentiate Lope Garcia de Castro to
     send to Spain; that for me, in my name, holding, as I do hold, my
     power, all may be explained to his Majesty Don Philip our King and
     Lord, that he, seeing the grounds of my request, may show favour to
     me, to my sons and my descendants and I sign my name on the day
     aforesaid.

                   Don Diego de Castro Titu Cusi Yupanqui.




To Don Lope Garcia de Castro,

Having received letters from your Lordship, asking me to become a
Christian and saying that it would conduce to the security of the
country, I enquired of Diego Rodriguez and Martin de Pando, who was the
principal monk among those who were in Cuzco, and who were the most
approved and of most weight among the religious orders. They replied
that the most flourishing were those of St Augustine, and their Prior
was the most important religious in Cuzco. Having heard this, I became
more attached to the order of St Augustine than to any other. I wrote
letters to the Prior, requesting him to come in person to baptize me,
because I would rather be baptized by him than by anyone else. He took
the trouble to come to my country and to baptize me, bringing with him
another monk, and Gonzalo Perez de Vivero and Atilano de Anaya who
arrived at Rayangalla on the 12th of August 1568, whither I came from
Vilcapampa to receive baptism. There, in that village of Rayangalla,
were the said Prior named Juan de Vivero and his companions. I was
instructed in the things of the faith for a fortnight, at the end of
which time, on the day of the famous Dr St Augustine, the Prior baptized
me. My godfather was Gonzalo Perez de Vivero and my godmother Doña
Angelina Zica Ocllo. After I was baptized the Prior remained for eight
days to instruct me in the holy catholic church and to initiate me into
its mysteries. He then departed with Gonzalo Perez de Vivero, leaving me
a companion named Friar Marcos Garcia, that he might little by little
instil into my mind what the Prior had taught, that I might not forget,
and also to teach the word of God to the people of my land. Before he
departed I explained to my followers the reason why I had been baptized,
and had brought these people into my land. All replied that they
rejoiced at my baptism, and that the friar should remain. In effect the
friar did remain with me[80].


                     DIEGO RODRIGUEZ DE FIGUEROA.

                               _Notice._

[Sidenote: Thin 4^{to} MS.]

The manuscript of the Report of Diego Rodriguez de Figueroa on his
mission to Titu Cusi Yupanqui Inca, came into the possession of Eugene
Jacquet, a French orientalist, who gave it to Alexander von Humboldt,
in 1833. Humboldt left it to the Royal Library at Berlin. The text was
published by Dr Pietschmann of Göttingen in 1910.

Rodriguez came to Peru in about 1552. The Count of Nieva, Viceroy from
1561 to 1564, appointed him _Defensor de todos los Indios_.

Rodriguez took part in the subjugation of Vilcapampa by order of the
Viceroy Toledo in 1571, and an _encomienda_ of 100 Indians was given to
him, in that province, where he was Alguazil Mayor. He was there four
years, but quarrelled with the Governor. In a petition to the Viceroy
Don Martin Henriquez, successor to Toledo (1 Dec. 1582), Rodriguez
mentions that he has five daughters and three sons, that he had lived
many years at Potosi, and had fought in three battles for the King. He
had occupied himself with writings and pictures representing the history
of the Incas and all sorts of reports and memoirs. He had been
Corregidor of Potosi.




NARRATIVE

OF THE ROUTE AND JOURNEY MADE BY

DIEGO RODRIGUEZ

FROM THE CITY OF CUZCO TO THE LAND OF WAR OF MANCO[81] INCA WHO WAS IN
THE ANDES IN INSURRECTION AGAINST THE SERVICE OF HIS MAJESTY, AND OF THE
AFFAIRS TOUCHING WHICH HE TREATED WITH THE OBJECT OF ESTABLISHING PEACE,
AS WELL AS TO INDUCE THE PEOPLE TO RECEIVE THE EVANGELICAL DOCTRINE OF
OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

as follows:


I left Cuzco on the 8th of April after having received letters from the
Judge Matienzo to the Inca Titu Cusi Yupanqui, with leave to make an
entrance, after having offered my services to go by that route. I went
to sleep at Tambo, where they gave me seven Indian carriers to show me
the way. Three men of this town were to enter with me, after the cacique
had told them that if the Inca asked them whence they came they were to
say they came from another part and that they were not natives of Tambo,
because it was a garrison of the Inca frontier, and he might kill them,
if they said they came from thence.

On the 9th of April I went to the other part of the cordillera, crossed
the uninhabited snowy region and slept at Yanamachi, where there are
large caves. There I heard that the runners of the Inca had arrived at
Chuquichaca which is near the land of peace, and ready to pass to the
other side of the river which is subject to the Spaniards. I encouraged
the Indians and told them to fear nothing as I would go with them to see
what people they were and what they wanted; but they were unwilling.
That night seven Indians fled from fear. They carried loads containing
some presents for the Inca, bought with my own money and at my cost.
Considering one thing and another, I should have wished to return, if it
had not been that I was ashamed, and for other secret reasons.

I concealed the loads under some straw, and went on for five leagues to
the valley of Amaibamba, three leagues within the land of the Inca,
where they gather much coca, and where there are always many Indians at
harvest time. The place was devoid of inhabitants, because all had
concealed themselves in the forests. There was no one to show me the
ford over the river, but I passed, I and the horse, God seeing fit to
guide the horse miraculously, the depth being more than 300 _estados_.

Later in April some of the Indians who had fled, as well as the runners,
came to me. I encouraged them and said that I would go to the bridge to
see what was going on. I said to them that those others were infidels
and were not Christians, and that one Christian could fight all the
infidels put together; because those others were infidels and they were
Christians. They answered that they had been robbed more than ten or
fifteen times, and some of those others had got their wives and
children, that they were not men but devils with no fear of God, and
that when they had stolen everything they burnt the house, and to insult
the Christians they burnt the churches, and had broken the images, and
with the cross placed in front they had made a fire and cooked a sheep.
It is true that I saw the burnt church, and the pieces they showed me,
which may have been bits of the cross. I explained to them that God
permitted this for our sins, but that He would inflict a great
punishment on those others. I told them that I was going to speak to the
Inca on the part of the President of the Municipality and of the Royal
Audience of the city of La Plata, and to warn him that if he would not
live in conformity with our Holy Catholic Faith and in obedience to his
Majesty, war would be declared. While I should be there, they were to
keep a good watch on the bridge to see when the runners should arrive,
that I might speak with them. They replied that they did not dare, and
they also advised me not to, because those others would kill me, and
give my body to be eaten by the Anti Indians.

Seeing the small courage of these Indians, I sent them for the loads, to
the place where they were hidden, and left the horse here, in the valley
of Amaibamba, as the road was very rough, and in places one could not
even walk on foot, but like cats. I arrived at the bridge, which is
between two great hills, on the 11th of April. I made great lights on
the banks of the river to see if any of the Inca’s runners had arrived.
I also made a flag of a pocket handkerchief, and put it on the top of a
tree as a sign of peace, and a very large cross on the bridge, that they
might understand that a Spaniard and Christian had come. Then two
runners came from Yucay, which is in the land of peace. They told me
that my luggage had arrived and was waiting at Amaibamba, that the
Indians who had fled to the mountains had now returned, that they were
not frightened now that I was at the bridge, that they would feel safe
while I was there, and that the Inca had gone back with his captains.

On the 11th they made great fires, and there was much smoke on the other
side of the river. That night two Indian runners fled to the mountains
because they did not dare to sleep where I slept, which was close to the
bridge. There I was, in much trouble with the mosquitos, which bit me by
night and by day, but in no trouble about the Inca’s people. This being
the case I determined to return to Amaibamba, and wait there for the
runners. If they made any remark I could say that it was three leagues
away, and that the bites of mosquitos had swollen my hands and feet, and
brought on a fever.

On Good Friday, the 20th of April, in the evening, a runner arrived with
the news that six Indians of the Inca had arrived at the bridge, and
there appeared to be more behind. It did not appear what object they
had, but they had left the cross which I had set up. All the Indians
armed themselves and some, from fear, fled to the mountains. I presently
went to the bridge, commending myself to our Lord. I went by a very bad
road and in the night, having several falls by the way, and much hard
work. I took with me two Indians against their will, with coca, bread,
and other things to eat. I arrived at the bridge at about 3 o’clock in
the morning, and began to cry out and struck a light. The runners then
came together and, with many torches of straw alight, we began to talk.
I said that I came, with peaceful intent, to speak to the Inca, bringing
letters from the Municipality and Judges of the city of La Plata, and
another from the Judge Matienzo, requesting permission for me to enter
the country, speak to the Inca, and deliver the letters into his hands.
They replied that they were satisfied. The letters were thrown over the
river with a sling, and coca and bread were passed over on a rope, that
they might eat. I asked them to let me leave one of the two Indians
until the reply came from the Inca, to which they agreed.

On the 28th of April the Inca replied in a very brief letter. He thanked
me for the trouble I had taken, but for the rest he said that he did not
want any Spaniard to enter his territory either in peace or in war, for
they would only come as spies and to deceive him. He ordered me not to
enter, and that if I did his captains would kill me. Further he kissed
the hands of the Judge Matienzo and of all the others who had written,
and did not reply as he was in bad health. I was to return with this
message. I was to be so good as to send him the letters, which I told
him I was bringing, that he might have them in his hand. On the day that
I received this reply from the Inca, I reflected that if I returned they
would say at Cuzco that I was afraid and sought an excuse for not going
to the Inca. So I determined to give the letters to the runners, as well
as some presents which I had brought, such as raisins and comfits,
quince jam, three pieces of cloth, three pairs of scissors, four knives
with sheaths, some needles and other things. I wrote that I was his
friend, and that he should understand that I had no wish to deceive him,
but to tell him what it would be convenient for him to know. If he would
give me permission I would enter his territory to recognize him as a
Lord. I further said that if I could serve him in anything I would do
so. That he might know this to be the truth I sent him a provision
appointing me Defender of all the Indians of this kingdom signed by the
Count of Nieva[82].

On the 5th of May ten captains came to the bridge, richly dressed with
diadems of plumes, and lances in their hands which they brandished, and
wearing masks on their faces. They came to the passage of the bridge
where I was, and asked if I was the man who had the audacity to want to
come and speak to the Inca. I said yes. They replied that I could not
fail to be much afraid, and if I felt fear I could not come, because the
Inca was a great enemy of cowards. To this I answered that if he was an
elephant or a giant I might be afraid, but as he was a man like myself I
had no fear, but I would offer him respect. If he would let me enter
under his word, I would do so, for I knew that he would keep it. On this
they produced two letters. One was from a mestizo who is there, named
Pando, and the other from the Inca. They sent them across to me. Some of
the Indians who were with me then fled. In both letters there were
expressions of joy to understand, from the Provision, that I was not a
spy and that I did not come to deceive them. They were pleased that I
should come as far as a town called Aramcalla, and that the Inca would
come there with his Governor and Master of the Camp.

On the 6th of May I crossed the river in a basket travelling along a
cable, and seven Indians came with me. The ten Indians of the Inca
helped me to cross, and accompanied me. That night I slept at the foot
of a snowy mountain, in an uninhabited village called Condormarca, where
there had been a bridge in ancient times, which crossed the river to go
to Tambo, Sapamarca, and Viticos in the country of peace.

On the 7th of May as many as a hundred Indians came to meet me and
accompany me over the road of Marainiyo, a very rough country with much
vegetation and some swamps. They asked me if it was I who had put up the
flag which I mentioned before. I said yes and that I had hoisted it as a
signal that I came on an errand of peace. They answered that it was a
great piece of insolence for anyone to hoist a flag in the territory of
the Inca, and if it had not been that the Inca had given orders for me
to enter, they would have killed me there and then. Each one then began
to brandish his arms, calling the Spaniards bearded cowards and thieves.
Others said, “May we not kill this little bearded one, to avenge what
his brethren have done to us.” I appeased them by saying it was true
than when the Spaniards came they did much harm; but that now there was
justice, that the people were favoured and had their liberty. They then
asked me if I was one of those who came first, or whether I had arrived
recently. I answered that it was seventeen years since I came from
Spain, that in all times there were some good and some bad, and that now
they deserved much honour for it seemed to me that they were good men.
As to what others had done, the fault did not lie with me. I then gave
them some drink, and I gave some of them needles, ornaments, knives, and
other things, so we made friends. I then wrote to the Inca to say that I
had entered his country, but had not yet come to where he was, and that
in token of friendship I sent him two glass jars and two dozen buttons
of green glass that looked like emeralds.

On the 8th of May we departed from the station of the Inca called
Marainiyo, and marched to an Indian village named Lucuma where four
Indians came to see me from a captain, who was on that frontier, named
Cayanbi. I sent him salt and knives, and in return he supplied me with
maize and chicha, asking me not to pass on, because he had not sent to
tell the Inca anything about my arrival, but that he would come and
sleep that night, to accompany me. Considering the abominable road, and
the discomfort of having to travel on foot, and seeing that though I was
near the goal they would not let me reach it, I sent to say that I would
not go, and that I wanted to return to Cuzco. So I ordered the Indians
to take the road by which we had come, and I wrote a very angry letter
to the Inca saying that I had arrived at Lucuma by his order, and that
one of his captains, who was on that frontier, had refused to receive
me in his land. With the letter I sent a hat with two plumes of
feathers. When the captain saw my determination to return to Cuzco he
came to me, on the road, and begged me not to go until a reply came from
the Inca. He also brought plenty of food of the country.

I remained with the captain until another day when the reply of the Inca
came, the runner having covered 40 leagues in two days, saying in his
letter that he was very angry with the captain who would be well
punished. He sent another in his place named Vilcapaniguana, with a
hundred Indians to help in my journey. I was lodged in Arancalla, a
village of a hundred Indians, in a very rough country near the snows,
where there was a large fort.

I arrived there on the 9th of May, and they made me two houses on a hill
two arquebus shots from the village. Presently the inhabitants of the
village came with provisions for my party. Above all things they asked
me to show them the contents of my loads, because they desired much to
know. At first I refused, but as it seemed to me that they would manage
to find out, against my will, I thought that it would be well to let
them see. So they looked at everything. They saw that I carried a sword
and dagger, and said that I should show them to the Inca as he would
rejoice to see them. The same day a servant of the Inca arrived, with
two baskets of earth nuts[83], to visit me on his part. I received him
well and gave him a head cloth and an ornament; and for the Inca two
packs of cards and two pair of scissors. I understood that he came to
see what manner of man I was, and to learn from those who came with me
what I had asked, said, and done. They took leave, very well contented.

On the next day, the 11th of May, I received another letter from the
Inca, in which he made great offers to me, owing to the good report he
had heard of me from Cuzco, and that I was to come to a village further
on called Bambacona that we might sooner meet, and that he would be
there in two days.

I set out on the 12th of May and went on to Viticos where the seven
Spaniards killed the Inca, and their heads are exposed. The Indians told
me that those Spaniards had killed him to raise the land, and that they
determined to kill him while playing at _la herradura_. One Mendez[84]
did it with four or five stabs behind until he killed him; and to Titu
Cusi, the Inca who is now, they would have done the same, but he escaped
down some rocks, which they showed me. They, however, succeeded in
giving him a stab in the leg, the mark of which he afterwards showed me.
If they had wanted to kill some Indians they could have done so, but
their object was to kill the Inca. Then many Indians and captains
assembled, who seized the Spaniards and killed them.

On the 13th of May I sent two of my Indians to the Inca with some
refreshments of raisins, figs, and other things. The Inca received them
well, and gave them two baskets of earth nuts which they were to take to
me, with a message that next day he would arrive, so that we should see
each other soon, and that I need not travel further.

On the 14th of May the Indians of Bambacona had made a large house on a
strong height surrounded by entrenchments. Below were the houses of the
inhabitants. The road by which he was to come was very clean and passed
over a great plain. The three hundred Indians with their lances, and
others from the surrounding country, had made a great theatre for the
Inca, of red clay. They were awaiting his arrival, and wished me to go
out to meet him. They told me that the people of the village would wait
on the plain, and that they would show me a place where they had brought
two loads of straw, half a stone’s throw from the rest of the people.
They told me to wait there, and see the entry of the Inca, and not to
move until the Inca sent for me.

Many lances were drawn up on a hill, and messengers arrived to say that
the Inca was coming. Presently the escort of the Inca began to appear.
The Inca came in front of all, with a head-dress of plumes of many
colours, a silver plate on his breast, a golden shield in one hand, and
a lance all of gold. He wore garters of feathers and fastened to them
were small wooden bells. On his head was a diadem and another round the
neck. In one hand he had a gilded dagger, and he came in a mask of
several colours. Arriving on the plateau where the places of the people
were, and his seat was set up, and mine, he gazed where the sun was,
making a sort of reverence with his hand, which they call _mucha_, and
then went to his seat. There came with him a mestizo with a shield and
sword, and in a Spanish dress and a very old cloak. Presently he turned
his eyes in the direction where I was, and I took off my hat. The
Indians did not notice this. I held up an image of our Lady which I
carried in my bosom, and though the Indians saw it, they took no notice.
Then two _orejones_ came near the Inca with two halberds, dressed in
diadems of plumes with much adornment of gold and silver. These made
obeisance and reverence to the sun and then to the Inca. All the rest
were standing near his seat, encircling him in good order. Presently the
governor came, named Yamqui Mayta, with 60 or 70 attendants with their
silver plates, lances, belts of gold and silver, the same dresses as
were worn by all who came with the Inca. Then came the Master of the
Camp with the same gaily dressed following: and all made obeisance first
to the sun and then to the Inca, saying, “Child of the Sun thou art the
child of the day[85].” Then they took up their positions round the Inca.
Then another captain entered, named Vilcapari Guaman, with about thirty
Indians bearing lances adorned with feathers of many colours. Then
twenty men with axes, making reverences to the sun like the rest. All
wore masks of different colours, which they put before their faces. Next
a little Indian entered who, after making reverences to the sun and the
Inca, came towards me, brandishing a lance, and raising it with great
audacity. He then began to cry out in Spanish “Get out! get out!” and to
menace me with his lance. Next another captain entered named Cusi Puma,
with about 50 archers; who are Antis eating human flesh. Presently all
these warriors took off their plumes of feathers and put down their
lances. With their daggers of bronze and their shields of silver, or
leather, or of feathers, each one came to do reverence to the Inca who
was seated, and then returned to their places.

Presently he sent for me, and passing through that multitude of Indians,
I took off my hat and made a speech to him. I said that I had come from
Cuzco solely to know and serve him. If I wore a sword and dagger it was
to serve him with them, and not to offend him. To this he answered that
it was for men to bear arms and not for women or cowards, and he did
not, therefore, hold me in more esteem for that. But he said he was
pleased at the trouble I had taken to come from such a distance to him,
adding that he had come 40 leagues only to see and converse with me.
Then he gave me a cup of chicha, asking me to drink it for his service.
I drank a quarter of it, and then began to make faces, and wipe my mouth
with a handkerchief. He began to laugh, understanding that I did not
know that liquor. Then he spoke to the mulatto, asking him how this was,
and that our Lord Jesus Christ should be remembered for he had blessed
such work. He said that he would show me the governor Yamqui Mayta, that
I might talk to him. He came and embraced me as the Inca had done, and
he was seated on the Inca’s right hand.

Presently I returned to my lodging, with permission of the Inca, and he
sent me, by the governor, a macaw and two baskets of earth nuts. Then
the mestizo came with a very small cup of chicha, with a message from
the Inca asking me to drink it, that he looked upon me as a friend, and
that when I liked, we could treat of the matters about which I had come.
I took a sip, and gave the rest to one of the Indians who had come with
me. He sent a message by the mestizo that I must rest, that I must be
tired, and that another day he would do all that I desired. I sent him
four pieces of glass, and a case of comfits, which were the presents the
Judge Matienzo had sent, and had mentioned in his letter. I also sent
half an _arroba_ of crystals and pearls, and seven bracelets of silver,
saying that the glass was sent by Matienzo, because it was a thing held
in high estimation and that as the comfits gave a pleasant taste to the
tip of the tongue, so I trusted that my words would give satisfaction,
and that I wished to be of service as the messenger and ambassador who
came to him. He took it all in, and rejoiced greatly. That he might not
hesitate to eat the comfits, I said that they were very good, and that
he might be sure that they would do him no harm, I wished to eat some in
his presence. I did eat with the mestizo and invited him, who ate them
also. Then I gave two sheathed knives, a head cloth, and other things to
the governor Yamqui Mayta. I distributed presents to all the other
captains pointed out to me by the mestizo, embraced them all, and
returned to my lodging.

Then the people of the village brought much food and presented it to the
Inca, and to those who had come with him. The Inca did not eat on
cloths, but on green rushes, and the rest on the ground.

The Inca was a man of forty years of age, of middle height, and with
some marks of small-pox on his face. His mien rather severe and manly.
He wore a shirt of blue damask, and a mantle of very fine cloth. He is
served on silver, and there are also twenty or thirty fairly
good-looking women, waiting behind him. He sent for me to eat where he
was with his women and his governor. The food consisted of maize,
potatoes, small beans, and the other products of the country, except
that there was very little meat, and what there was consisted of
venison, fowls, macaws, and monkeys, both boiled and roasted. When night
came on he asked me whether I had made the acquaintance of his captains.
I replied in the affirmative, and he then took leave of me. He went to
the house that had been prepared for him, in exactly the same order as
when he arrived, with music of silver flutes and trumpets. That night
there was a guard of a hundred Indians who were divided into watches,
and flutes and drums were played to call each watch. They placed a guard
of fifteen Indians over me with their lances, I being in a house outside
the village. I calculate that all the Indians who came with the Inca,
and those of the village, numbered 450.

In the morning of the 14th of May the Inca sent for me to his house, for
it was raining. The greater part of his troops were seated round a large
fire. The Inca was seated, dressed in a shirt of crimson velvet, with a
mantle of the same. All his captains had taken off the masks they wore
on the day before. As I entered I saluted, making many compliments, and
taking off my cap. He saluted me in his language. The mestizo was on a
seat in front. I presented the Inca with a very good looking glass, two
necklaces of coral beads, and a paper book. He was very much pleased
with the presents, and ordered my seat to be placed near him, next to
the governor and two captains. I understood that the Inca had been told
by one of the captains who came with me, respecting what I had said and
asked, and that I had expressed discontent at the want of proper respect
shown to me by the Indians. Presently he asked for the letter I brought,
and what I had come for. I answered that he had already seen the
letters, before my arrival, and that he had then read what I now wished
to put before him in words. He said that that was true. I then said that
what I had to communicate to him was a matter of great importance, both
for the salvation of his body and his soul; and that it might be seen
that I did not wish to deceive on any point as regards what I had to
say, I suggested that he should send for all the wisest men he had with
him, that what I had to say might be better understood. At the same time
he was himself a man of such sound judgment, his own understanding would
be quite sufficient to deal with all that might be submitted to him. He
replied that all were there present, and that I might now say what I
wanted, as on another day I should have to return to Cuzco with his
reply. The Christians, he added, had never given more than one day for
audience and another for departure. If they stayed longer his people
might kill them from fear and terror, without his permission to kill. I
answered that it would occupy more than two days to complete the
negotiations, and to make what I had come to say clearly understood.
Especially this was the case when I did not wish to cause discontent by
being given so short a time, my intention being rather to cause
satisfaction and not annoyance. The Inca was pleased and said to me that
he and his captains would not answer until I had represented everything,
and after that I could make answer to their view of what I had said.

Presently I said to the mestizo, who was the interpreter, that I
requested permission to say something in praise of God and of our holy
Christian religion. The Inca gave permission. I then said many things
which were the fruits of study in books I had brought, but to avoid
prolixity I will not write down my discourse. I have it written in a
little book with other things. The Inca and all his captains expressed
themselves pleased at having heard it, and enquired whether there were
any Christians among the Indians who were there. If so they were ordered
to stand up. Twenty or twenty-five among the chiefs did so. I asked each
one his name, and every one of them gave me Christian names. So I asked
the permission of the Inca to animate and console them, which he was
pleased to give. I said to them that they should not turn back but trust
in our Lord Jesus Christ, remaining firm in what they had professed when
they received baptism. And I told them to serve the Inca as he was their
Lord, and also God the creator of all things. I said many other things
to them until they began to cry, in presence of all those captains of
the Inca, and the Inca himself was moved to anger. He spoke very
fiercely to me, saying that no Spaniard who had entered his territory
had dared to treat of these things and to praise their Lord Jesus
Christ, nor in the time of his father, that it was great insolence on my
part, and that he was disposed to order me to be killed. I answered that
I came as a man who had to do this, that I had confessed and taken the
sacrament as a Christian, and that no time could be better for me to
die than the present. I reminded him that what I had said, was said with
his permission. Then I delivered a discourse in praise of truth and
against what was false, representing that so I must deal with him, being
as truthful as if I was on oath. I then spoke of the Judge Matienzo who
had given permission for me to come with a letter from him to the Inca.
I told him how well fitted I was to manage affairs for the Indians, and
I showed them some papers I had brought with me, by which the Inca would
be convinced of it. He should not think that I came as a spy, or for a
bad object, nor would he believe it when he knew what I had done for him
in his absence. They had all thought that the entries into their lands
on foot or on horseback had been secret, but we had known of them and
they were quite public. For this there was indeed no need of spies, and
presently I would tell them all, and how I desired to take up the
negotiation from further back.

During this discussion three of their Indians arrived who had been sent
as messengers to the President. They brought eight yards of yellow
damask, half a dozen masks, and a letter from the President in which he
said that if the Inca would come peacefully to Cuzco, he should have a
grant of certain villages of Indians with a revenue of over $15,000,
which the Treasurer Merlo would show, sending the account in three or
four days, and showing what the rents are from those Indians, which
would be paid in the name of his Majesty. Merlo also wrote out a
translation of what was in the decrees respecting the Indians. Another
letter was sent, signed by the President, which was for Merlo. It said
that the letter was written by the President and that if the Inca did
not wish to accept the grant that was offered to him, he was requested
to reply at once, because an officer, on the part of the city of Cuzco
was to force an entry and make war. The question should be settled for
his word had been given. There were letters saying that the chiefs of
Xauxa and of the whole kingdom were arrested, and that the
municipalities of Cuzco and Guamanga wished to make war.

The Inca and his captains received the news bravely. The Inca rose up
and declared that they were not afraid of the Spaniards. He said, before
his assembly, all he could think of in abuse of the Spaniards and in
praise of his Indians. Then all the Indians arose and began to worship,
and those Indian captains began to make offerings, each one for himself,
with daggers of bronze or iron in their hands. Some said they would kill
four Spaniards, others five, others six, and others ten. One of them,
named Chinchero, said that as I was there, why was he not ordered to
kill me, for he wanted to stab me with the dagger in his hand. The Inca
kept silence, answering nothing, so the Indian went back to his seat.

As daylight was now appearing, and they had all drunk freely, I asked
permission of the Inca to return to my lodging and get something to eat,
and that on another day I would state frankly what I had come for. So I
departed, leaving them to boast loudly, but all much disturbed in their
minds.

Soon afterwards they sent me a sheep of Castille, many fowls and
partridges, and the other food which their country produces. To those
who brought them I gave some trinkets, needles, and other Spanish
things. Presently the Inca sent for me. I went there, and was there
until night, without a word being spoken, when I returned to my lodging.
The reason for this appeared to be that too much chicha had been drunk.

Next day, the 15th of May, the Inca came out in the morning with all his
people in the same order as before. He sent for me in the open space.
When I came I found them at breakfast, and they gave me, and my Indian
attendants, plenty to eat. Afterwards I asked permission to state what I
had come for. I said, through the mestizo interpreter, that the
President and Judges of the Royal Audience took great pains to favour
the Indians, and for that reason I had come with instructions to offer
many advantages, wishing to establish peace, not to make war, not that
the Indians should make incursions into the land of peace. The President
had been strictly charged by his Majesty to grant many favours to the
Inca and his captains, and the Judge Matienzo had sent me to ascertain
the Inca’s wishes and intentions. To this it was replied that news had
now arrived of the desire to make war both from Cuzco and Guamanga, and
that threatening movements had been made at other places. In consequence
of this, incursions had been made into the land of peace. Further they
knew that Hurtado[86] had asked leave to attack them in the time of the
Count[87], and had made incursions from Guamanga and in Amaibamba. I
replied that the invasion was given up to avoid damage and evil, and not
from fear of the Inca’s people, also because the Archbishops, friars,
and clerics had intervened to prevent war. The Inca said that this was
true, that so he had been informed, and that now, as then, the clergy
would be against war. I told him that the face of things was altered.
The reason was that his people had entered the land of peace, burnt the
churches, pulled down the images, and destroyed the crosses: also that
the Indians who were there had been made to worship the sun, though they
were Christians. For these reasons the Archbishop, friars, and clergy
could not show them favour. The Inca denied it, saying that he had not
given such an order; and the first instruction he had given to his
people, whenever they made a raid, was not to touch either the churches
or the crosses. I then said that I had many witnesses to the facts, who
had seen him and the mestizo take the images and burn the churches. He
then admitted that he had taken the images and that he had them well
guarded and could show them, but that he had never burnt the church. I
told him that in Amaibamba I had seen the bits of the cross, and that
they had cooked a sheep with it. He replied that he had not gone
personally on that raid, that the Indians had done it, and that he
regretted it much. He also said that none of the friars, clerics, or
soldiers in Peru could complain that he had killed one of them, though
he might have done so many times. He could easily have killed two
Augustine friars and two other Spaniards who were shut up in a house at
Curahuasi, and many others at many times and in many places, but he
would not do such a thing, and he had ordered his people not to kill
them. Nor had he killed the Indians that I had brought, and that the
Indians had more liberty in his land than the Spaniards. He only took
Indians who had belonged to his ancestors. To this I replied that here
in Peru it was said that he was not the heir of the Incas of this
kingdom, but the sons of Atahualpâ, because the Spaniards found him in
possession of the kingdom when they arrived. He answered that Atahualpâ
was a usurper and a bastard who had murdered Huascar Inca the legitimate
heir, and that after him came his father Manco Inca. I then observed
that the report was that he was an illegitimate son. He then told me
that among them, when there was no legitimate son, the custom was that a
bastard succeeded. He was, therefore, high priest in what we call
spiritual things. This was in default of another brother, at least one
who was older than himself. He thus inherited the temporal lordship. He
was in possession and was recognized by the other Incas. They all obeyed
him, and if he had not the right they would not obey him. For the rest
the question had better be settled by arms and not by talking. All who
come try to deceive him. He told me I might go next day. He would write
to the Judge Matienzo that he had given me plenty to eat, and let me go
in peace. He said he was surprised that I should have shown such
prejudice against him in my conversation. In this way he took leave of
me, and I went back to my lodging where I remained all that day. From
the top of a rising ground I saw the festivities made for the Inca, and
heard the songs. The dances were war dances with spears in their hands,
throwing them from one to the other. I believe that they did such things
by reason of the quantity of chicha they had drunk.

The Inca sent for me late in the afternoon and I went against my will.
He told me to sit down and began to boast, saying that he could himself
kill fifty Spaniards, and that he was going to have all the Spaniards in
the kingdom put to death. He took a lance in his hand and a shield and
began to act a valiant man, shouting “Go at once and bring me all that
people that are behind these mountains; for I want to go and fight the
Spaniards and to kill them all, and I want the wild Indians to eat
them.” Then there marched up about 600 or 700 Anti Indians, all with
bows and arrows, clubs and axes. They advanced in good order, making
reverence to the sun and to the Inca, and took up their positions. Then
the Inca again began to brandish his lance, and said that he could raise
all the Indians in Peru, he had only to give the order and they would
fly to arms. Then all those Antis made an offer to the Inca that, if he
wished it, they would eat me raw. They said to him, “What are you doing
with this little bearded one here, who is trying to deceive you? it is
better that we should eat him at once.” Then two renegade Inca
_orejones_ came straight to me with spears in their hands, flourishing
their weapons and saying, “The bearded ones! Our enemies.” I laughed at
this, but at the same time commended myself to God. I asked the Inca to
have mercy and protect me, and so he delivered me from them, and hid me
until the morning.

On the morning of the 16th of May the Inca sent for me to come to the
open square which he entered in the same order as before, and as I came
in I saluted the Inca and sat down. The Inca and all the captains then
began to laugh heartily at what had happened the day before, and they
asked me what I thought of yesterday’s festival. I replied that I
thought it rather exceptional, and that to have treated me so was wrong,
seeing that I had come on serious business. They explained that it was
only their fun, and that they could not give it up. I then observed that
I had to go without having settled anything. We should arrange some kind
of peace in the way which seemed to them best, with a fixed period. From
such an agreement they would derive much good, by having many new things
in their land through which they might make much money and become very
rich. They said they would agree if they had any confidence in our
promises. The Inca then asked me what kind of peace appeared to me to be
good. I said that the King would give more than $15,000 of rent for his
maintenance, with which he might be in Cuzco, or here in the Andes, if
he would consent to have a town of Indians in Vilcapampa. They answered
that this was well, because I said that they should sell coca and wood
to Spaniards who settled here, and become very rich.

On this proposal we were occupied for two days. Afterwards the Inca said
that if the Spaniards lived amongst them and there was some grievance,
owing to which the Spaniards killed one of them or they killed a
Spaniard, there would be trouble. For this reason he did not wish that
there should be a town, or that the Spaniards should live among them. I
replied that I did not wish that to happen, and that it would be better
for the Inca or his son to come out and take possession of the estates
which the President had promised him in the name of his Majesty. A
Corregidor might then come here in the name of his Majesty to administer
and maintain justice in that land, the inhabitants receiving the
evangelical law and holy baptism. From this much good would come and
they would possess their houses and estates. They received this proposal
very well, with the condition that his Majesty should pardon everything
that had been done up to that time. The Inca’s conditions were that
estates should be given to those who were with him and had served him;
that the lands which he and his father had desolated near the land of
peace and the valley of Amaibamba should be granted to him; that the
Indians taken from there should be his; that his Majesty should gratify
the persons favoured, that they should be given a promise that they
should enjoy the liberties and privileges enjoyed by people of noble
birth; that friars and clerics should enter to preach the holy evangel;
and that he should be obedient to his Majesty. As the Inca was poor and
unable to appear in conformity with the dignity of his position, he
stipulated that his son Titu should go out, and be married to the Inca’s
niece Doña Beatriz. He also stipulated that the friars and clerics
should not be admitted until Doña Beatriz had been delivered to him. He
feared that if she was married to anyone else, he and his son would be
left without the _repartimiento_ of Indians granted to his brother
Sayri Tupac. After a year or two the Inca undertook to come out
peacefully, having collected the means to buy what was necessary. He
would settle near Guamanga or Cuzco, whichever locality he liked best,
with his son Titu and the governor Yamqui Mayta. This arrangement
appeared convenient, and he and his captains would swear to observe it,
if it was necessary. I was to go out by the way of Guamanga, to complete
the treaty with the President.

At this time a letter arrived from the Judge Matienzo announcing that he
intended to leave Cuzco in ten days, and that I was to return, bringing
the statement of what the Inca wanted. I then said to the Inca that, to
show his sincerity, and that the Christians might see that he was acting
in good faith, I would request him to allow me to assemble the Indians
who were Christians, to set up a cross, and there to preach the law of
our Lord Jesus Christ and the holy evangel. The Inca consented and
ordered a great cross to be made. In order that the agreement might be
more secure I asked and prayed him to tell me the truth. For I had seen
in the baptismal book of the principal church (in Cuzco) that the Inca
had been baptized and named Diego. He told me that it was true, and that
he was a Christian, and he confessed it before the Indians. He said that
they had poured water over his head, but that he did not remember the
name. Presently about 120 Christian Indians assembled before the cross,
kneeling and taking off their _llautus_. Those who were not Christians
stood apart, wondering at our proceedings. We carried the cross, I and
four Indians, and set it up. Then I said many things about our holy
Christian religion and the salvation of their souls. Then I told them to
pray for God’s mercy on their knees, which they did three times, crying
for mercy with their clasped hands raised to heaven. Then I asked
permission of the Inca to preach to those who were not Christian, as he
was one. He agreed, and ordered them to come and hear me preach. I
explained to them that the things which God had created were for the use
of man, that the sun and moon were creatures made by God for man’s
service, and to give him light. After they had adored the cross, I said
it would be well for me to write to the Judge Matienzo to tell him that
they wished to receive the evangel, to make peace, and to send me to
Lima on horseback, by way of Guamanga, to settle the agreement with the
President. They sent Indian runners, and I sent two of those I had
brought with me, to convey the writing as agreed.

On the 17th of May the Inca sent certain macaws and baskets of earth
nuts to the Treasurer Merlo and the Judge Matienzo. I then said it would
be a good thing for the Inca to send thirty captains to the city of
Cuzco, that they might see how well treated they would be, and how
freely they could pass over the whole land. I should remain as a hostage
until their return. The Inca said that if I thought such a proceeding
advisable he would agree; but if the slightest injury was done to any
one of those Indians, he said he would hang me. I replied that I was
willing to run the risk. Then the Inca sent the thirty captains to
arrive there in six days, and send an account of their treatment in
another five days. He ordered them to go first to the chief or principal
church and worship the holy sacrament, and then to the house of the
Judge Matienzo. He also wrote to the friars of our Lady of Mercy, and to
the Franciscan friars, to ask two of them to come and preach in his
territory, and that he would give them the products of the land in
exchange for their doctrine. He also wrote to the Judge Matienzo,
thanking him for having sent me, for that I had made known to them the
law of our Lord Jesus Christ. He asked for two friars as his people
wished to be Christians and to be convinced that the things they had
worshipped up to that time were foolishness. As his honour had expressed
a wish to have an interview with the Inca at the frontier of the land of
peace, the Inca would rejoice to comply, if his honour would come with
not more than three Spaniards, and that he would be at the bridge of
Chuquichaca, at such time as the Judge might appoint.

In the meantime I preached and explained the Christian doctrine every
morning, and they came to hear me. The Indian messengers who went to
Cuzco did not return at the appointed time. They thought that their
friends had been put to death and were sad. The governor Yamqui Mayta
said to me, that morning, that I had committed some sin in Peru, because
they sent me here and here I should be killed. Before I arrived, he
continued, they had resolved that, with 700 Antis and 2000 other
Indians, they would attack the towns near their frontier, seize all the
Indians they could capture, and kill all the clerics, friars, and other
Spaniards they could catch. They had abandoned this plan out of regard
for me. Yet, notwithstanding that they had received the evangelic law, I
had deceived them. If within two days the messengers did not return, he
added, they would make the raid which had originally been intended.

On the 20th of May the news came that the captains who took the message
to Cuzco had been received and well treated. Out of joy at this news
they played on drums and trumpets and had a great feast. They sent for
me and told me I had told the truth. Then they read the letters from the
Judge Matienzo which had arrived. In them he said that he wished to have
an interview with the Inca, and that on the last day of Easter he would
set out, arriving at the bridge on Friday or Saturday, making all haste.
He said that he would bring fourteen or fifteen men with him, being the
guard that his Majesty granted, to accompany him. At this the Inca was
undecided, fearing that it might be a plot to kill him and his Indians,
but that I would counsel him and that he would trust me. I said that not
only could he trust the word of the Judge in going to Chuquichaca, but
that he might trust it in going to Cuzco. If he brought a hundred men
with him it would not be for offence but for service. All those he
brought with him would come as friends. If the King of Spain wished to
conquer him, not all the Indians in the kingdom and 10,000 more could
stand against his power. His Majesty had done this because his thought
was to maintain peace, and to advance the knowledge of God; not that the
Spaniards should invade their land and seize their wives and children.
To this he replied that the power of the King was great, and though he
had so many nations, as well black men as Moors, subject to him, yet he,
the Inca, like Manco Inca his father before him, knew how to defend
himself in those mountains. At the same time, as I said he should go, he
would do so, and presently he sent to Vilcapampa for more men.

On the 25th of May one of his generals arrived with 300 men, armed with
lances, who entered the open place where the rest were drawn up, and
made obeisance to the sun and to the Inca. Then a hundred captains of
those who came from Vilcapampa went to where Yamqui Mayta was standing
and asked why he had consented to have the cross planted in their land,
seeing that it had not been set up in the time of Manco Inca. Why then
was it there now? If I had persuaded the Inca to do this, they intended
to kill me. The Inca replied that it was done by his order, and that it
was well that they should accept the cross of the creator of all
things. Having received this answer they went to their seats, and the
festival proceeded.

On the 28th of May we set out for the bridge of Chuquichaca to meet the
Judge who was coming. A garrison of 200 Indians was left in Arancalla
and the rest went with us. We arrived on Saturday, the eve of the
Trinity, at the bridge of Chuquichaca, where we received the news that
the Judge Matienzo was at the bridge of Amaibamba with 30 Spaniards, 10
negroes, 20 arquebusiers and 150 Cañari Indians with their lances.
Presently we received a letter from the Judge Matienzo in which he said
that he had come with this escort, that the Inca should cross the river
to see him, and that the Treasurer Merlo, a clergyman, two other
Spaniards and I would be hostages for his safety. The Inca wished to
comply, but the captains would not consent. The Inca then wrote to the
Judge Matienzo proposing that he should come with all his company to the
passage of the bridge, that his honour should pass over, and that he,
the Inca, would send as hostages his governor and camp master, who would
go to the other side. The Inca then detached 300 Indians to keep watch
and ward. I said that the Judge Matienzo would not consent to this, not
having a royal commission, but that he would cross with all his escort
and that, in that open space which was large, the Inca and Judge could
see each other and discuss what they desired. The Inca wrote a letter to
that effect. Then there were prepared litters of silver and gold and
much carving, and he had 25 _alcabuçes_ brought out, which he
distributed among those who knew. He said to me that, as I was his
friend, he wanted to tell me a secret. He had had 300 cloaks and also
breeches of dead people brought. Then he called an assembly, saying that
those who brought those clothes had been killed, and if the Spaniards
intended to attack, each one would become a good soldier in defence of
his lord.

At that moment the Judge Matienzo arrived at the bridge with all his
people. Then Garcia de Merlo, the clergyman, and the two other Spaniards
crossed over and explained to the Inca the proposals of the President.
He said that he understood and that he would come across the river. But
the captains said that the bridge was tricky, that the Inca’s legs were
bruised from a fall he had recently had, and that he could not pass
over. Then he sent me, with the governor and two other captains, to be
hostages together with the thirty captains who had come from Cuzco. I
took the Judge apart and explained everything to him, but those who were
with him would scarcely let us talk in secret. I began to understand
that it was not intended to settle anything owing to the intriguers who
were with the Judge, and who were unreasonable. The Indians were noting
everything. The Judge said he did not wish to cross the river, and I
returned with the governor and all the other captains of the Inca. I
then asked the Inca to come over, and he agreed to do so, contrary to
the wishes of all his captains, as I advised it. Then he went with all
his followers richly dressed and with their arms in good order. They
marched to a cross that had been put up and all did reverence to it. The
Inca’s escort amounted to 600 Indians. Then I went to the Judge Matienzo
and asked him to go alone to the bridge without any of his followers, so
that he and the Inca might converse without anyone hearing them. He
consented and went with the mestizo Porras as interpreter. He was armed
with sword and arquebus, and the Inca also had his weapons. The Inca had
passed from the other side with his governor, camp master, ten captains,
and the mestizo.

The Inca threw himself at the feet of the Judge weeping, and relating
the misfortunes of his father and himself. He told how they had been
kept in prison by Juan Pizarro, like dogs in a collar, until they should
give him a box full of gold. They also seized his mother and one of his
sisters in the valley of Tambo. His father had taken refuge in these
mountains and four times Juan Pizarro, Hernando Pizarro and Orgoñez came
to conquer him by order of the Marquis, when many Spaniards and Indians
lost their lives. As a return for his father’s hospitality to seven
Spaniards of the party of Almagro, they murdered him. He said many other
things which were not confided to us. Finally he asked for peace on the
basis that had been negotiated. Then he sent for some small baskets of
feathers and presented them to the Judge.

The Judge said that he was also anxious for peace and that he would
consent to all the terms in the name of his Majesty, except as regards
the Indians who had been taken from citizens of Cuzco. They must be
given up. The Inca said that this might be settled afterwards. The Judge
replied that that could not be. Then the Inca said that he must go to
consult with his captains, and that he would return with the answer. The
Judge pressed the Inca to come out of the mountains, and the Inca said
that he was poor, and unable to maintain the expense. He put forward the
excuse that he was in the Andes, 60 leagues from whence the Judge came,
and it would be necessary for him to wait more than a month before they
could go together. It is true that this was so. The Judge said that he
would wait for him at Cuzco. At this juncture the arquebusiers who were
with the Judge Matienzo began to press nearer to hear what was said,
notwithstanding that they were called to and told to stop. The Inca
wanted to return from fear of them. But reason did not prevail and
there was confusion. The Inca took leave, saying that he wished to tell
what had been said to his captains, and that he would return. I passed
backwards and forwards four or five times to ascertain when the Inca
would resume the interview, for the Judge wanted to depart. The Inca
said that he was so pressed upon that he was afraid, and that he thought
treachery was intended. I went to the Judge and asked him not to go that
day as he had arrived very late. Amaibamba was distant more than three
leagues, and he could not get there before night. I urged him to stay
and hear what the Inca would say when he resumed the conversation. So he
waited until the morning, the Spaniards guarding one side and the
Indians the other. The Indians made many fires and played on their
trumpets and whistles. In the morning the camp master came and told me
that the Inca would come to answer the Judge, and to tell me his view of
the negotiation. The Judge did not wish it, and said the Inca could send
what he had to propose further in a letter. If he would not come out in
peace the bridge must be destroyed. The Inca answered that he would
comply with the treaty he had made with me, and he ordered the bridge to
be broken down on his side. This was done and we departed. They also
retired.

This is a true account of what happened in this journey, abridged so as
to avoid prolixity, and I sign with my name the truth of what happened
in my presence.




MOLINA

(_See Hakluyt Society’s volume for 1873._)


Father Cristobal de Molina was a priest who devoted his life to the
investigation of the history, religion and customs of the ancient
Peruvians, of which he gave an account to the Emperor in a letter dated
Lima, 12 July, 1539 as follows: “I went with Almagro (the elder) in his
discoveries and, that your Majesty may be well informed, he sent Henao,
a servant of the Comendador Mayor Cobos, to delineate all the route he
traversed and discovered, that is to say from Tumbez in 3 S. to the
river Maulé in 39, which by land is 1024 leagues, besides what he
discovered between Panama and Tumbez; and drew the nations and tribes,
their dresses, rites, and each one in his manner of living, with many
other things.” He adds: “I do not speak of what happened between
Hernando Pizarro and Almagro because I am a Priest and wish to give no
opinion unless by command of my Prince. I am now advanced in years, and
tired with the labours in the service of your Majesty under Almagro.”
(_Coll. Muñoz, Ee_ 1, fo. 260 _and_ 261.)

Molina dedicated his Laws and Rites of the Incas to Sebastian de
Lartoun, Bishop of Cuzco, who took possession of the see on July 28th,
1573. Molina died, when assisting at the Council of Lima, on October
9th, 1583. (_Historia del Cuzco._ _Vasco Contreras y Valverde MS._)




INDEX


=Abancay=, artillery placed in, 101

=Acosta=, Juan de, in command of troops, 155;
  career of, 155 (_n._)

=Acuña=, Doña Brianda de, wife of the Viceroy, 115, 115 (_n._)

=Aguero=, Diego de, Captain, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 16;
  career of, 16 (_n._), 17 (_n._);
  receives despatches from the Viceroy, 17;
  sets out for the city of Truxillo, 22, 23;
  informs the Viceroy of events in Lima, 45;
  returns to the municipality of Lima, 54;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56, 57

=Alamos=, Diego Maldonado de, signs the document appointing
    Gonzalo Pizarro Chief Justice, 68, 69

=Aldana=, Lorenzo de, Captain, writes to the Viceroy, 74, 75;
  career and death of, 74 (_n._);
  goes to see the Viceroy, 86;
  his imprisonment on board a ship, 86, 145;
  released, 86

=Alexander=, King of Greece, account of his
    treatment of Parmenion, 84, 84 (_n._)

=Almagro=, Diego de, supporters of, favoured by the Viceroy, 18;
  defeated by Vaca de Castro at Chupas, 36

=Almagro=, Diego de, the lad, 23, 124, 178 (_n._)

=Almao=, Luis de, a servant of Gonzalo Pizarro, 35

=Almendras=, Diego de, joins Gonzalo Pizarro, 41

=Almendras=, Francisco de, Captain, joins Gonzalo Pizarro, 40;
  his career, 40 (_n._);
  acts as witness to a proposal with regard to Gonzalo Pizarro, 67;
  is sent to Guamanga for artillery, 79, 80, 81;
  ordered to seize despatches, 101;
  intercepts Francisco de Ampuero and Pero Lopez, 102;
  his further treatment of them, 103, 104;
  prevents Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa from proceeding
    further on his mission, 108;
  sent to Chuquisaca as Lieutenant of the Governor, 140 (_n._);
  murder of, 156

=Almendras=, Martin de, joins Gonzalo Pizarro, 41

=Altamirano=, Antonio de, Alcalde, 8;
  accompanies Vaca de Castro on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13;
  career and death of, 13 (_n._);
  in favour of Gonzalo Pizarro being made Chief Justice, 68;
  leaves the meeting to avoid voting, 69;
  but afterwards signs, 70;
  named as Ensign General, 79

=Alvarado=, Alonso de, Captain, 111

=Alvarado=, Hernando de, Captain, sent to Truxillo, 111

=Alvarez=, the Licentiate, sails with Blasco Nuñez, 1 (_n._);
  one of the four Judges appointed to carry
   out the new laws in Peru, 4 (_n._);
  opposes the Viceroy, 7;
  attends a meeting of Alcaldes and perpetual magistrates, 37;
  summoned to meet the Viceroy, 94

=Alzate=, Simon de, Public Notary, goes with despatches, 90;
  Captain Francisco de Almendras wishes him to be killed, 103, 104

=Amaibamba=, 171, 172, 173, 187, 188, 191, 196, 199

=Amendariz=, Diaz, Licentiate, Commissary General, 78

=Ampuero=, Francisco de, at the city of the Kings, 18;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56, 57;
  to accompany Pero Lopez to Cuzco, 89, 90;
  his career, 89 (_n._), 90 (_n._);
  arrives at Guamanga, 93;
  intercepted by Francisco de Almendras, 102;
  allowed to return, 104

=Añaquito=, 51, 98;
  death of Blasco Nuñez at, 2;
  Hernando Bachicao at, 13 (_n._);
  the Licentiate Benito Suarez de Carbajal at, 26 (_n._);
  Diego de Mora at, 34 (_n._)

=Anaya=, Atilano de, 167

=Andahuaylas=, province of, 47;
  letters from, to Cuzco, 65;
  letter to, from Gonzalo Pizarro, 65;
  Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa in, 109

=Anti Indians=, 165, 180, 189, 194

=Apurimac=, 124, 170

=Arancalla=, 175, 177, 196

=Arauco=, Martin de, takes part in destroying four ships, 151

=Arbieto=, Martin Hurtado de, 187 (_n._)

=Arequipa=, 9 (_n._), 10 (_n._), 29, 37 (_n._), 48, 73, 98, 147;
  discontent in, at the ordinances, 30

=Arevalo=, 9 (_n._)

=Arrian=, 84

=Arvés=, Juan de, goes to the city of Leon, 112

=Asdrubal=, 49

=Atahualpa=, 17 (_n._), 28 (_n._), 40 (_n._), 70 (_n._), 188

=Aurelio=, Antonio de, chosen to accompany the royal ordinances, 93

=Avila=, Alonso de, 126

=Avila=, Juan Vazquez de, 16

=Aviles=, 45

=Aviles=, Alonso de, disloyalty of, 116

=Ayavire=, town of, 42, 42 (_n._)


=Bachicao=, Hernando, 11;
  accompanies Vaca de Castro on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13;
  career of, 13 (_n._);
  resolves to go to Cuzco, 34;
  desires to leave Lima, 45, 46;
  arrives in Huarochiri, 47;
  departure from Lima, 59;
  the Cuzco citizens disturbed by his news, 64;
  is interviewed with others by Pedro de los Rios, 65;
  signs in favour of Gonzalo Pizarro being made Chief Justice, 68, 69;
  in charge of the artillery, 79, 140 (_n._), 156

=Badajos=, 19

=Balsa=, Juan, 42 (_n._)

=Bambacona=, 178

=Banba=, 165

=Barba=, Francisco, with King Manco Inca, 124

=Barbaran=, Juan de, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17;
  receives despatches from the Viceroy, 17;
  returns to the city of the Kings with the news of the Viceroy’s coming, 18;
  receives the rod of office, 19

=Barcelona=, 2 (_n._)

=Barco=, Pedro del, hanged, 139 (_n._)

=Barrionuevo=, Alonso de, supports Vela Nuñez, 126, 127

=Bazan=, a soldier, sent to Arequipa by Gonzalo Pizarro, 40

=Beatriz=, Doña, 191

=Belalcazar=, Sebastian de, Adelantado, 13 (_n._), 74 (_n._), 156;
  ordered to execute and enforce the new laws, 77, 78

=Berrio=, Juan de, at Guamanga, 80;
  chosen to accompany the royal ordinances, 93

=Buenaventura=, port of, 77

=Bustillo=, servant of Comendador Hernando Pizarro,
    carries letters to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35


=Cabrera=, Juan, arrival of, at the town of Timana, 77

=Caceres=, Alonso de, Captain, 105, 106, 139 (_n._);
  quiets the tumult at Arequipa, 30

=Caceres=, Juan de, the Accountant, 7, 92 (_n._)

=Caciques= and the new laws, 15

=Cadiz=, the isle of, 49

=Cali=, town of, 77, 129

=Callao=, 16, 40, 42, 43

=Camargo=, Alonso de, plot of, 156;
  receives pardon, 159

=Camporedondo=, Gaspar Rodriguez de, 11;
  accompanies Vaca de Castro to the city of the Kings, 13;
  career of, 13 (_n._);
  great friendship for Vaca de Castro, 46;
  departs from Lima, 46, 59;
  Gonzalo Pizarro converses with, 66;
  seeks pardon of the Viceroy, 92;
  action of Francisco de Carbajal against, 92 (_n._);
  beheaded, 136 (_n._)

=Cañari Indians=, 196

=Canary Islands=, 70 (_n._)

=Canela=, 38, 49

=Canelos=, Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda sent to explore, 115 (_n._)

=Cañete=, Marquis of, 42 (_n._)

=Caravaya=, mines of, 42

=Carbajal=, Benito Suarez de, the Licentiate, accompanies Vaca
    de Castro on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13;
  receives a letter of advice from his brother the Factor, 26;
  his career and death, 26 (_n._);
  his arrival at Cuzco, 48

=Carbajal=, Diego de, 136 (_n._)

=Carbajal=, Francisco de, departs from Cuzco, 8;
  his arrival at the city of the Kings, 8;
  lodges at the house of Antonio Riquelme, 8;
  receives an insult from the members of the municipality, 9;
  date and place of birth, 9 (_n._);
  his career, 9 (_n._), 10 (_n._);
  wishes to return to Spain, 30;
  departs from Lima, 31;
  summoned to come to Cuzco with arms and troops, 73;
  action against Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo, 92 (_n._);
  appointed as Master of the Camp, 118;
  gives advice to Gonzalo Pizarro, 118, 119;
  deserts the Viceroy, 135 (_n._);
  copy of letter to Gonzalo Pizarro, 160, 161

=Carbajal=, Jeronimo de, 26, 136 (_n._)

=Carbajal=, Rodrigo de, 26

=Carbajal=, Yllan Suarez de, the Factor, 13 (_n._);
  appointed to meet the Viceroy, 16;
  career of, 16 (_n._);
  receives despatches from the Viceroy, 17;
  sets out for the city of Truxillo, 22, 23;
  returns to Lima, 24;
  is induced to make friends with Vaca de Castro, 33;
  goes to meet the Viceroy, 54;
  converses with the Viceroy, 55;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56, 57;
  cypher letter of, to Benito Suarez de Carbajal, 72;
  secret proceedings in the house of, 131;
  death of, 136, 149;
  character of, 149

=Cardenas=, Francisco de, 89, 94;
  sends news to Gonzalo Pizarro, 100

=Carrasco=, Pero Alonso, Procurator,
    does not fall in with Gonzalo Pizarro’s suggestion, 70;
  badly wounded, 71

=Carrero=, Puerto, 140 (_n._)

=Cartagena=, 106

=Carthage=, 49

=Carvajal=, the Licentiate, leaves Cuzco, 106

=Carveo=, Hernando, father of Diego Centeno, 61

=Castilla=, Baltasar de, career of, 135 (_n._);
  the Viceroy desires to kill, 146;
  flight of, from Lima, 149

=Castilla=, Jeronimo, excuses himself from going with Gonzalo Pizarro, 106;
  flight of, from Cuzco, 116

=Castilla=, Sebastian de, the murderer of Hinojosa, 38 (_n._), 135 (_n._)

=Castillo=, Pedro Gonzalez del, the Scrivener, 92 (_n._)

=Castro=, Diego de, 166

=Castro=, Lope Garcia de, 166, 167, 168

=Castro=, Vaca de, the Governor, 4;
  consents to Francisco de Carbajal’s return to Spain, 8;
  replies to those who wished him to remain as Royal Governor, 11, 12;
  his letter to Captain Gonzalo Pizarro, 12;
  sets out from Cuzco, 13;
  is ordered to give up the position of Governor, 17, 18;
  on leaving Cuzco, with all the artillery and arms, proceeds to
    Guamanga, and then to the valley of Xauxa, 21, 22;
  sends Pero Lopez to welcome the Viceroy, 22;
  letter to, from the municipality of the city of the Kings, 22;
  is perplexed as to what course to pursue, 25;
  proceeds unarmed, 26;
  numerous missives of, 27;
  arrives at Lima, 29;
  sends a letter to the city of Arequipa, 29;
  his procedure at Lima, 32, 33;
  sends a letter of advice to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35;
  goes to meet the Viceroy, 54;
  the Viceroy’s hatred of, 82;
  is imprisoned, 85, 86;
  is released, 86;
  is again imprisoned, 86;
  flight of, to Nombre de Dios, 153;
  lands at Terceira, 153;
  imprisoned in the castle of Arevalo, 153;
  his release, 153;
  restored to his seat in the Royal Council of Castille, 153

=Cauca=, valley of the, 63 (_n._)

=Caxamarca=, 16 (_n._), 40 (_n._), 70 (_n._)

=Cayanbi=, 176

=Ccoya=, Leonora, an Inca Princess,
    wife of Francisco de Villacastin, 42 (_n._)

=Centeno=, Diego, Alcalde, 13 (_n._);
  nominated as Procurator, 37;
  career and death of, 37 (_n._);
  sets out for Lima, 38;
  arrival at Lima, 59, 60;
  mission of, 60, 61;
  character and career of, 61;
  arrives at Cuzco with despatches and provisions of the Viceroy, 79;
  seeks pardon of the Viceroy, 92;
  plot of, 156

=Cepeda=, Diego de, the Licentiate, joins Blasco Nuñez’s expedition, 1;
  one of the four Judges appointed to enforce the new laws in Peru, 4 (_n._);
  opposes the Viceroy, 7;
  summoned to meet the Viceroy, 94;
  his reply to the Viceroy’s speech, 95, 96

=Cermeño=, Pedro, Captain, says that Vaca
    de Castro was the Royal Governor, 11;
  Gonzalo Pizarro converses with, 66;
  acts as witness to a proposal concerning Gonzalo Pizarro, 67;
  brings Diego Maldonado to Gonzalo Pizarro, 70;
  Captain of arquebusiers, 79, 140 (_n._);
  ordered to Xaquixaguana, 106

=Cespedes=, Luis de, accompanies Bishop Don
    Jeronimo de Loaysa on his journey to Cuzco, 88

=Chachapoyas=, the Viceroy not received in, 147

=Chaqui=, Gonzalo Pizarro at, 35, 38

=Charcas=, 9 (_n._), 31, 34, 37 (_n._), 147

=Charles V=, new laws signed by, at Barcelona, 2 (_n._);
  letter to, from Blasco Nuñez, 18 (_n._);
  Alonso Riquelme appointed Treasurer by, 28 (_n._)

=Chaves=, Gomez de, Public Notary, proposal
    made concerning Gonzalo Pizarro in presence of, 67;
  scheme of, 122

=Chicama=, valley of, 34 (_n._)

=Chimu=, ancient name of Truxillo, 23, 34 (_n._)

=Chincha=, 130

=Chupas=, battle of, 10 (_n._), 13 (_n._), 17
    (_n._), 26 (_n._), 28, 34 (_n._), 36, 37
    (_n._), 71 (_n._), 73, 74 (_n._), 178 (_n._)

=Chuquichaca=, 171, 194, 195, 196

=Chuquinga=, 74 (_n._)

=Chuquisaca=, 37 (_n._), 40 (_n._), 53 (_n._)

=City of the Kings= (_see_ Lima)

=Ciudad Real=, 34 (_n._)

=Ciudad Rodrigo=, 37 (_n._), 61

=Cleander=, 84 (_n._)

=Cobos=, Comendador Mayor, 200

=Coca=, Sebastian de, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17;
  loyalty of, 126;
  returns to Lima, 128

=Cochacaxa=, an Indian village, 107

=Collique=, province of, 154

=Colonna=, 9

=Columbus=, 6

=Conde=, Beltran del, departs from Lima, 46

=Condesuyos=, 105

=Condormarca=, 175

=Contreras=, Rodrigo de, sails with Blasco Nuñez, 1 (_n._);
  at Panama, 5;
  his complaint to the Viceroy, 5, 6

=Cordova=, Gonsalvo de, Captain, 9 (_n._)

=Cornejo=, Miguel, 9 (_n._), 10 (_n._);
  reads the new laws to the people of Arequipa, 30;
  with King Manco Inca, 124

=Cueto=, Diego Alvarez de, Captain,
    the Viceroy’s brother-in-law, arrives at Tumbez with the Viceroy, 14;
  at Truxillo, 34;
  accompanies the Viceroy on the way to Lima, 46;
  appointed Captain-General of the fleet, 86;
  appointed Captain of cavalry, 99;
  arranged to go to meet the fugitives, 130;
  the plan abandoned, 130;
  half the Constables’ fees ordered to be paid to, 146;
  takes part in destroying four ships, 151

=Curahuasi=, 188

=Curamba=, Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa at, 109

=Cusi Puma=, 180

=Cuzco=, city of, 4, 8, 11, 12;
  Vaca de Castro departs from, 13, 21;
  departure of Captain Gonzalo Pizarro from, 34;
  siege of, 37 (_n._);
  citizens of, go out to meet Gonzalo Pizarro, 44;
  flight of citizens of, from Lima, 46;
  anger of the citizens at the new laws, 64;
  proposal of the municipal officers, 67;
  many citizens of, hesitate to take up arms,
    and write to the Viceroy for pardon, 91, 92;
  movements in, on behalf of the Viceroy, 121, 122, 123;
  Manco Inca advances on, with an armed force, 123;
  the Viceroy not received in, 147


=Diminus=, 84

=Diogenes Laertius=, quoted, 97

=Dionysius of Halicarnassus=, quoted, 97


=Encomenderos= and the new laws, 5, 15, 30

=Enriquez=, Juan, the common
    crier, ordered to proclaim the new laws publicly, 83

=Escobar=, Francisco de, 137 (_n._)

=Escobar=, Maria de, 145, 151

=Escobedo=, Francisco de, 136 (_n._)

=Esidoro=, Friar, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17

=Espinal=, Manuel de, Treasurer, ordered to go to Arequipa, 112

=Espinosa=, a soldier, 43

=Espinosa=, Francisco de, leaves Huanuco, 113

=Esquivel=, Pantoja Alonso Perez de, the Licentiate, 19;
  proceeds to Truxillo to join the Viceroy, 19;
  flight of, from Cuzco, 116;
  takes part in a plot to murder Francisco de Almendras, 156

=Estacio=, Manuel de, discontent of, 131

=Estopiñan=, Lorenzo de, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17;
  negotiations with the Licentiate de la Gama, 28;
  is sent to Vaca de Castro with documents to sign, 33;
  goes to meet the Viceroy, 56;
  mission of, 60

=Estremadura=, 37 (_n._)

=Felipe=, Don, orders the new laws to be enforced, 77

=Felix=, a servant of the Viceroy, 114

=Figueroa=, Diego Rodriguez de, report
    of, on his mission to Titu Cusi Yupanqui Inca, 168, 169;
  narrative of the route and journey made by, 170 ff.

=Florencia=, Martin de, hanged, 139 (_n._)

=Frederick Barbarossa=, 98

=Fuentes=, Pedro de, sent to Arequipa as Lieutenant of the Governor, 140 (_n._)


=Gama=, Antonio de la, the Licentiate, sets out to meet Vaca de Castro, 19;
  career of, 19 (_n._);
  meets Vaca de Castro, 22;
  precedes Vaca de Castro’s entering Lima, 27, 28;
  departs from Lima, 47, 48;
  letters from, 66;
  is ordered to the bridge of the Apurimac, 124

=Garay=, Antonio, remains at Huanuco, 114

=Garcia=, Marcos, the narrative of Titu Cusi
    Yupanqui dictated to, 164, 166, 167, 168

=Garcilasso=, the Inca, 13 (_n._)

=Gasca=, 17 (_n._), 26 (_n._), 31 (_n._),
    34 (_n._), 37 (_n._), 38 (_n._), 53 (_n._), 71 (_n._), 74 (_n._), 76

=Gavilan=, Diego, at Guamanga, 80

=Gil=, Gaspar, Captain, accompanies Vaca de Castro on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13;
  put to death, 155

=Giron=, 17 (_n._), 31 (_n._), 34 (_n._),
    53 (_n._), 71 (_n._), 74 (_n._)

=Gomera=, Conde de, 135 (_n._)

=Gonzalez=, Diego, kills Alonso de Toro, 42 (_n._)

=Grado=, leaves Huanuco, 113

=Gran Canaria=, island of, Blasco Nuñez reaches, 1

=Griego=, Jorge, 126

=Guadachevi=, 26

=Gualle=, town of, 89

=Guamanga=, city of, Vaca de Castro at, 22;
  artillery sent for from, 79, 80;
  Pero Lopez and Francisco de Ampuero arrive at, 93

=Guayaquil=, the Viceroy’s letter to, 10

=Guelpone=, Count of Angleria, 98

=Guevara=, Anton Ruiz de, 139 (_n._)

=Guevara=, Juan Velez de, Captain, says that Vaca
    de Castro was the Royal Governor, 11;
  is interviewed with others by Pedro de los Rios, 65;
  votes in favour of Gonzalo Pizarro being made Chief Justice, 68, 69;
  Captain of infantry, 79;
  ordered to Xaquixaguana, 106;
  in charge of arquebusiers, 140 (_n._)

=Guevara=, Vasco de, Captain, at Guamanga, 80, 81;
  arrives at Lima, 100

=Gumiel=, Diego, Captain of infantry, 79;
  pardon granted to, 92 (_n._);
  execution of, 140 (_n._)

=Gutierrez=, Felipe, 105, 136 (_n._)


=Hannibal=, 49

=Hector=, son of Parmenion, 84, 84 (_n._)

=Henao=, 200

=Henriquez=, Martin, 169

=Heredia=, Nicolas de, executed, 159

=Hernandez=, Garcia, leaves Huanuco, 113

=Hinojosa=, Pedro Alonso de, 17 (_n._);
  nominated as Procurator, 37;
  career of, 37 (_n._);
  murder of, 38 (_n._);
  sets out for Lima, 38, 59;
  returns to Cuzco, 60;
  sent to Arequipa for arms and troops, 73

=Hojeda=, Juan Julio de, signs the document
   appointing Gonzalo Pizarro Chief Justice, 69

=Holguin=, Alonso, Indians taken away from, 34, 64

=Hontivéros=, 79

=Huacho=, 53 (_n._)

=Huanuco=, 23, 75, 102, 147

=Huara=, a town of Indians, 22

=Huarina=, battle of, 10 (_n._), 13 (_n._), 37 (_n._), 64, 98

=Huarochiri=, province of, 47, 116, 126

=Huascar Inca=, 188

=Huayna Ceapac=, palace of, 13 (_n._)

=Huaytara=, 100

=Hurtado=, 187


=Illanes=, Juan de, 162

=Indians=, new laws regarding, 2 (_n._), 3, 11, 14, 15, 64;
  liberation of, at Truxillo and San Miguel, 23;
  conflict between, and Spaniards, 125


=Josephus=, 98

=Julius Cæsar=, 49, 63


=La Barranca=, town of, 22;
  the motto at, 24;
  the Viceroy arrives at, 50

=La Gasca=, President, 12

=La Gasca=, account of the voyage of, 162, 163

=La Plata=, 172, 173

=Lartoun=, Sebastian de, Bishop of Cuzco, 200

=Las Casas=, new laws advocated by, 2 (_n._)

“=Las Perdrices=,” near the city of the Kings, 17

=Lentulus=, Consul, 63

=Leon=, Antonio de, goes to receive the Viceroy, 26, 50

=Leon=, Cieza de, 10 (_n._)

=Leon=, Francisco de, 41

=Leon=, Gomez de, 41

=Leon=, Juan de, at the city of the Kings, 18;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 26, 50, 56, 57

=Leon=, Luis de, 139 (_n._), 140 (_n._)

=Leon=, the Licentiate, leaves Lima, 48;
  arrives at Cuzco, 66;
  the ordinances discussed at the house of, 92

=Leon y Ramirez=, Luis de, joins those who fled from Cuzco, 116

=Lerma=, Alonso de, Ensign to the General Vela Nuñez, 149 (_n._)

=Leyton=, Catalina, wife of Francisco de Carbajal, 9 (_n._)

=Leyva=, 9 (_n._)

=Lima=, ancient name of the city of the Kings,
    4, 9 (_n._), 10 (_n._), 16 (_n._), 17 (_n._);
  the Viceroy to be received at, 17;
  happenings at, 28;
  Vaca de Castro’s procedure at, 32, 33;
  commotion at, on hearing of the Viceroy’s coming, 45;
  the Viceroy’s approach to, 50, 51;
  tumult in, 52;
  reception of Viceroy at, 56, 57;
  news received at, of Gonzalo Pizarro’s being made Procurator, 75;
  unsettled feeling at, 81, 82;
  the citizens of, greatly disturbed at the
    proclamation of the new laws, write letters to Gonzalo Pizarro, 85;
  the arrival of the Judges at, 90;
  the Court of Justice founded at, 91;
  great excitement in, at the news of the
    flight of Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda, 129

=Llaches=, 17 (_n._)

=Loaysa=, Father Baltasar de, departs from Lima, 47;
  statement of, 52;
  seeks pardon of the Viceroy, 92;
  sets out from Cuzco to Lima, 92

=Loaysa=, Jeronimo de, Bishop of the city of the Kings, 17, 29, 31;
  career and death of, 31 (_n._);
  his action at Lima, 33;
  asked to meet the Viceroy, 52;
  goes to meet, and discourses with him, 54, 55;
  distressed at the imprisonment of Vaca de Castro, secures his release, 86;
  sets out for Cuzco to try to avert a civil war, 87, 88;
  arrives at Guamanga, 93;
  receives letters from the Viceroy, 94;
  his answer, 94;
  reaches Cochacaxa, 107;
  is advised to return to Lima, 107;
  meets Francisco de Almendras, 107;
  is prevented from proceeding further, 108;
  writes to Gonzalo Pizarro, 108;
  Gonzalo Pizarro’s answer to, 108;
  departs to Curamba, thence to Andahuaylas and Uramarca, 109

=Lopez=, Pero, Secretary, 12;
  is sent by Vaca de Castro to welcome the Viceroy, 22;
  informs Vaca de Castro of the Viceroy’s action, 23;
  bears a message to the Viceroy from Vaca de Castro, 50;
  despatched to Cuzco with the ordinances, 58;
  sent with orders from the Viceroy to Gonzalo Pizarro, 89;
  arrives at Guamanga, 93;
  intercepted by Francisco de Almendras, 102;
  allowed to return, 104

=Losa=, Father Juan de, accompanies Bishop
    Don Jeronimo de Loaysa on his journey to Cuzco, 88;
  sends a letter to Gonzalo Pizarro, 100;
  well received by Gonzalo Pizarro, 110

=Lucuma=, 176

=Lucumaes=, a camp ordered to be made at, 106, 118

=Luna=, Gomez de, imprisoned and strangled, 156

=Lunahuana=, 17 (_n._)


=Mala=, conference at, 13 (_n._), 16 (_n._)

=Malaga=, 79

=Maldonado=, Arias de, 136 (_n._)

=Maldonado=, Diego, Alcalde, the rich, 53 (_n._);
  accompanies Vaca de Castro on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13;
  resolves to go to Cuzco, 34;
  departs from Lima, 46;
  interviews held by, concerning Gonzalo Pizarro, 65;
  Gonzalo Pizarro asks him to come to Cuzco, 65;
  on the election of Gonzalo Pizarro as Chief Justice, 68;
  leaves the meeting to avoid voting, 70;
  Gonzalo Pizarro forces him to sign, 70;
  declines to be Ensign General, 79;
  seeks pardon of the Viceroy, 92;
  does not approve of Gonzalo Pizarro’s enterprise, 121;
  raises the King’s banner at Cuzco, 123;
  musters all the Spaniards there, 124

=Maldonado=, Francisco, is interviewed with others by Pedro de los Rios, 65;
  signs in favour of Gonzalo Pizarro’s election as Chief Justice, 68, 69;
  sent to represent Gonzalo Pizarro, 153

=Manco Inca=, 90 (_n._), 122;
  Gonzalo Pizarro appointed Captain against, 65;
  sends an armed force against Cuzco, 123;
  receives reports from his captains, 124;
  questions Diego Mendez, 124;
  is killed by Diego Perez, 125;
  the murder of, described by his son, 164, 165

=Manjarres=, flight of, from Cuzco, 116

=Manjarves=, Pedro de, 139 (_n._)

=Marainiyo=, 175, 176

=Mark Antony=, 49

=Marquez=, Alonso, accompanies Bishop Don
    Jeronimo de Loaysa on his journey to Cuzco, 88

=Martin=, Diego, the clergyman, 104

=Martin=, Lope, goes to Lima, 59, 60;
  arrives at Cuzco with news of the Viceroy, 79;
  leaves Cuzco, 106

=Matienzo=, Judge, 170, 173, 174, 181, 185, 187, 189, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198

=Maulé=, river, 200

=Mendez=, Diego, with King Manco Inca, 124

=Mendiburu=, General, 10 (_n._)

=Mendieta=, Lope de, Magistrate, 37, 156

=Mendieta=, servant of the Viceroy, 45

=Mendoza=, Antonio de, the Viceroy of Mexico, 9 (_n._), 51

=Mendoza=, Lope de, 8;
  executed, 159

=Mendoza=, Luis de, 156

=Meneses=, Pablo de, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17;
  career of, 17 (_n._);
  goes to meet the Viceroy, 54;
  visits Baltasar de Loaysa, 92 (_n._);
  appointed Captain of infantry, 99

=Merlo=, Garcia de, Treasurer, 185, 193, 196, 197

=Mesa=, Alonso de, 70; career of, 70 (_n._), 71 (_n._);
  scheme of, 122

=Mexia=, Gaspar, the Viceroy’s desire to kill, 146;
  flight of, from Lima, 149

=Mexia=, Hernan, 162

=Mexia=, Lorenzo, deserts the Viceroy, 135 (_n._);
  the Viceroy’s desire to kill, 145

=Mezcua=, Gomez de, a servant of Gonzalo Pizarro, 48;
  arrives at Cuzco, 62

=Milan=, city of, 98

=Molina=, Father Cristobal de, letter of, to the Emperor, 200

=Monje=, Martin, a soldier, 41

=Monroy=, with King Manco Inca, 124

=Montalvo=, Garcia de, Lieutenant-Governor of Cuzco, 44

=Montaña=, 99

=Montemayor=, Alonso de, meets the Viceroy at Lima, 50;
  appointed Captain of cavalry, 99

=Mora=, Diego de, Captain, Indians taken away from, 34, 64;
  his career, 34 (_n._)


=Navarro=, a citizen of Cuzco, 105

=New Castille=, 6, 19, 20, 21

=New Granada=, 63 (_n._)

=New Toledo=, 12

=Nicanor=, son of Parmenion, 84, 84 (_n._)

=Nicaragua=, 5

=Nieva=, Viceroy Count of, 187, 187 (_n._) (_see_ Zuñiga y Velasco)

=Niño=, Rodrigo, Licentiate, appointed Procurator, 53;
  career of, 53 (_n._);
  takes part in the reception of the Viceroy, 56, 57;
  returns to Lima, 128

=Nombre de Dios=, Blasco Nuñez arrives at, 2

=Nuñez=, Francisco Velasquez Vela de, General,
    brother of the Viceroy, sails with Blasco Nuñez, 1 (_n._);
  arrives at Tumbez with the Viceroy, 14;
  at Truxillo, 34;
  sent to intercept the traitors, 115;
  plot to murder, 126, 127;
  returns to the Viceroy, 127, 129;
  beheaded, 159

=Nuñez=, Juan Velasquez Vela, appointed Captain of the Guard, 99

=Nuñez=, Rodrigo, at enmity with Vaca de Castro, 23

=Nuñez Vela=, Blasco, the Viceroy, sets sail from San Lucar, 1;
  arrives at Gran Canaria, 1;
  reaches Nombre de Dios, 2;
  proceeds to the city of Panama, 2;
  his cruel death at Añaquito, 2;
  is appointed with four Judges to enforce the new laws in Peru, 3, 3 (_n._);
  alleged strained relations with the Judges, 4;
  his answer to Governor Rodrigo de Contreras, 6;
  rejects the Judges’ advice, 7;
  leaves Panama and reaches Tumbez, 10;
  writes letters to the city of San Francisco
    del Quito, Puerto Viejo, and Guayaquil, 10;
  his action at Tumbez, 14, 15;
  journeys to San Miguel, 15;
  enforces the new laws there, 15;
  proceeds to Truxillo, 17;
  is to be received at Lima, 17;
  letter to Charles V, 18 (_n._);
  his commission from the King appointing him Viceroy made public, 19, 20, 21;
  is reported as having liberated Indians at Truxillo and San Miguel, 23;
  departs from San Miguel, 23;
  travels by the Royal Road of the Coast, 23;
  his grand reception at Truxillo, 24;
  remains there, 33, 34;
  departure from, 46;
  his approach to Lima, 50;
  arrives at La Barranca, 50;
  meets Pero Lopez, 50;
  on his nearing Lima met by citizens, 54;
  discourses with Bishop of Lima, 54, 55;
  reception of, at Lima, 56, 57;
  disturbed at the news of Gonzalo Pizarro’s being made Procurator, 76, 77;
  his hatred of Vaca de Castro, 82;
  greatly grieved at the news of the seizure of the artillery, 82;
  orders the new laws to be proclaimed publicly, 83;
  imprisons Vaca de Castro, 85, 86;
  imprisons Lorenzo de Aldana, 86;
  orders a fleet, 86;
  appoints Diego Alvarez de Cueto as Captain-General
    and Jeronimo Zurbano as Captain, 86;
  approves of Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa’s mission to Cuzco, 87;
  his call to arms, 89;
  sends Pero Lopez with orders to Gonzalo Pizarro, 89;
  writes letters to the King and the Council, 91;
  summons the Judges to meet him, 94;
  his speech to them, 95;
  revokes the new laws, 97;
  appoints captains, 99;
  his address to them, 99;
  active preparations of, 109, 110;
  sends Captain Hernando de Alvarado to Truxillo, 111;
  orders Manuel de Espinal to go to Arequipa, 112;
  sends Jeronimo de Villegas to Huanuco, 112;
  his complaints on receiving news of Pedro de Puelles’
    disloyalty and treachery of Jeronimo de Villegas, 114;
  sends Captain Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda and General
   Vela Nuñez to intercept the traitors, 115;
  his three sons, 115 (_n._);
  deeply moved at the great treason of Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda, 129;
  seeks the advice of the assembly of the Judges and others, 130;
  arrest and imprisonment of, 137;
  faults of, 138;
  indictment of the judges against, 143;
  his proceedings at Panama, 143;
  violent conduct at Tumbez, San Miguel and Truxillo, 144;
  unpopularity of, 146;
  misgovernment of, 147, 148;
  causes the death of the Factor Yllan Suarez de Carbajal, 149;
  takes refuge in the house of the Licentiate Cepeda, 151;
  release of, 153;
  marches to Quito with a force, 154;
  is pursued by Gonzalo Pizarro, 155;
  collects arms and assembles troops at Popayan, 157;
  names of the officers of, 158;
  is wounded and afterwards beheaded, 158;
  is honourably buried, 158

=Ñusta=, Inez Yupanqui, Princess, 90 (_n._)


=Ocampo=, Diego de, 154;
  put to death, 155

=Ochoa=, carries despatches for the Viceroy, 17

=Ocllo=, Doña Angelina Zica, 168

=Octavius=, 49

=Olave=, Fortun Sanchez de, gets possession of
    certain provisions of the Viceroy, 121

=Olea=, a soldier, 47

=Oñate=, Francisco de, 164, 164 (_n._)

=Oran=, 53 (_n._)

=Orellana=, 115 (_n._)

=Orgoñez=, Rodrigo, 53 (_n._), 198

=Ortiz=, Father Friar Diego, 166


=Pablo=, Vicente, 102

=Paez=, the Licentiate, 2

=Palcocon=, 35

=Palomino=, Alonso, Alcalde, 18;
  arrives at Cuzco with news of the ordinances, 29;
  sends letter to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35;
  goes to induce Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa to receive the Viceroy, 52;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56, 57;
  sends news to Gonzalo Pizarro, 100

=Palomino=, Diego, Lieutenant to the Governor, 15, 23;
  deprived of his Indians, 64

=Palomino=, Juan Alonso, leaves Cuzco, 106;
  stationed at Andahuaylas, 109

=Panama=, the city of, 37 (_n._);
  Blasco Nuñez arrives at, 2;
  Indians brought from Peru to, 3 (_n._);
  consternation at the introduction of the new laws, 5;
  Gasca at, 31 (_n._)

=Pando=, a mestizo, 175

=Pando=, Martin de, clerk, declaration of, 166, 167

=Pardomo=, Luis, pardoned, 159

=Paredas=, Diego Garcia de, 162

=Pariacaca=, 28, 127, 128

=Parmenion=, account of Alexander’s treatment of, 84, 84 (_n._)

=Paucar-colla=, 53 (_n._)

=Paulo Inca=, brother of Manco Inca, 125

=Pavia=, battle of, 9 (_n._)

=Payta=, 90

=Pedrarias=, 42 (_n._)

=Peñalosa=, Pero Ordoñez de, accompanies
    Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa on his journey to Cuzco, 88

=Peranzules=, Captain, 61

=Perez=, Diego, kills King Manco Inca, 125

=Perez=, Gomez, with King Manco Inca, 124

=Peru=, kingdoms of, Blasco Nuñez ordered to set out for, 1;
  new laws with regard to the natives of, 3, 4, 5

=Philip=, King, 167

=Philotas=, son of Parmenion, 84, 84 (_n._)

=Piedrahita=, disloyalty of, 116, 126

=Pineda=, Gonzalo Diaz de, appointed Captain of arquebusiers, 99;
  desires to join Gonzalo Pizarro, 113;
  is sent by the Viceroy with a force to intercept the traitors, 115;
  his career and death, 115 (_n._);
  arrives at the rebel camp, 119;
  his intention to murder Vela Nuñez, 126;
  enters Guamanga, 128

=Pineda=, Rodrigo de, gives information
    about Gonzalo Pizarro to Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa, 88

=Piura=, ancient name of San Miguel, 15 (_n._), 23

=Pizarro=, Hernando, war between, and Almagro, 2 (_n._), 200;
  besieged by Indians in Lima, 9 (_n._);
  murder of, 10 (_n._), 16 (_n._);
  his servant carries letters to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35

=Pizarro=, Gonzalo, Captain, letter of Governor Vaca de Castro to, 12;
  plot of Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo against, 13 (_n._);
  Altamirano put to death by order of, 13 (_n._);
  receives many letters offering him support, 25;
  his departure from Cuzco and arrival at Plata, 34;
  at Chaqui, 35;
  letters to, 35;
  greatly concerned at the new laws, 35, 36;
  collects money at the mines of Porco, 36;
  desires to go to Cuzco, 39;
  despatches Bazan to Arequipa, 40;
  arrives at the lake of Titicaca, 40;
  joined by many soldiers, 41;
  reaches the town of Ayavire, 42;
  arrival at Cuzco, 44;
  coolly received by the citizens, 47, 48;
  many people join him, 48;
  chosen Procurator, 49;
  elected Procurator-General, 62, 63;
  made Captain against the Inca, 65;
  sends a letter to the province of Andahuaylas, 65;
  is given authority to march to Lima, 66;
  wishes to be made Chief Justice, 67;
  is elected to the office, 69;
  is enraged with Pero Alonso Carrasco, 70, 71;
  sends to Arequipa for arms and troops, 73;
  nominates captains and officers for the war, 78, 79;
  sends to Guamanga for artillery, 79, 80;
  presses forward his preparations for war, 101;
  orders Captain Francisco de Almendras to seize despatches, 101;
  sends letters to Pedro de Puelles, 101, 102;
  prepares to set out from Cuzco, 105;
  letter of, to Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa,
    and to Francisco de Almendras, 108;
  pitches his camp at Xaquixaguana, 116;
  is informed of the flight of Graviel de Rojas and others from Cuzco, 117;
  his anger thereat, 117;
  marches on to Lucumaes, 118;
  appoints Francisco de Carbajal Master of the Camp, 118;
  conspiracy against, 118;
  seeks advice from Francisco de Carbajal, 118;
  advances very cautiously, 120;
  plot against, 121;
  enters the city of Lima, 139, 140 (_n._);
  popularity of, 142;
  sends envoys to Spain, 152;
  marches against the Viceroy, 154, 155;
  continues to pursue the Viceroy, 156;
  names of the officers of, 156;
  complete victory of, at Quito, 158;
  at the height of his power, 158;
  is urged to assume the kingship of Peru, 159

=Pizarro=, Juan, 198

=Pizarro=, Marquis Don Francisco, 27, 90;
  the Viceroy at the house of, 57, 58

=Plata=, town of, Captain Gonzalo Pizarro’s arrival at, 34;
  consternation at, on hearing of the new laws, 36, 37;
  appointment of Procurators at, 37

=Plutarch’s= life of Catullus, 76

=Polidamas= and Alexander the Great, 84, 84 (_n._)

=Pompey the Great=, 49, 63

=Popayan=, 74 (_n._), 77;
  execution of the new laws at, postponed, 78

=Porco=, mines of, 36

=Porras=, the mestizo, 197

=Portocarrero=, pardon granted to, 92 (_n._)

=Potosi=, silver mines at, 35

=Prado=, Rodrigo Nuñez de, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17

=Pucara=, 92 (_n._)

=Puelles=, Pedro de, Governor of Huanuco, 53 (_n._);
  letters to, from Gonzalo Pizarro, 101;
  his career and death, 101 (_n._);
  replies to Gonzalo Pizarro, 102;
  conduct of, at the city of Leon, 112, 113;
  arrives at the rebel camp, 119;
  beheads the traitors, 136 (_n._);
  enters Lima with Gonzalo Pizarro, 140

=Puerto Viejo=, the Viceroy’s letter to, 10

=Puertocarrero=, Pedro de, commands the cavalry, 79;
  leaves Cuzco, 106


=Quichua=, 53 (_n._)

=Quijos=, 115 (_n._)

=Quilca=, port of, 21, 31, 117

=Quimbaya=, 63

=Quiñones=, Antonio de, accompanies Vaca de Castro
    on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13

=Quiñones=, Pedro Ramirez de, the Licentiate, 2

=Quintus Curtius=, 84

=Quiquijana=, town called, 43

=Quito=, conquest of, 13 (_n._), 28, 98;
  former prosperity of the citizens of, 51;
  the Viceroy not received in, 147;
  the Viceroy meets Pizarro’s army at, 157;
  desperate battle at, 158


=Ragana=, birthplace of Francisco de Carbajal, 9 (_n._)

=Ramirez=, Juan, sent by Gonzalo Pizarro to Arequipa, 36

=Ravenna=, battle of, 9 (_n._)

=Rayangalla=, 167, 168

=Rebdona=, a soldier, sentenced to be hanged, 122

=Retamoso=, Francisco de, 37

=Ribas=, Juan de, hanged, 104

=Ribera=, Antonio de, 12;
  arrives at Cuzco with news of the ordinances, 29;
  letter to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35;
  sends news to Gonzalo Pizarro, 100;
  sent to meet Gonzalo Pizarro, 139 (_n._)

=Ribera=, Luis de, Alcalde, Lieutenant-Governor of the town of Plata, 36, 37;
  addresses the townspeople, 38

=Ribera=, Nicolas de, Alcalde, 17, (_n._), 18;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56

=Ribera=, Nicolas de (Junior), the lad, 18;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56, 57

=Rimachi Yupanqui=, 165, 166

=Rios=, Pedro de los, accompanies Vaca de Castro
    on his journey to the city of the Kings, 13;
  resolves to go to Cuzco, 34;
  departs from Lima, 46;
  is asked by Gonzalo Pizarro to go to Cuzco, 65;
  objects to serving with Gonzalo Pizarro, 70;
  seeks pardon of the Viceroy, 92

=Riquelme=, Alonso, the Treasurer, 18, 28;
  career of, 28 (_n._);
  is induced to make friends with Vaca de Castro, 33;
  goes to induce Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa to receive the Viceroy, 52;
  has an interview with the Viceroy, 58, 59

=Riquelme=, Antonio, the Treasurer, 8

=Rivadeneira=, is disarmed and returns to Lima, 128

=Robles=, Alonso de, visits Baltasar de Loaysa, 92 (_n._)

=Robles=, Martin de, visits Baltasar de Loaysa, 92 (_n._);
  appointed Captain of infantry, 99;
  the Viceroy wishes to kill, 145

=Rodas=, Francisco de, to act as Procurator, 78

=Rodriguez=, Baltazar, ordered to be hanged, 146

=Rodriguez=, Gaspar, resolves to go to Cuzco, 34;
  desires to leave Lima, 45;
  arrives in the province of Huarochiri, 47;
  the Cuzco citizens disturbed by his news, 64

=Rojas=, Gabriel de, excuses himself from going with Gonzalo Pizarro, 106;
  is seized as a fugitive, 139 (_n._)

=Rojas=, Gaspar de, at Guamanga, 136 (_n._)

=Rojas=, Gomez de, flight of, from Cuzco, 116

=Rojas=, Graviel de, flight of, from Cuzco, 71, 116

=Rome=, sack of, 9 (_n._)

=Ruiloba= (Ruy Lopez ?), a messenger of Vaca de Castro, 22


=Saavedra=, Juan de, Captain, goes to meet the Viceroy, 54;
  is given permission to go to Huanuco, 75;
  hanged, 139 (_n._)

=Sacsahuana=, 26 (_n._), 31 (_n._), 34 (_n._),
    38 (_n._), 42 (_n._), 53 (_n._), 71 (_n._)

=Sahagun=, 13 (_n._)

=Salas=, Juan de, Factor, goes to meet the Viceroy, 54

=Salazar el Corcovedo=, Rodrigo de, deserts the Viceroy, 136 (_n._)

=Salcedo=, Garcia de, the Overseer, goes to induce Bishop
    Don Jeronimo de Loaysa to receive the Viceroy, 52;
  takes part in receiving the Viceroy, 56, 57

=Salinas=, battle of, 13 (_n._), 28, 37 (_n._)

=San Francisco= del Quito, the Viceroy’s letter to the city of, 10

=San Lorenzo=, 53 (_n._)

=San Lucar=, port of, Blasco Nuñez sets sail from, 1

=San Lucar= de Barrameda, 13 (_n._), 21, 79

=San Martin=, Friar Tomas de, Regent or Principal
    of the Dominicans, 96, 96 (_n._), 104, 162

=San Miguel=, the Viceroy’s arrival and action at, 15, 23, 34;
  ancient name of, 23

=San Salvador=, 166

=San Vicente=, Fray Isidro de, accompanies Bishop
    Don Jeronimo de Loaysa on his journey to Cuzco, 88

=Sanchez=, Francisco, a citizen of Cuzco, 43

=Sanchez=, Ortun, a priest, 125

=Sandoval=, Juan de, accompanies Bishop Don Jeronimo
    de Loaysa on his journey to Cuzco, 88

=Santa Cruz=, a soldier, sentenced to be hanged, 123

=Santander=, 99 (_n._)

=Santillana=, the Mayor-domo of the Viceroy, 45, 46

=Santo Domingo=, the convent of, 140 (_n._)

=Santo Tomas=, Reverend Friar Domingo de, 53;
  career and death of, 53 (_n._)

=Sapamarca=, 175

=Saucedo=, Garcia de, the Overseer, 18

=Sayavedra=, Juan de, appointed Serjeant-Major, 100;
  remains at Huanuco, 113

=Sayri Tupac=, 170, 192

=Segura=, Hernan Nuñez de, 156

=Serna=, Jeronimo de la, goes to Arequipa intending
    to join the Viceroy, 105, 106;
  appointed Captain of the company of Gonzalo Diaz, 130;
  is put to death, 155

=Sicilia=, Pedro Martin de, 136 (_n._)

=Silva=, Diego de, visits Baltasar de Loaysa, 92 (_n._)

=Solano=, Friar Juan, Bishop of Cuzco, letter of, to the King, 132;
  career and death of, 132 (_n._)

=Solar=, Antonio, ordered to be hanged, 145

=Solar=, Francisco del, said to have left a motto at La Barranca, 24;
  his imprisonment and release, 24 (_n._)

=Solis=, Gomez de, goes to join Gonzalo Pizarro, 127

=Soras=, country of, 81
=
Soria=, flight of, from Cuzco, 116

=Soto=, Blas de, brother of Gonzalo Pizarro, 39

=Sotomayor=, Diego Mendez de, 178

=Spaniards=, consternation of, at the introduction of the new laws, 5, 6;
  conflict between, and Indians, 123

=St Jerome=, quoted, 99, 99 (_n._)

=Suarez=, Luis, the ordinances discussed at the house of, 92 (_n._)

=Suarez=, Vasco, Alcalde, at Guamanga, 80

=Sullca Huarac=, 166

=Suta Yupanqui=, 166


=Tablero=, Hernando Perez, a soldier, 140 (_n._)

=Taboga=, 162

=Talavera=, 16 (_n._), 17 (_n._)

=Tambo=, 170, 175, 198

=Tapia=, Francisco de, 37

=Tapia=, Juan Vazquez de, 26

=Tejada=, Lison de, Judge, sails with Blasco Nuñez, 1 (_n._);
  one of the four Judges appointed to enforce the new laws in Peru, 4 (_n._);
  opposes the Viceroy, 7;
  summoned to meet the Viceroy, 94;
  is sent to Spain as representative of the Judges, 152

=Tierra Firme= (_see_ Panama)

=Timana=, town of, 77

=Tinoco=, Rodrigo, leaves Huanuco, 113

=Titicaca=, the lake of, Gonzalo Pizarro arrives at, 40

=Titu Cusi= Yupanqui, Inca, 125, 170;
  narrative of, 164, 165;
  attempt to kill, 178, 178 (_n._)

=Tobar=, Francisco Garcia de, Captain, death of, 77

=Toledo=, Viceroy, 169

=Toro=, Alonso de, letters of, to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35, 42;
  death of, 42 (_n._);
  disinclined to comply with Gonzalo Pizarro’s wishes, 61;
  is sent for by Gonzalo Pizarro, 62;
  Gonzalo Pizarro converses with, 66;
  appointed Master of the Camp, 79;
  seeks pardon of the Viceroy, 92;
  pardon granted to, 92 (_n._);
  hangs Martin de Vadillo, 106;
  sent to Cuzco as Lieutenant of the Governor, 140 (_n._)

=Toro=, Hernando de, 112

=Torre=, Juan de la, disloyalty of, 116;
  takes part in the plot to murder Vela Nuñez, 126

=Torres=, Cristoval de, disloyalty of, 116;
  takes part in the plot tomurder Vela Nuñez, 126;
  ordered to carry news to Gonzalo Pizarro, 128

=Torres=, Hernando de, 41

=Truxillo=, 15;
  the Viceroy proceeds to, 17;
  the Factor Yllan Suarez de Carbajal and the
    Captain Diego de Aguero set out for, 22;
  the Viceroy liberates Indians at, 23;
  ancient name of, 23;
  the Viceroy remains at, 33, 34

=Tumbez=, 5;
  the Viceroy arrives at, 10, 14

=Tumibamba=, 155

=Tupac Amaru Inca=, 31 (_n._), 187 (_n._)

=Tuscany=, Countess Matilda of, 98 (_n._)


=Ulloa=, Francisco Noguerol de, 112

=Ulloa=, Noguerol de, 41

=Uramarca=, Bishop Don Jeronimo de Loaysa at, 109

=Urbina=, Diego de, appointed Captain of
    arquebusiers, afterwards Camp Master, 99, 109;
  the Viceroy desires to kill, 145

=Urute=, discovery of, 106


=Vadillo=, Juan de, expedition of, 106

=Vadillo=, Martin de, flight of, from Cuzco, 106;
  is hanged by Alonso de Toro, 106

=Valverde=, Ana de, wife of Diego de Mora, 34 (_n._)

=Valverde=, Maria, wife of the Licentiate Rodrigo Niño, 53 (_n._)

=Vargas=, Alonso de, 140 (_n._)

=Vargas=, Hernando de, appointed to meet the Viceroy, 17

=Vasquez=, Tomas, sent to Arequipa by Vaca de Castro with a letter, 29, 30;
  his career, 42 (_n._);
  disinclined to comply with Gonzalo Pizarro’s wishes, 61;
  Gonzalo Pizarro converses with, 66;
  pardon granted to, 92 (_n._);
  leaves Cuzco, 106

=Vega=, Garcilasso de la, Captain, 71;
  does not approve of Gonzalo Pizarro’s election as Chief Justice, 72, 73;
  excuses himself from going with Gonzalo Pizarro, 106;
  flight of, from Cuzco, 116;
  seized as a fugitive, 139 (_n._);
  escape of, 140 (_n._)

=Vela=, Hernan, loyalty of, 126

=Vera=, Maria de, 61

=Verdugo=, Melchor, seized as a fugitive, 139 (_n._);
  Indians of, heavily rated by the Viceroy, 147

=Vilcamayu=, 170

=Vilcapampa=, 164, 166, 167, 169, 170, 190, 195

=Vilcapaniguana=, 177

=Vilcapari Guaman=, 180

=Vilcas=, bridge of, 102

=Villacastin=, Francisco de, letter of, to Gonzalo Pizarro, 42;
  his career, 42 (_n._);
  disinclined to comply with the wishes of Gonzalo Pizarro, 61;
  is sent for by Gonzalo Pizarro, 62;
  pardon granted to, 92 (_n._)

=Villacorta=, letter of, to Gonzalo Pizarro, 35

=Villadiego=, 79

=Villalobos=, Dr, 2

=Villegas=, Jeronimo de, sent to Huanuco, 112;
  treachery of, 113;
  arrives at the rebel camp, 119

=Viticos=, province of, 123, 124

=Viticos=, town of, 164, 165, 175, 178

=Vivero=, Gonzalo Perez de, 167, 168

=Vivero=, Juan de, 168


=Xaguey=, the Viceroy at, 55

=Xaquixaguana=, Captains Juan Velez de Guevara and
    Pedro Cermeño, ordered to go to, 106;
  Gonzalo Pizarro pitches his camp at, 116

=Xauxa=, province of, 22, 74, 75, 139


=Yamqui Mayta=, 179, 181, 192, 194, 195

=Yanamachi=, 171

=Yca=, town of, 88

=Ylave=, town of, 41

=Yucay=, 172


=Zaragoza=, 104

=Zarate=, Agustin de, an Accountant, sails with Blasco Nuñez, 1 (_n._);
  publishes a book dealing with the events which
    led to the expulsion of the Viceroy, 4 (_n._);
  sent to meet Gonzalo Pizarro, 139 (_n._)

=Zarate=, Juan Ortiz de, is asked by Gonzalo Pizarro to accompany him, 43;
  his share in the plot to murder Francisco de Almendras, 156

=Zarate=, Pedro Ortiz de, the Licentiate, sails with Blasco Nuñez, 1 (_n._);
  one of the four Judges appointed to enforce the new laws in Peru, 4 (_n._);
  offers his advice to the Viceroy, 7;
  summoned to meet the Viceroy, 94

=Zuñiga y Velasco=, Diego de, Count of Nieva, Viceroy of Peru, 169, 174, 187

=Zurbano=, Geronimo de, appointed Captain of the fleet, 86;
  takes part in destroying four ships, 151

CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.



The Hakluyt Society.

(Founded 1846.)

1913.

President.

ALBERT GRAY, Esq., K.C.

Vice-Presidents.

THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD BELHAVEN AND STENTON.

SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., Ex.-Pres. R.G.S.

THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD PECKOVER OF WISBECH.

Treasurer.

EDWARD HEAWOOD, Esq.

Council.

  ADMIRAL SIR LEWIS BEAUMONT,
  G.C.B., K.C.M.G.

  SIR THOMAS BOWRING.

  LT.-COLONEL CHARLES FREDERICK
  CLOSE, C.M.G., R.E.

  BOLTON GLANVILL CORNEY, ESQ.,
  I.S.O.

  MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, late R.E.

  WILLIAM FOSTER, ESQ., C.I.E.

  F. H. H. GUILLEMARD, ESQ., M.D.

  SIR EVERARD IM THURN, K.C.M.G.,
  C.B.

  JOHN SCOTT KELTIE, ESQ., LL.D.

  ADMIRAL SIR ALBERT HASTINGS
  MARKHAM, K.C.B.

  ALFRED P. MAUDSLAY, ESQ.

  LT.-COL. SIR MATTHEW NATHAN,
  G.C.M.G., R.E.

  ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET THE RIGHT HON.
  SIR EDWARD HOBART SEYMOUR,
  G.C.B., O.M., G.C.V.O., LL.D.

  H. R. TEDDER, ESQ.

  LIEUT.-COL. SIR RICHARD CARNAC
  TEMPLE, BART., C.I.E.

  BASIL HOME THOMSON, ESQ.


                            Hon. Secretary.

                      J. A. J. DE VILLIERS, ESQ.,
                         BRITISH MUSEUM, W.C.

                    Clerk and Assistant Treasurer.

                         MR. SAMUEL JOHN EVIS,
             ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, 1, SAVILE ROW, W.

                          Bankers in London.

         MESSRS. BARCLAY & CO., LTD., 1, PALL MALL EAST, S.W.

                         Bankers in New York.

               THE MORTON TRUST CO., 38, NASSAU STREET.

              Agent for Distribution and Sale of Volumes.

     MR. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, GRAFTON STREET, NEW BOND STREET, W.


Annual Subscription.--One and a-half Guinea (in America, eight dollars).

The Hakluyt Society, established in 1846, has for its object the
printing of rare and valuable Voyages, Travels, Naval Expeditions, and
other geographical records. Books of this class are of the highest
interest to students of history, geography, navigation, and ethnology;
and many of them, especially the original narratives and translations of
the Elizabethan and Stuart periods, are admirable examples of English
prose at the stage of its most robust development.

The Society has not confined its selection to the books of English
travellers, to a particular age, or to particular regions. Where the
original is foreign, the work is given in English, fresh translations
being made, except where it is possible to utilise the spirited
renderings of the sixteenth or seventeenth century. The works selected
for reproduction are printed (with rare exceptions) at full length. Each
volume is placed in the charge of an editor especially competent--in
many cases from personal acquaintance with the countries described--to
give the reader such assistance as he needs for the elucidation of the
text. As these editorial services are rendered gratuitously, _the whole
of the amount received from subscribers is expended in the preparation
of the Society’s publications_.

One hundred volumes (forming Series I., see pages iv. to xiv.) were
issued from 1846 to 1898; thirty volumes of Series II. (see pages xv. to
xvii.) have been issued in the fourteen years ending 1912. A brief index
to these is given on pages xix. to xxiv., and a list of works in
preparation on page xviii.


The Annual Subscription of ONE AND A-HALF GUINEA--entitling the member
to the year’s publications--is due on January 1, and may be paid to

     Messrs. BARCLAY and CO., 1, Pall Mall East, London, S.W.;

     The MORTON TRUST CO., 38, Nassau Street, New York; or to

     Messrs. ASHER and CO., 56, Unter den Linden, Berlin.

Members have the sole privilege of purchasing back or current issues of
the Society; these tend to rise in value, and those which are out of
print are now only to be obtained at high prices.

The present scale of charges is as follows:--

  FIRST SERIES, _Sets_, omitting Nos. 1 to 10,
    12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 22, 25, 36, 37, and 42
  (79 vols)                                   £=41= =9=_s._ =6=_d._

  _Single Copies._--Nos. 29, 31, 34, 46, 47,
    51, 53, 55, 56, 58, 60 to 73, 76, 77, 79,
  80, 82 to 87, 90 to 94, 96, 97, 98, at           =10=_s._ =6=_d._

  Nos. 28, 30, 41, 45, 48, 49, 50, 57, 74, 78,
    81, 88, 89, 95, 100, at                        =15=_s._ =0=_d._

  Nos. 20, 21, 23, 27, 33, 35, 38, 39, 40, 43,
    44, 54, 59, 75, 99, at      =25=_s._ =0=_d._

  SECOND SERIES, Nos. 11 to 22, 28, 29, at         =10=_s._ =6=_d._

  Nos. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, at                  =15=_s._ =0=_d._

  Nos. 3, 5, 6, at                                 =25=_s._ =0=_d._

  _All other issues of this Series are out of print._

Gentlemen desiring to be enrolled as members should send their names to
the Hon. Secretary, with the form of Banker’s Order enclosed in this
Prospectus. Applications for back volumes should be addressed to the
Society’s Agent, MR. QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street,
London, W.


WORKS ALREADY ISSUED.

FIRST SERIES.

1847-1898.

1--The Observations of Sir Richard Hawkins, Knt.,

In his Voyage into the South Sea in 1593. Reprinted from the edition of
1622, and edited by ADMIRAL CHARLES RAMSAY DRINKWATER BETHUNE, C.B. pp.
xvi. 246. Index.

_(First Edition out of print. See No. 57.) Issued for 1847._

2--Select Letters of Christopher Columbus,

With Original Documents relating to the Discovery of the New World.
Translated and Edited by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A., Keeper of Maps,
British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. pp. xc. 240. Index.

(_First Edition out of print. See No. 43._ Two copies only were printed
on vellum, one of which is in the British Museum, C. 29. k. 14.)

_Issued for 1847._

3--The Discovery of the Large, Rich, & Beautiful Empire of Guiana,

With a relation of the great and golden City of Manoa (which the
Spaniards call El Dorado), &c., performed in the year 1595 by SIR WALTER
RALEIGH, Knt.... Reprinted from the edition of 1596. With some
unpublished Documents relative to that country. Edited with copious
explanatory Notes and a biographical Memoir by SIR ROBERT HERMANN
SCHOMBURGK, Ph. D. pp. lxxv. xv. 1 Map. Index.

_(Out of print. Second Edition in preparation.) Issued for 1848._

4--Sir Francis Drake his Voyage, 1595,

By THOMAS MAYNARDE, together with the Spanish Account of Drake’s attack
on Puerto Rico. Edited from the original MSS. by WILLIAM DESBOROUGH
COOLEY. pp. viii. 65.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1848._

5--Narratives of Voyages towards the North-West,

In search of a Passage to Cathay & India, 1496 to 1631. With selections
from the early Records of ... the East India Company and from MSS.
in the British Museum. Edited by THOMAS RUNDALL. pp. xx. 259. 2 Maps.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1849._

6--The Historie of Travaile into Virginia Britannia,

Expressing the Cosmographie and Commodities of the Country, together
with the manners and customs of the people, gathered and observed as
well by those who went first thither as collected by WILLIAM STRACHEY,
Gent., the first Secretary of the Colony. Now first edited from the
original MS. in the British Museum by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A.,
Keeper of Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. pp. xxxvi. 203. 1 Map. 6
Illus. Glossary. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1849._

7--Divers Voyages touching the Discovery of America.

And the Islands adjacent, collected and published by RICHARD HAKLUYT,
Prebendary of Bristol, in the year 1582. Edited, with notes & an
introduction by JOHN WINTER JONES, Principal Librarian of the British
Museum. pp. xci. 171. 6. 2 Maps, 1 Illus. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1850._

12--The Countries round the Bay of Bengal.

Edited, from an unpublished MS., 1669-79, by THOMAS BOWREY, by Col. SIR
RICHARD CARNAC TEMPLE, Bart., C.I.E. pp. lvi. 387. 19 Illus. & 1 Chart.
Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1903._

8--Memorials of the Empire of Japon,

In the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. (The Kingdome of Japonia.
Harl. MSS. 6249.--The Letters of Wm. Adams, 1611 to 1617.) With a
Commentary by THOMAS RUNDALL. pp. xxxviii. 186. 1 Map. 5 Illus.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1850._

9--The Discovery and Conquest of Terra Florida,

By Don Ferdinando de Soto, & six hundred Spaniards his followers.
Written by a Gentleman of Elvas, employed in all the action, and
translated out of Portuguese by RICHARD HAKLUYT. Reprinted from the
edition of 1611. Edited with Notes & an Introduction, & a Translation of
a Narrative of the Expedition by LUIS HERNANDEZ DE BIEDMA, Factor to the
same, by WILLIAM BRENCHLEY RYE, Keeper of Printed Books, British Museum.
pp. lxvii. 200. v. 1 Map. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1851._

10--Notes upon Russia,

Being a Translation from the Earliest Account of that Country, entitled
Rerum Muscoviticarum Commentarii, by the BARON SIGISMUND VON
HERBERSTEIN, Ambassador from the Court of Germany to the Grand Prince
Vasiley Ivanovich, in the years 1517 and 1526. Translated and Edited
with Notes & an Introduction, by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A., Keeper of
Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. Vol. 1. pp. clxii. 116. 2 Illus.

(Vol. 2 = No. 12.)

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1851._

11--The Geography of Hudson’s Bay,

Being the Remarks of Captain W. COATS, in many Voyages to that locality,
between the years 1727 and 1751. With an Appendix containing Extracts
from the Log of Captain MIDDLETON on his Voyage for the Discovery of the
North-west Passage, in H.M.S. “Furnace,” in 1741-3. Edited by JOHN
BARROW, F.R.S., F.S.A. pp. x. 147. Index.

_Issued for 1852._

12--Notes upon Russia,

(Vol. 1. = No. 10.) Vol. 2. pp. iv. 266. 2 Maps. 1 Illus. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1852._

13 A True Description of Three Voyages by the North-East,

Towards Cathay and China, undertaken by the Dutch in the years 1594,
1595 and 1596, with their Discovery of Spitzbergen, their residence of
ten months in Novaya Zemlya, and their safe return in two open boats. By
GERRIT DE VEER. Published at Amsterdam in 1598, & in 1609 translated
into English by WILLIAM PHILIP. Edited by CHARLES TILSTONE BEKE, Ph. D.,
F.S.A. pp. cxlii. 291. 4 Maps. 12 Illus. Index.

_(Out of print. See also No. 54.) Issued for 1853._

14-15--The History of the Great and Mighty Kingdom of China and the
Situation Thereof.

Compiled by the Padre JUAN GONZALEZ DE MENDOZA, & now reprinted from the
Early Translation of R. Parke. Edited by SIR GEORGE THOMAS STAUNTON,
Bart., M.P., F.R.S. With an Introduction by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A.,
Keeper of Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S., 2 vols. Index.

_(Vol. 14 out of print.) Issued for 1854._

16--The World Encompassed by Sir Francis Drake.

Being his next Voyage to that to Nombre de Dios. [By SIR FRANCIS DRAKE,
the Younger.] Collated with an unpublished Manuscript of Francis
Fletcher, Chaplain to the Expedition. With Appendices illustrative of
the same Voyage, and Introduction, by WILLIAM SANDYS WRIGHT VAUX,
F.R.S., Keeper of Coins, British Museum. pp. xl. 295. 1 Map. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1855._

17--The History of the Two Tartar Conquerors of China,

Including the two Journeys into Tartary of Father Ferdinand Verbiest, in
the suite of the Emperor Kang-Hi. From the French of Père PIERRE JOSEPH
D’ORLÉANS, of the Company of Jesus, 1688. To which is added Father
Pereira’s Journey into Tartary in the suite of the same Emperor. From
the Dutch of NICOLAAS WITSEN. Translated and Edited by the EARL OF
ELLESMERE. With an Introduction by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A., Keeper
of Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. pp. xv. vi. 153. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1855._

18--A Collection of Documents on Spitzbergen and Greenland,

Comprising a Translation from F. MARTENS’ Voyage to Spitzbergen, 1671; a
Translation from ISAAC DE LA PEYRÈRE’S Histoire du Groenland, 1663, and
God’s Power and Providence in the Preservation of Eight Men in Greenland
Nine Moneths and Twelve Dayes. 1630. Edited by ADAM WHITE, of the
British Museum. pp. xvi. 288. 2 Maps. Index.

_Issued for 1856._

19--The Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton to Bantam and the Maluco Islands,

Being the Second Voyage set forth by the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London trading into the East Indies. From the (rare)
Edition of 1606. Annotated and Edited by BOLTON CORNEY. M.R.S.L. pp. xi.
83. 52. viii. 3 Maps. 3 Illus. Bibliography. Index.

_(Out of print). Issued for 1856._

20--Russia at the Close of the Sixteenth Century.

Comprising the Treatise, “The Russe Commonwealth” by Dr. GILES FLETCHER,
and the Travels of SIR JEROME HORSEY, Knt., now for the first time
printed entire from his own MS. Edited by SIR EDWARD AUGUSTUS BOND,
K.C.B., Principal Librarian of the British Museum. pp. cxxxiv. 392.
Index.

_Issued for 1857._

21--History of the New World. By Girolamo Benzoni, of Milan.

Showing his Travels in America, from A.D. 1541 to 1556, with some
particulars of the Island of Canary. Now first Translated and Edited by
ADMIRAL WILLIAM HENRY SMYTH, K.S.F., F.R.S., D.C.L. pp. iv. 280. 19
Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1857._


22--India in the Fifteenth Century.

Being a Collection of Narratives of Voyages to India in the century
preceding the Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope; from Latin,
Persian, Russian, and Italian Sources. Now first Translated into
English. Edited with an Introduction by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A.,
Keeper of Maps, British Museum. pp. xc. 49. 39. 32. 10. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1858._


23--Narrative of a Voyage to the West Indies and Mexico,

In the years 1599-1602, with 4 Maps and 5 Illustrations. By SAMUEL
CHAMPLAIN. Translated from the original and unpublished Manuscript, with
a Biographical Notice and Notes by ALICE WILMERE. Edited by NORTON SHAW.
pp. xcix. 48.

_Issued for 1858._


24--Expeditions into the Valley of the Amazons, 1539, 1540, 1639,

Containing the Journey of GONZALO PIZARRO, from the Royal Commentaries
of Garcilasso Inca de la Vega; the Voyage of Francisco de Orellana, from
the General History of Herrera; and the Voyage of Cristoval de Acuña.
Translated and Edited by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.R., F.R.S.,
ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. lxiv. 190. 1 Map. List of Tribes in the Valley of
the Amazons.

_Issued for 1859._


25--Early Voyages to Terra Australis,

Now called Australia. A Collection of documents, and extracts from early
MS. Maps, illustrative of the history of discovery on the coasts of that
vast Island, from the beginning of the Sixteenth Century to the time of
Captain Cook. Edited with an Introduction by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR,
F.S.A., Keeper of Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. pp. cxix. 200. 13. 5
Maps. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1859._


26--Narrative of the Embassy of Ruy Gonzalez de Clavijo to the Court of
Timour, at Samarcand, A.D., 1403-6.

Translated for the first time with Notes, a Preface, & an introductory
Life of Timour Beg, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. pp. lvi. 200. 1 Map.

_Issued for 1860._


27--Henry Hudson the Navigator, 1607-13.

The Original Documents in which his career is recorded. Collected,
partly Translated, & annotated with an Introduction by GEORGE MICHAEL
ASHER, LL.D. pp. ccxviii. 292. 2 Maps. Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1860._


28--The Expedition of Pedro de Ursua and Lope de Aguirre,

In search of El Dorado and Omagua, in 1560-61. Translated from Fray
PEDRO SIMON’S “Sixth Historical Notice of the Conquest of Tierra Firme,”
1627, by WILLIAM BOLLAERT, F.R.G.S. With an Introduction by SIR CLEMENTS
R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. lii. 237. 1 Map.

_Issued for 1861._


29--The Life and Acts of Don Alonzo Enriquez de Guzman.

A Knight of Seville, of the Order of Santiago, A.D. 1518 to 1543.
Translated from an original & inedited MS. in the National Library at
Madrid. With Notes and an Introduction by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM,
K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. xxxv. 168. 1 Illus.

_Issued for 1862._

30--The Discoveries of the World,

From their first original unto the year of our Lord 1555. By ANTONIO
GALVANO, Governor of Ternate. [Edited by F. DE SOUSA TAVARES.]
Corrected, quoted, & published in England by RICHARD HAKLUYT, 1601. Now
reprinted, with the original Portuguese text (1563), and edited by
ADMIRAL CHARLES RAMSAY DRINKWATER BETHUNE, C.B. pp. iv. viiii. 242.

_Issued for 1862._

31--Mirabilia Descripta. The Wonders of the East.

By FRIAR JORDANUS, of the Order of Preachers & Bishop of Columbum in
India the Greater, _circa_ 1330. Translated from the Latin Original, as
published at Paris in 1839, in the _Recueil de Voyages et de Mémoires_,
of the Societé de Géographie. With the addition of a Commentary, by COL.
SIR HENRY YULE, K.C.S.I., R.E., C.B. pp. iv. xviii. 68. Index.

_Issued for 1863._

32--The Travels of Ludovico di Varthema,

In Egypt, Syria, Arabia, Persia, India, & Ethiopia, A.D. 1503 to 1508.
Translated from the original Italian edition of 1510, with a Preface, by
JOHN WINTER JONES, F.S.A., Principal Librarian of the British Museum, &
Edited, with Notes & an Introduction, by the REV. GEORGE PERCY BADGER.
pp. cxxi. 321. 1 Map. Index.

_Issued for 1863._


33--The Travels of Pedro de Cieza de Leon, A.D. 1532-50,

From the Gulf of Darien to the City of La Plata, contained in the first
part of his Chronicle of Peru (Antwerp, 1554). Translated & Edited, with
Notes & an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S.,
ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. xvi. lvii. 438. Index.

(Vol. 2 = No. 68.)

_Issued for 1864._


34--Narrative of the Proceedings of Pedrarias Davila,

In the Provinces of Tierra Firme or Castilla del Oro, & of the discovery
of the South Sea and the Coasts of Peru and Nicaragua. Written by the
Adelantado Pascual de Andagoya. Translated and Edited, with Notes & an
Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. pp. xxix. 88. 1 Map. Index.

_Issued for 1865._


35--A Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar,

In the beginning of the Sixteenth Century, by DUARTE BARBOSA, a
Portuguese. Translated from an early Spanish manuscript in the Barcelona
Library, with Notes & a Preface, by LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY. pp. xi.
336. 2 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1865._


36-37 Cathay and the Way Thither.

Being a Collection of mediæval notices of China, previous to the
Sixteenth Century. Translated and Edited by COLONEL SIR HENRY YULE,
K.C.S.I., R.E., C.B. With a preliminary Essay on the intercourse between
China & the Western Nations previous to the discovery of the Cape Route.
2 vols. 3 Maps. 2 Illus. Bibliography. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1866._


38--The Three Voyages of Sir Martin Frobisher,

In search of a Passage to Cathaia and India by the North-West, A.D.
1576-8. By GEORGE BEST. Reprinted from the First Edition of HAKLUYT’S
Voyages. With Selections from MS. Documents in the British Museum &
State Paper Office. Edited by ADMIRAL SIR RICHARD COLLINSON, K.C.B. pp.
xxvi. 376. 2 Maps. 1 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1867._


39--The Philippine Islands,

Moluccas, Siam, Cambodia, Japan, and China, at the close of the 16th
Century. By ANTONIO DE MORGA, 1609. Translated from the Spanish, with
Notes & a Preface, and a Letter from Luis Vaez de Torres, describing his
Voyage through the Torres Straits, by LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY. pp.
xxiv. 431. 2 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1868._


40--The Fifth Letter of Hernan Cortés,

To the Emperor Charles V., containing an Account of his Expedition to
Honduras in 1525-26. Translated from the original Spanish by DON PASCUAL
DE GAYANGOS. pp. xvi. 156. Index.

_Issued for 1868._


41--The Royal Commentaries of the Yncas.

By the YNCA GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA. Translated and Edited, with Notes &
an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. Vol. 1. (Books I.-IV.) pp. xi. 359. 1 Map. Index.

(Vol. 2. = No. 45.)

_Issued for 1869._


42--The Three Voyages of Vasco da Gama,

And his Viceroyalty, from the Lendas da India of GASPAR CORREA;
accompanied by original documents. Translated from the Portuguese, with
Notes & an Introduction, by LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY. pp. lxxvii. 430.
XXXV. 3 Illus. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1869._


43--Select Letters of Christopher Columbus.

With other Original Documents relating to his Four Voyages to the New
World. Translated and Edited by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A., Keeper of
Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. Second Edition. pp. iv. 142. 3 Maps. 1
Illus. Index.

(First Edition = No. 2.)

_Issued for 1870._


44--History of the Imâms and Seyyids of ’Omân,

By SATÎL-IBN-RAZÎK, from A.D. 661-1856. Translated from the original
Arabic, and Edited, with a continuation of the History down to 1870, by
the REV. GEORGE PERCY BADGER, F.R.G.S. pp. cxxviii. 435. 1 Map.
Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1870._


45--The Royal Commentaries of the Yncas.

By the YNCA GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA. Translated & Edited with Notes, an
Introduction, & an Analytical Index, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B.,
F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. Vol. II. (Books V.-IX.) pp. 553.

(Vol. 1. = No. 41.)

_Issued for 1871._


46--The Canarian,

Or Book of the Conquest and Conversion of the Canarians in the year
1402, by Messire JEAN DE BÉTHENCOURT, Kt. Composed by Pierre Bontier and
Jean le Verrier. Translated and Edited by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S.A.,
Keeper of Maps, British Museum, Sec. R.G.S. pp. lv. 229. 1 Map. 2 Illus.
Index.

_Issued for 1871._


47--Reports on the Discovery of Peru,

I. Report of FRANCISCO DE XERES, Secretary to Francisco Pizarro. II.
Report of MIGUEL DE ASTETE on the Expedition to Pachacamac. III. Letter
of HERNANDO PIZARRO to the Royal Audience of Santo Domingo. IV. Report
of PEDRO SANCHO on the Partition of the Ransom of Atahuallpa. Translated
and Edited, with Notes & an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM,
K.C.B, F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. xxii. 143. 1 Map.

_Issued for 1872._


48--Narratives of the Rites and Laws of the Yncas.

Translated from the original Spanish MSS., & Edited, with Notes and an
Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. pp. xx. 220. Index.

_Issued for 1872._


49--Travels to Tana and Persia,

By JOSAFA BARBARO and AMBROGIO CONTARINI. Translated from the Italian by
WILLIAM THOMAS, Clerk of the Council to Edward VI., and by E. A. ROY,
and Edited, with an Introduction, by LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY. pp. xi.
175. Index. A Narrative of Italian Travels in Persia, in the Fifteenth
and Sixteenth centuries. Translated and Edited by CHARLES GREY. pp.
xvii. 231. Index.

_Issued for 1873._


50--The Voyages of the Venetian Brothers, Nicolo & Antonio Zeno,

To the Northern Seas in the Fourteenth century. Comprising the latest
known accounts of the Lost Colony of Greenland, & of the Northmen in
America before Columbus. Translated & Edited, with Notes and
Introduction, by RICHARD HENRY MAJOR, F.S A., Keeper of Maps, British
Museum, Sec. R.G.S. pp. ciii. 64. 2 Maps. Index.

_Issued for 1873._


51--The Captivity of Hans Stade of Hesse in 1547-55,

Among the Wild Tribes of Eastern Brazil. Translated by ALBERT TOOTAL, of
Rio de Janiero, and annotated by SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON, K.C.M.G.
pp. xcvi. 169. Bibliography.

_Issued for 1874._


52--The First Voyage Round the World by Magellan. 1518-1521.

Translated from the Accounts of PIGAFETTA and other contemporary
writers. Accompanied by original Documents, with Notes & an
Introduction, by LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY. pp. lx. 257. xx. 2 Maps. 5
Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1874._


53--The Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque,

Second Viceroy of India. Translated from the Portuguese Edition of 1774,
and Edited by WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH, F.R.S.L., of the British Museum.
Vol. 1. pp. lx. 256. 2 Maps. 1 Illus. (Index in No. 69.)

(Vol. 2 = No. 55. Vol. 3 = No. 62. Vol. 4 = No. 69.)

_Issued for 1875._


54--The Three Voyages of William Barents to the Arctic Regions, in 1594,
1595, & 1596.

By GERRIT DE VEER. Edited, with an Introduction, by Lieut. KOOLEMANS
BEYNEN, of the Royal Netherlands Navy. Second Edition, pp. clxxiv. 289.
2 Maps. 12 Illus.

(First Edition = No. 13.)

_Issued for 1875._


55--The Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque,

Second Viceroy of India. Translated from the Portuguese Edition of 1774,
with Notes and an Introduction, by WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH, F.R.S.L., of
the British Museum. Vol. 2. pp. cxxxiv. 242. 2 Maps. 2 Illus. (Index in
No. 69.)

(Vol. 1 = No. 53. Vol. 3 = No. 62. Vol. 4 = No. 69.)

_Issued for 1875._


56--The Voyages of Sir James Lancaster, Knt., to the East Indies,

With Abstracts of Journals of Voyages to the East Indies, during the
Seventeenth century, preserved in the India Office & the Voyage of
Captain JOHN KNIGHT, 1606, to seek the North-West Passage. Edited by SIR
CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. xxii. 314.
Index.

_Issued for 1877._


57--The Hawkins’ Voyages,

During the reigns of Henry VIII, Queen Elizabeth, and James I. [Second
edition of No. 1.] Edited by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S.,
ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. lii. 453. 1 Illus. Index.

(First Edition = No. 1).

_Issued for 1877._


58--The Bondage and Travels of Johann Schiltberger, a Native of Bavaria,
in Europe, Asia, & Africa.

From his capture at the battle of Nicopolis in 1396 to his escape and
return to Europe in 1427. Translated from the Heidelberg MS., Edited in
1859 by Professor KARL FR. NEUMANN, by Commander JOHN BUCHAN TELFER,
R.N.; F.S.A. With Notes by Professor P. BRUUN, & a Preface,
Introduction, & Notes by the Translator & Editor. pp. xxxii. 263. 1 Map.
Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1878._


59--The Voyages and Works of John Davis the Navigator.

Edited by ADMIRAL SIR ALBERT HASTINGS MARKHAM. K.C.B. pp. xcv. 392. 2
Maps. 15 Illus. Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1878._


The Map of the World, A.D. 1600.

Called by Shakspere “The New Map, with the Augmentation of the Indies.”

To illustrate the Voyages of John Davis. _Issued for 1878._


60-61--The Natural & Moral History of the Indies,

By Father JOSEPH DE ACOSTA. Reprinted from the English Translated
Edition of Edward Grimston, 1604; and Edited by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM,
K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. Vol. 1, The Natural History Books,
I.-IV. pp. xlv. 295. Vol. 2, The Moral History Books, V.-VII. pp. xiii.
295-551. Index.

_Issued for 1879._


Map of Peru.

To Illustrate Nos. 33, 41, 45, 60, and 61.

_Issued for 1879._


62--The Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque,

Second Viceroy of India. Translated from the Portuguese Edition of 1774,
with Notes & an Introduction, by WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH, F.S.A., of the
British Museum. Vol. 3. pp. xliv. 308. 3 Maps. 3 Illus. (Index in No.
69.)

_Issued for 1880._


63--The Voyages of William Baffin, 1612-1622,

Edited, with Notes & an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM,
K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. lix. 192. 8 Maps, 1 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1880._


64--Narrative of the Portuguese Embassy to Abyssinia,

During the years 1520-1527. By Father FRANCISCO ALVAREZ. Translated from
the Portuguese & Edited, with Notes & an Introduction, by LORD STANLEY
OF ALDERLEY. pp. xxvii. 416. Index.

_Issued for 1881._


65--The History of the Bermudas or Summer Islands,

Attributed to Captain NATHANIEL BUTLER. Edited from a MS. in the Sloane
Collection, British Museum, by General SIR JOHN HENRY LEFROY, R.A.,
K.C.M.G., C.B., F.R.S. pp. xii. 327. 1 Map. 3 Illus. Glossary. Index.

_Issued for 1881._


66-67--The Diary of Richard Cocks,

Cape-Merchant in the English Factory in Japan, 1615-1622, with
Correspondence (Add. MSS. 31.300-1, British Museum). Edited by S¡R
EDWARD MAUNDE THOMPSON, K.C.B., Director of the British Museum. Vol. 1.
pp. liv. 349. Vol. 2. pp. 368. Index.

_Issued for 1882._


68--The Second Part of the Chronicle of Peru, 1532-1550,

By PEDRO DE CIEZA DE LEON. 1554. Translated and Edited, with Notes & an
Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. pp. lx. 247. Index.

(Vol. 1 = No. 33.)

_Issued for 1883._


69--The Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque,

Second Viceroy of India. Translated from the Portuguese Edition of 1774,
with Notes & an Introduction, by WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH, F.S.A., of the
British Museum. Vol. 4. pp. xxxv. 324. 2 Maps. 2 Illus. Index to the 4
vols.

(Vol. 1 = No. 53. Vol. 2 = No. 55. Vol. 3 = No. 62.)

_Issued for 1883._


70-71--The Voyage of John Huyghen van Linschoten to the East Indies.

From the Old English Translation of 1598. The First Book, containing his
Description of the East. In Two Volumes, Edited, the First Volume, by
the late ARTHUR COKE BURNELL, Ph.D., C.I.E., Madras C. S.; the Second
Volume, by PIETER ANTON TIELE, of Utrecht. Vol. 1. pp. lii. 307. Vol. 2.
pp. xv. 341. Index.

_Issued for 1884._


72-73--Early Voyages and Travels to Russia and Persia,

By ANTHONY JENKINSON and other Englishmen, with some account of the
first Intercourse of the English with Russia and Central Asia by way of
the Caspian Sea. Edited by EDWARD DELMAR MORGAN, and CHARLES HENRY
COOTE, of the British Museum. Vol. 1. pp. clxii. 176. 2 Maps. 2 Illus.
Vol. 2. pp. 177-496. 2 Maps. 1 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1885._


74-75--The Diary of William Hedges, Esq.,

Afterwards SIR WILLIAM HEDGES, during his Agency in Bengal; as well as
on his Voyage out and Return Overland (1681-1687). Transcribed for the
Press, with Introductory Notes, etc., by R. BARLOW, and Illustrated by
copious Extracts from Unpublished Records, etc., by Col. Sir HENRY YULE,
K.C.S.I., R.E., C.B., LL.D. Vol. 1. The Diary, with Index. pp. xii. 265.
Vol. 2. Notices regarding Sir William Hedges, Documentary Memoirs of Job
Charnock, and other Biographical & Miscellaneous Illustrations of the
time in India. pp. ccclx. 287. 18 Illus.

(Vol. 3 = No. 78.)

_Issued for 1886._


76-77--The Voyage of François Pyrard, of Laval, to the East Indies,

The Maldives, the Moluccas and Brazil. Translated into English from the
Third French Edition of 1619, and Edited, with Notes, by ALBERT GRAY,
K.C., assisted by HARRY CHARLES PURVIS BELL, Ceylon C. S. Vol. 1. pp.
lviii. 1 Map. 11 Illus. Vol. 2. Part 1. pp. xlvii. 287. 7 Illus.

(Vol. 2. Part II. = No. 80.)

_Issued for 1887._


78--The Diary of William Hedges, Esq.

Vol. 3. Documentary Contributions to a Biography of Thomas Pitt,
Governor of Fort St. George, with Collections on the Early History of
the Company’s Settlement in Bengal, & on Early Charts and Topography of
the Húglí River. pp. cclxii. 1 Map. 8 Illus. Index to Vols. 2, 3.

(Vols. 1, 2 = Nos. 74, 75.)

_Issued for 1888._


79--Tractatus de Globis, et eorum usu.

A Treatise descriptive of the Globes constructed by Emery Molyneux, and
Published in 1592. By ROBERT HUES. Edited, with annotated Indices & an
Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.

R.G.S. To which is appended,


Sailing Directions for the Circumnavigation of England,

And for a Voyage to the Straits of Gibraltar. From a Fifteenth Century
MS. Edited, with an Account of the MS., by JAMES GAIRDNER, of the Public
Record Office; with a Glossary by EDWARD DELMAR MORGAN. pp. l. 229. 37.
1 Illus. 1 Map.

_Issued for 1888._


80--The Voyage of François Pyrard, of Laval, to the East Indies, the
Maldives, the Moluccas, and Brazil.

Translated into English from the Third French Edition of 1619, and
Edited, with Notes, by ALBERT GRAY, K.C., assisted by HARRY CHARLES
PURVIS BELL, Ceylon Civil Service. Vol 2. Pt. II. pp. xii. 289-572. 2
Maps. Index.

(Vol 1. Vol. 2. Pt. I. = Nos. 76, 77.)

_Issued for 1889._


81--The Conquest of La Plata, 1535-1555.

I.--Voyage of ULRICH SCHMIDT to the Rivers La Plata and Paraguai, from
the original German edition, 1567. II. The Commentaries of Alvar Nuñez
Cabeza de Vaca. From the original Spanish Edition, 1555. Translated,
with Notes and an Introduction, by H. E. DON LUIS L. DOMINGUEZ, Minister
Plenipotentiary of the Argentine Republic. pp. xlvi. 282. 1 Map,
Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1889._


82-83--The Voyage of François Leguat, of Bresse, 1690-98.

To Rodriguez, Mauritius, Java, and the Cape of Good Hope. Transcribed
from the First English Edition, 1708. Edited and Annotated by Capt.
SAMUEL PASFIELD OLIVER, (late) R.A. Vol 1. pp. lxxxviii. 137. 1 Illus. 6
Maps. Bibliography. Vol. 2. pp. xviii. 433. 5 Illus. 5 Maps. Index.

_Issued for 1890._


84-85--The Travels of Pietro della Valle to India,

From the Old English Translation of 1664, by G. HAVERS. Edited, with a
Life of the Author, an Introduction & Notes by EDWARD GREY, late Bengal
C. S. Vol. 1. pp. lvi. 192. 2 Maps. 2 Illus. Bibliography. Vol. 2. pp.
xii. 193-456. Index.

_Issued for 1891._


86--The Journal of Christopher Columbus,

During his First Voyage (1492-93), and Documents relating to the Voyages
JOHN CABOT and GASPAR CORTE REAL. Translated, with Notes & an
Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. pp. liv. 259. 3 Maps. 1 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1892._


87--Early Voyages and Travels in the Levant,

I.--The Diary of Master THOMAS DALLAM, 1599-1600. II.--Extracts from the
Diaries of Dr. JOHN COVEL, 1670-1679. With some Account of the Levant
Company of Turkey Merchants. Edited by JAMES THEODORE BENT, F.S.A.,
F.R.G.S. pp. xlv. 305. Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1892._


88-89--The Voyages of Captain Luke Foxe, of Hull, and Captain Thomas
James, of Bristol,

In Search of a N.-W. Passage, 1631-32; with Narratives of the Earlier
North-West Voyages of Frobisher, Davis, Weymouth, Hall, Knight, Hudson,
Button, Gibbons, Bylot, Baffin, Hawkridge, & others. Edited, with Notes
& an Introduction, by ROBERT MILLER CHRISTY, F.L.S. Vol. 1. pp. ccxxxi.
259. 2 Maps. 2 Illus. Vol. 2. pp. viii. 261-681. 3 Maps. 1 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1893._


90--The Letters of Amerigo Vespucci,

And other Documents illustrative of his Career. Translated, with Notes &
an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres.
R.G.S. pp. xliv. 121. 1 Map. Index.

_Issued for 1894._


91--Narratives of the Voyages of Pedro Sarmiento de Gamboa to the
Straits of Magellan, 1579-80.

Translated and Edited, with Illustrative Documents and Introduction, by
SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., ex-Pres. R.G.S. pp. xxx. 401. 1
Map. Index.

_Issued for 1894._


92-93-94--The History and Description of Africa,

And of the Notable Things Therein Contained. Written by AL-HASSAN
IBN-MOHAMMED AL-WEZAZ AL-FASI, a Moor, baptized as GIOVANNI LEONE, but
better known as LEO AFRICANUS. Done into English in the year 1600 by
John Pory, and now edited with an Introduction & Notes, by Dr. ROBERT
BROWN. In 3 Vols. Vol. 1. pp. viii. cxi. 224. 4 Maps. Vol. 2. pp.
225-698. Vol. 3. pp. 699-1119. Index.

_Issued for 1895._


95--The Chronicle of the Discovery and Conquest of Guinea.

Written by GOMES EANNES DE AZURARA. Now first done into English and
Edited by CHARLES RAYMOND BEAZLEY, M.A., F.R.G.S., and EDGAR PRESTAGE,
B.A. Vol. 1. (Ch. i.--xl.) With Introduction on the Life & Writings of
the Chronicler. pp. lxvii. 127. 3 Maps. 1 Illus.

(Vol. 2 = No. 100.)

_Issued for 1896._


96-97--Danish Arctic Expeditions, 1605 to 1620. In Two Books.

Book 1. The Danish Expeditions to Greenland, 1605-07; to which is added
Captain JAMES HALL’S Voyage to Greenland in 1612. Edited by CHRISTIAN
CARL AUGUST GOSCH. pp. xvi. cxvii. 205. 10 Maps. Index.

_Issued for 1896._

Book 2. The Expedition of Captain JENS MUNK to Hudson’s Bay in search of
a North-West Passage in 1619-20. Edited by CHRISTIAN CARL AUGUST GOSCH.
pp. cxviii. 187. 4 Maps. 2 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1897._


98--The Topographia Christiana of Cosmas Indicopleustes, an Egyptian
Monk.

Translated from the Greek and Edited by JOHN WATSON MCCRINDLE, LL.D.,
M.R.A.S. pp. xii. xxvii. 398. 4 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1897._


99--A Journal of the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama, 1497-1499.

By an unknown writer. Translated from the Portuguese, with an
Introduction and Notes, by ERNEST GEORGE RAVENSTEIN, F.R.G.S. pp. xxxvi.
250. 8 Maps. 23 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1898._


100--The Chronicle of the Discovery and Conquest of Guinea.

Written by GOMES EANNES DE AZURARA. Now first done into English and
Edited by CHARLES RAYMOND BEAZLEY, M.A., F.R.G.S., and EDGAR PRESTAGE,
B.A. Vol. 2. (Ch. xli.--xcvii.) With an Introduction on the Early
History of African Exploration, Cartography, &c. pp. cl. 362. 3 Maps. 2
Illus. Index.

(Vol. 1 = No. 95.)

_Issued for 1898._



WORKS ALREADY ISSUED.

SECOND SERIES.

1899, etc.


1-2--The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to the Court of the Great Mogul,
1615-19.

Edited from Contemporary Records by WILLIAM FOSTER, B.A., of the India
Office. 2 vols. Portrait, 2 Maps, & 6 Illus. Index.


_(Out of print.) Issued for 1899._


3--The Voyage of Sir Robert Dudley to the West Indies and Guiana in
1594.

Edited by GEORGE FREDERIC WARNER, Litt.D., F.S.A., Keeper of
Manuscripts, British Museum. pp. lxvi. 104. Portrait, Map, & 1 Illus.
Index.

_Issued for 1899._


4--The Journeys of William of Rubruck and John of Pian de Carpine.

To Tartary in the 13th century. Translated and Edited by H. E. the Hon.
WM. WOODVILLE ROCKHILL. pp. lvi. 304. Bibliography. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1900._


5--The Voyage of Captain John Saris to Japan in 1613.

Edited by H. E. SIR ERNEST MASON SATOW, G.C.M.G. pp. lxxxvii. 242. Map,
& 5 Illus. Index.

_Issued for 1900._


6--The Strange Adventures of Andrew Battell of Leigh in Essex.

Edited by ERNEST GEORGE RAVENSTEIN, F.R.G.S. pp. xx. 210. 2 Maps.
Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1900._


7-8--The Voyage of Mendaña to the Solomon Islands in 1568.

Edited by the LORD AMHERST OF HACKNEY and BASIL THOMSON. 2 vols. 5 Maps,
& 33 Illus. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1901._


9--The Journey of Pedro Teixeira from India to Italy by land, 1604-05;

With his Chronicle of the Kings of Ormus. Translated and Edited by
WILLIAM FREDERIC SINCLAIR, late Bombay C. S., with additional Notes,
&c., by DONALD WILLIAM FERGUSON. pp. cvii. 292. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1901._


10--The Portuguese Expedition to Abyssinia in 1541, as narrated by

CASTANHOSO and BERMUDEZ. Edited by RICHARD STEPHEN WHITEWAY, late I.C.S.
With a Bibliography, by BASIL H. SOULSBY, F.S.A., Superintendent of the
Map Department, British Museum. pp. cxxxii. 296. Map, & 2 Illus.
Bibliography. Index.

_(Out of print.) Issued for 1902._


11--Early Dutch and English Voyages to Spitzbergen in the Seventeenth
Century,

Including HESSEL GERRITSZ. “Histoire du Pays nommé Spitsberghe,” 1613,
translated into English, for the first time, by BASIL H. SOULSBY,
F.S.A., of the British Museum: and JACOB SEGERSZ. van der Brugge,
“Journael of Dagh Register,” Amsterdam, 1634, translated into English,
for the first time, by J. A. J. DE VILLIERS, of the British Museum.
Edited, with introductions and notes by SIR MARTIN CONWAY. pp. xvi. 191.
3 Maps, & 3 Illus. Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1902._


13--The Voyage of Captain Don Felipe Gonzalez,

In the Ship of the Line San Lorenzo, with the Frigate Santa Rosalia in
company, to Easter Island, in 1770-1771. Preceded by an Extract from
Mynheer JACOB ROGGEVEEN’S Official Log of his Discovery of and Visit to
Easter Island in 1722. Translated, Annotated, and Edited by BOLTON
GLANVILL CORNEY, Companion of the Imperial Service Order. With a Preface
by Admiral SIR CYPRIAN BRIDGE, G.C.B. 3 Maps & 4 Illus. Bibliography.
Index, pp. lxxvii. 176.

_Issued for 1903._


14, 15--The Voyages of Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, 1595 to 1606.

Translated and Edited by SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B., Pres. R.G.S.,
President of the Hakluyt Society. With a Note on the Cartography of the
Southern Continent, and a Bibliography, by BASIL H. SOULSBY, F.S.A.,
Superintendent of the Map Department, British Museum. 2 vols. 3 Maps.
Bibliography. Index.

_Issued for 1904._


16--John Jourdain’s Journal of a Voyage to the East Indies, 1608-1617.

(Sloane MS. 858, British Museum). Edited by WILLIAM FOSTER, B.A., of the
India Office, pp. lxxxii. 394. With Appendices, A-F, and a Bibliography,
by BASIL H. SOULSBY, F.S.A. 4 Maps. Index.

_Issued for 1905._


17--The Travels of Peter Mundy in Europe and Asia, 1608-1667.

(Bodleian Library. Rawl. MSS. A. 315.) Vol. I. Travels in Europe,
1608-1628. Edited by Lieut.-Col. S¡R RICHARD CARNAC TEMPLE, Bart.,
C.I.E., Editor of “A Geographical Account of Countries round the Bay of
Bengal.” 3 Maps & 3 Illus. With a Bibliography, alphabetically arranged.
Index. pp. lxiii. 284.

_Issued for 1905._


18--East and West Indian Mirror.

By JORIS VAN SPEILBERGEN. An Account of his Voyage Round the World in
the years 1614 to 1617, including the Australian Navigations of JACOB LE
MAIRE. Translated from the Dutch edition, “Oost ende West-Indische
Spiegel, &c.,” _Nicolaes van Geelkercken: Leyden, 1619_, with Notes and
an Introduction, by JOHN A. J. DE VILLIERS, of the British Museum. With
a Bibliography & Index by BASIL H. SOULSBY, F.S.A. 26 Illus. & Maps.
Index. pp. lxi. 272.

_Issued for 1906._


19, 20.--A New Account of East India and Persia.

In eight Letters, being Nine Years’ Travels, begun 1672, and finished
1681. By JOHN FRYER, M.D., Cantabrig., and Fellow of the Royal Society.
_Printed by R. R. for Ri. Chiswell; at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul’s
Churchyard, London, 1688._ Fol. Edited, with Notes and an Introduction,
by WILLIAM CROOKE, B.A., Bengal Civil Service (retired), Editor of
“Hobson Jobson,” &c., &c. Vol. I-II.

_Issued for 1909 and 1912._


21--The Guanches of Tenerife, The Holy Image of Our Lady of Candelaria.

With the Spanish Conquest and Settlement. By the FRIAR ALONSO DE
ESPINOSA, of the Order of Preachers, 1594. Translated and Edited, with
Notes and an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B., President of
the Hakluyt Society. With a Bibliography of the Canary Islands, A.D.
1341-1907, chronologically arranged, with the British Museum
press-marks, and an alphabetical list of authors, editors, and titles. 2
Maps, by SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, and 4 Illus. Index. pp. xxvi. 221.

_Issued for 1907._


22--History of the Incas.

By PEDRO SARMIENTO DE GAMBOA. 1572. From the MS. sent to King Philip II.
of Spain, and now in the Göttingen University Library. And The Execution
of the Inca Tupac Amaru. 1571. By Captain BALTASAR DE OCAMPO, 1610.
(British Museum Add. MSS. 17, 585.) Translated and Edited, with Notes
and an Introduction, by SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B. 2 Maps, by GRAHAM
MACKAY, R.G.S., and 10 Illus. Index, pp. xxii. 395.

--Supplement. A Narrative of the Vice-Regal Embassy to Vilcabambal 1571,
and of the Execution of the Inca Tupac Amaru, Dec. 1571. By _Friar
Gabriel de Oviedo_, of Cuzco, 1573. Translated by SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM,
K.C.B. Index. pp. 397-412.

_Issued for 1907._


23, 24, 25--Conquest of New Spain.

The True History of the Conquest of New Spain. By BERNAL DÍAZ DEL
CASTILLO, one of its Conquerors. From the only exact copy made of the
Original Manuscript. Edited and published in Mexico, by GENARO GARCÍA,
1904. Translated into English, with Introduction and Notes, by ALFRED
PERCIVAL MAUDSLAY, M.A., Hon. Professor of Archæology, National Museum,
Mexico. Vols. I-III.

_Issued for 1908 and 1910._


26, 27.--Storm van’s Gravesande.

The Rise of British Guiana, compiled from his despatches, by C. A.
HARRIS, C.B., C.M.G., Chief Clerk, Colonial Office, and J. A. J. DE
VILLIERS, of the British Museum. 2 vols.

_Issued for 1911._


28.--Magellan’s Strait.

Early Spanish Voyages, edited, with Notes and Introduction, by SIR
CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B. pp. viii. 288.

_Issued for 1911._


29.--Book of the Knowledge.

Book of the Knowledge of all the Kingdoms, Lands and Lordships that are
in the World.... Written by a Spanish Franciscan in the Middle of the
XIV Century; published for the first time, with Notes, by MARCOS JIMENEZ
DE LA ESPADA. Translated and Edited by SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B. With
20 Coloured Plates. pp. xiii. 85.

_Issued for 1912._


30.--Conquest of New Spain.

The True History of the Conquest of New Spain. By BERNAL DÍAZ
CASTILLO.... Edited by GENARO GARCÍA. Translated, with Notes, by ALFRED
P. MAUDSLAY, M.A., Hon. Professor of Archæology. Vol. IV.

_Issued for 1912._


EXTRA SERIES


1-12--The Principal Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques, & Discoveries of
the English Nation,

Made by Sea or Over-land to the remote and farthest distant quarters of
the earth at any time within the compasse of these 1600 yeeres. By
RICHARD HAKLUYT, Preacher, and sometime Student of Christ Church in
Oxford. With an Essay on the English Voyages of the Sixteenth Century,
by WALTER RALEIGH, Professor of the English Language in the University
of Oxford. Index by Madame MARIE MICHON and Miss ELIZABETH CARMONT. 12
vols. James MacLehose & Sons: Glasgow, 1903-5.

(_Out of print._)


13--The Texts & Versions of John de Plano Carpini and William de
Rubruquis.

As printed for the first time by HAKLUYT in 1598, together with some
shorter pieces. Edited by CHARLES RAYMOND BEAZLEY, M.A., F.R.G.S. pp.
xx. 345. Index. University Press: Cambridge, 1903.

(_Out of print._)


14-33--Hakluytus Posthumus or Purchas His Pilgrimes.

Contayning a History of the World in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells by
Englishmen and others. By SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D. 20 vols. Maps & Illus.
With an Index by Madame MARIE MICHON. James MacLehose and Sons: Glasgow,
1905-7.


THE ISSUES FOR 1913 WILL BE:

     1. The War of Quito, by CIEZA DE LEON. Translated and Edited by SIR
     CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B.

     2. New Light on Drake. Spanish and Portuguese Documents relating to
     the circumnavigation voyage. Discovered, translated and annotated
     by MRS. ZELIA NUTTALL.

     3. The Quest and Occupation of Tahiti by Emissaries of Spain.
     Edited by B. GLANVILL CORNEY, I.S.O. Vol. I.


OTHER VOLUMES IN ACTIVE PREPARATION ARE:

     The Quest and Occupation of Tahiti. Edited by B. GLANVILL CORNEY,
     I.S.O. Vol. II.

_In Press._

     Cathay and the Way Thither. Being a collection of Mediæval Notices
     of China previous to the XVI Century. Translated and Edited by
     Colonel SIR HENRY YULE, K.C.S.I., R.E., C.B. A new Edition by
     Professor HENRI CORDIER, de l’Institut de France. 3 Vols.

_In Press._

     The Travels of Peter Mundy in Europe and Asia, 1608-1667. Edited by
     SIR RICHARD CARNAC TEMPLE, Bart., C.I.E. Vol. II.

     The True History of the Conquest of New Spain. By BERNAL DIAZ DEL
     CASTILLO. Translated, with Notes, by A. P. MAUDSLAY. Vol. V. and
     last.

     Jons Olafssonar Indiafara. An English translation, Edited by SIGFUS
     BLÖNDAL and SIR R. C. TEMPLE, Bart., C.I.E. 2 Vols.



INDEX TO THE FIRST AND SECOND SERIES OF THE SOCIETY’S PUBLICATIONS,
1847-1912.


Abd-er-Razzak, i. 22

Abyssinia, i. 32, 64; ii. 10

Acosta, Joseph de, i. 60, 61

Acuña, Cristoval de, i. 24; ii. 22

Adams, Will., i. 8, 66, 67; ii. 5

Africa, i. 21, 58, 82, 83, 92-94, 95, 100

Africa, East, i. 32, 35, 64; ii. 10

Africa, West, ii. 6

Aguirre, Lope de, i. 28, 47

Alaminos, Anton de, ii. 23

Albuquerque, Affonso de, i. 53, 55, 62, 69

Alcock, Thomas, i. 72, 73

Alessandri, Vincentio d’, i. 49

Al Hassan Ibn Muhammad. _See_ Hasan.

Alvarado, Pedro de, ii. 23

Alvarez, Francisco, i. 64

Alvo, Francisco, i. 52

Amapaia, i. 3

Amat y Junient, Manuel de, Viceroy of Peru, ii. 13

Amazon, i. 24

America, Central, i. 40

America, North, i. 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 18, 21, 23, 43, 50, 65, 96, 97

America, South, i. 3, 21, 24, 28, 33, 34, 41, 43, 45,
    47, 51, 60, 61, 68, 76, 77, 80, 81, 91; ii. 3, 13, 14, 15, 22

Amherst of Hackney, Lord, ii. 7, 8

Andagoya, Pascual de, i. 34; ii. 22

Angiolello, Giovanni Maria, i. 49

Angola, ii. 6

Aquines, Juan. _See_ Hawkins, Sir John.

Arabia, i. 32; ii. 16

Arctic Regions, i. 13, 54, 88, 89, 96, 97

Arias, Dr. Juan Luis, i. 25; ii. 14, 15

Arias d’Avila, Pedro, i. 21, 34, 47; ii. 22, 23

Arriaga y Rivera, Julian de, ii. 13

Arromaia, i. 3

Asher, George Michael, i. 27

Asia, i. 5, 8, 13-15, 17, 19, 22, 26, 35-39, 42, 44, 49,
    53-55, 58, 62, 66, 67, 69-78, 80, 82, 83, 87; ii. 1, 2, 4, 5, 12, 16, 17

Astete, Miguel de, i. 47; ii. 22

Atahualpa, i. 47, 68; ii. 22

Australasia, i. 25; ii. 7, 8, 14, 15, 18

Avila, Francisco de, i. 48; ii. 22

Avila, Pedro Arias d’. _See_ Arias d’Avila.

Azov, i. 49

Azurara, Gomes Eannes de. _See_ Eannes.


Badger, George Percy, i. 32, 44

Baffin, William, i. 5, 63, 88, 89

Balak, John, i. 13, 54

Bantam, i. 19

Barbaro, Giosafat, i. 49

Barbosa, Duarte, i. 35, 52

Barcelona MSS., i. 35

Bardsen, Ivar, i. 50

Barentsz., William, i. 13, 27, 54

Barker, Edmund, i. 56

Barlow, R., i. 74, 75, 78

Barrow, John, F.R.S., i. 11

Battell, Andrew, ii. 6

Beazley, Charles Raymond, i. 95, 100; Extra Ser. 13

Behrens, Carl Friedrich, ii. 13

Beke, Charles Tilstone, i. 13, 54

Bell, Harry Charles Purvis, i. 76, 77, 80

Belmonte y Bermudez, Luis de, ii. 14, 15

Bengal, i. 74, 75, 78; ii. 12

Bent, James Theodore, i. 87

Benzoni, Girolamo, i. 21

Bermudas, i. 65, 86

Bermudez, João, ii. 10

Beste, George, i. 38

Béthencourt, Jean de, i. 46; ii. 21

Bethune, Charles Ramsay Drinkwater, i. 1, 30

Beynen, Koolemans, i. 54

Biedma, Luis Hernandez de, i. 9

Bilot, Robert, i. 88, 89

Birch, Walter de Gray, i. 53, 55, 62, 69 Bollaert, William, i. 28

Bond, Sir Edward Augustus, K.C.B., i. 20

Bontier, Pierre, i. 16; ii. 21

Boty, Iver, i. 13

Bowrey, Thomas, ii. 12

Bracciolini, Poggio, i. 22

Brazil, i. 51, 76, 77, 80

Bridge, Admiral Sir Cyprian Arthur George, G.C.B., ii. 13

British Guiana, ii. 26, 27

British Museum MSS., i. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 16, 20, 25, 38, 52, 53, 55, 62,
65-67, 69; ii. 13, 16, 22

Brown, Dr. Robert, i. 92-94

Brugge, Jacob Segersz, van der. _See_ Segersz, Jacob.

Bruun, Philip, i. 58

Burnell, Arthur Coke, C.I.E., i. 70, 71

Burre, Walter, i. 19

Burrough, Christopher, i. 72, 73

Burrough, William, i. 72, 73

Burton, Sir Richard Francis, K.C.M.G., i. 51

Butler, Nathaniel, i. 65, 86

Button, Sir Thomas, i. 5, 88, 89

Bylot, Robert, i. 5, 63, 88, 89


Cabeça de Vaca, Alvar Nuñez. _See_ Nuñez Cabeça de Vaca.

Cabot, John, i. 86

Cabot, Sebastian, i. 5, 12

Cambodia, i. 39

_Canarian, The_, i. 46; ii. 21

Canary Islands, i. 21, 46; ii. 21

Candelaria, Our Lady of, ii. 21

Cape of Good Hope, i. 22, 36, 37, 82, 83

Carmont, Elizabeth, Extra Ser. 12

Carpino Joannes, de Plano. _See_ Joannes.

Caspian Sea, i. 72, 73

Cassano, Ussan, i. 49

Castanhoso, Miguel de, ii. 10

Castilla del Oro, i. 34, 47

Cathay, i. 5, 13, 36-38, 54; ii. 19, 20

Champlain, Samuel, i. 23

Chanca, Dr., i. 2, 43

Charles V., Emperor, i. 40, 47; ii. 22, 23, 24

Charnock, Job, i. 74, 75, 78

Cheinie, Richard, i. 72, 73

China, i. 5, 13-15, 17, 36, 37, 39, 54; ii. 19, 20

Christy, Robert Miller, i. 88, 89

Cieza de Leon, Pedro de, i. 33, 68; ii. 22

Cinnamon, Land of, i. 24

Clavigo, Ruy Gonzalez de. _See_ Gonzalez de Clavigo.

Cliffe, Edward, i. 16

Clifford, George, i. 59

Coats, William, i. 11

Cocks, Richard, i. 8, 66, 67

Cogswell, Joseph G., i. 27

Collinson, Sir Richard, K.C.B., i. 38

Columbus, Christopher: Journal, i. 86 Letters, i. 2, 43

Congo, ii. 6

Contarini, Ambrogio, i. 49

Conti, Nicolò, i. 22

Conway, Sir William Martin, ii. 11

Cooley, William Desborough, i. 4

Cook, Captain James, i. 25

Coote, Charles Henry, i. 72, 73

Corney, Bolton, i. 19

Corney, Bolton Glanvill, I.S.O., ii. 13

Correa, Gaspar, i. 42

Corte Real, Gaspar, i. 86

Cortés, Hernando, i., 21, 40; ii. 23, 24, 25

Cosmas Indicopleustes, i. 98

Covel, John, i. 87

Crosse, Ralph, i. 56

Crooke, William, ii. 19, 20

Cumberland, Earl of, i. 59

Cuzco, i. 47; ii. 22


Dalboquerque, Afonso. _See_ Albuquerque.

Dallam, Thomas, i. 87

Dalrymple, Alexander, i. 25; ii. 14, 15

Dampier, William, i. 25

Danish Arctic Expeditions, i. 96, 97

Darien, Gulf of, i. 33

Dati, Giuliano, i. 2, 43

Davila, Pedrarias. _See_ Arias d’Avila.

Davis, Edward, ii. 13

Davis, John, i. 5, 59, 88, 89

De Villiers, John Abraham Jacob, ii. 11, 18, 26, 27

Díaz, Juan, _Clerigo_, ii. 23

Díaz del Castillo, Bernal, ii. 23, 24, 25, 30

Digges, Sir Dudley, i. 63

Dominguez, Don Luis L., i. 81

Donck, Adrian van der, i. 27

Dorado, El, i. 3, 28; ii. 26, 27

Doughty, Thomas, i. 16

Downton, Nicholas, i. 56

Drake, Sir Francis, i. 4, 16

Drake, Sir Francis, the Younger, i. 16

Dryandri, Joh., i. 51

Ducket, Jeffrey, i. 72, 73

Dudley, Sir Robert, ii. 3

Dutch Voyages, i. 13; ii. 11, 13, 18


East India, ii. 19, 20

East India Company, i. 5, 19

East Indies. _See_ India.

Easter Island, ii. 13

Eannes, Gomes, de Zurara, i. 95, 100

Egerton MSS., ii. 13

Eden, Richard, i. 12

Edwards, Arthur, i. 72, 73

Egypt, i. 32

El Dorado, i. 3, 28; ii. 26, 27

Ellesmere, Earl of, i. 17

Elvas, Gentleman of, i. 9

Emeria, i. 3

England, Circumnavigation of, i. 79

Engronelanda, i. 50

Enriquez de Guzman, Alonzo, i. 29

Eslanda, i. 50

Espinosa, Alonso de, ii. 21

Estotilanda, i. 50

Ethiopia. _See_ Abyssinia.

Europe, i. 10, 12, 13, 18, 20, 49, 54, 58, 64, 72, 73, 79; ii. 9, 11, 17


Ferguson, Donald William, ii. 9

Fernandez de Quires, Pedro de. _See_ Quiros.

Figueroa, Christoval Suarez de. _See_ Suarez de Figueroa.

Fletcher, Francis, i. 16

Fletcher, Giles, i. 20

Florida, i. 7, 9

Fort St. George, i. 74, 75, 78

Foster, William, B.A., ii. 1, 2, 16

Fotherby, Robert, i. 63

Fox, Luke, i. 5, 88, 89

Foxe, Luke. _See_ Fox.

Frislanda, i. 50

Frobisher, Sir Martin, i. 5, 38, 88, 89

Fryer, John, ii. 19, 20

_Furnace_, H.M.S., i. 11


Gairdner, James, i. 79

Galvão, Antonio, i. 30

Gama, Christvoão da, ii. 10

Gama, Vasco da, i. 42, 99

Gamboa, Pedro Sarmiento de. _See_ Sarmiento de Gamboa.

Garcia, Genaro, ii. 23, 24, 25, 30

Garcilasso de la Vega, _el Inca_, i. 24, 41, 45; ii. 22

Gastaldi, Jacopo, i. 12

Gatonbe, John, i. 63

Gayangos, Pascual de, i. 40; ii. 22

Gerritsz., Hessel, i. 27, 54; ii. 11

Gibbons, William, i. 5, 88, 89

Gibraltar, Straits of, i. 79

Globes, i. 79

_God’s Power & Providence_, i. 18

Gonzalez de Clavijo. Ruy, i. 26; ii. 21

González y Haedo, Felipe, ii. 13

Gosch, Christian Carl August, i. 96, 97

Gray, Albert, K.C., i. 76, 77, 80

Great Mogul, ii. 1, 2

Greenland, i. 18, 50, 96, 97

Grey, Charles, i. 49

Grey, Edward, i. 84, 85

Grijalva, Juan de, ii. 23

Grimston, Edward. _See_ Grimstone.

Grimstone, Edward, i. 60, 61

Guanches, ii. 21

Guiana, i. 3; ii. 3

Guinea, i. 95, 100; ii. 6


Hackit, Thomas, i. 7

Hakluyt, Richard: Divers Voyages, i. 7 Galvano, i. 30 Principall
Navigations, i. 16, 20, 38, 59; Extra Ser. 1-12 Terra Florida, i. 9 Will
of, i. 7

Hall, James, i. 5, 88, 89, 96, 97

Harleian MSS., i. 8

Harris, C. A., ii. 26, 27

Hasan Ibn Muhammad, al Wazzān, al Fāsi, i. 92-94

Havers, George, i. 84, 85

Hawkins, Sir John, i. 1, 57

Hawkins, Sir Richard, i. 1, 57

Hawkins, William, i. 57

Hawkridge, William, i. 88, 89

Hedges, Sir William, i. 74, 75, 78

Heidelberg MS., i. 58

Herberstein, Sigismund von, i. 10, 12

Hernandez de Biedma, Luis, i. 9

Herrera, Antonio de, i. 24; ii. 22, 23

Hervé, Juan, ii. 13

Honduras, i. 40

Horsey, Sir Jerome, i. 20

Houtman’s Abrolhos, i. 25

Howard, Eliot, ii. 12

Hudson, Henry, i. 13, 27, 88, 89

Hudson’s Bay, i. 11, 96, 97

Hues, Robert, i. 79

Hugli River, i. 78; ii. 12


Icaria, i. 50

Imâms and Seyyids of Omân, i. 44

Incas, i. 41, 45, 47, 48; ii. 22

Incas, Rites and Laws, i. 48; ii. 22

Incas, Royal Commentaries, i. 41, 45; ii. 22

India, i. 5, 22, 32, 38, 42, 53, 55, 56, 69, 62, 70, 71, 74-78, 80, 84,
85; ii. 1, 2, 9, 12, 16, 17

India Office MSS., i. 5, 56, 66, 67

Indian Language, Dictionarie of the, i. 6

Italy, ii. 9


James I., i. 19

James, Thomas, i. 5, 88, 89

Janes, John, i. 59

Japan, i. 8, 39, 66, 67; ii. 5

Java, i. 82, 83

Jeannin, P., i. 27

Jenkinson, Anthony, i. 72, 73

Joannes, de Plano Carpino, ii. 4; Extra Ser. 13

Jones, John Winter, i. 7, 22, 32

Jordanus [Catalani], i. 31

Jourdain, John, ii. 16

Jovius, Paulas, i. 12

Juet, Robert, i. 27


Keeling, William, i. 56

Knight, John, i. 5, 56, 88, 89


Lambrechtsen, i. 27

Lancaster, Sir James, i. 56

La Peyrère, Isaac de, i. 18

La Plata, City, i. 33

La Plata, River, i. 81

Lefroy, Sir John Henry, K.C.M.G., i. 65, 86

Leguat, François, i. 82, 83

Le Maire, Jacob, ii. 18

_Lendas da India_, i. 42

Leo Africanus, i. 92-94

Leone, Giovanni, i. 92-94

Leupe, P. A., i. 25

Levant, i. 87

Le Verrier, Jean, i. 46; ii. 21

Leza, Gaspar Gonzalez de, i. 39; ii. 14, 15

Linschoten, Jan Huyghen van, i. 70, 71


McCrindle, John Watson, i. 89

Madras, i. 74, 75, 78

Madrid MSS., i. 29

Magellan, Ferdinand, i. 52

Magellan, Straits of, i. 91; ii. 18

Major, Richard Henry, i. 2, 6, 10, 12, 14, 15, 17, 22, 25, 43, 46, 50

Malay Archipelago, ii. 16, 18

Malabar, i. 35

Maldive Islands, i. 76, 77, 80

Maluco Islands. _See_ Molucca Islands.

Manoa, i. 3

Markham, Sir Albert Hastings, K.C.B., i. 59

Markham, Sir Clements Robert, K.C.B., i. 24, 26, 28, 29, 33, 34, 41, 56,
57, 60, 61, 63, 68, 79, 86, 90, 91; ii. 14, 15, 21, 22, 28, 29

Martens, Friedrich, i. 18

Maudslay, Alfred Percival, ii. 23, 24, 25, 30

Mauritius, i. 82, 83

Maynarde, Thomas, i. 4

Mendaña de Neyra, Alvaro, i. 25, 39; ii. 7, 8, 14, 15

Mendoza, Juan Gonzalez de, i. 14, 15

Mexico, i. 23; ii. 23, 24, 25, 30

Michon, Marie, Extra Ser., 12, 33

Middleton, Christopher, i. 11

Middleton, Sir Henry, i. 19, 56

_Mirabilia Descripta_, i. 31

Mogul, The Great, ii. 1, 2

Molucca Island, i. 19, 39, 52, 76, 77, 80

Molyneux, Emery, i. 79

Montezuma, i. 61; ii. 23, 24

Morga, Antonio de, i. 39; ii. 11, 15

Morgan, Henry, i, 59

Morgan, Edward Delmar, i. 72, 73, 79, 83, 86

Mundy, Peter, ii. 17

Munk, Jens, i. 96, 97

Münster, Sebastian, i. 12

Muscovy Company, i. 7, 63; ii. 11


Neumann, Karl Friedrich, i. 58

New Hebrides, ii. 14, 15

New Spain, ii. 23, 24, 25, 30

New World, i. 2, 43

Nicaragua, i. 34

Nicopolis, i. 58

Nikitin, Athanasius, i. 22

Nombre de Dios, i. 16

Norsemen in America, i. 2, 50

North-East Voyages, i. 13

North-West Passage, i. 5, 11, 38, 56, 88, 89, 96, 97

Northern Seas, i. 50

Nova Zembla, i. 13, 54

Nuñez Cabeça de Vaca, Alvar, i. 81


Ocampo, Baltasar de, ii. 22

Olaondo, Alberto, ii. 13

Olid, Cristóval de, ii. 23

Oliver, Samuel Pasfield, i. 82, 83

Omagua, i. 28

’Omân, i. 44

Ondegardo, Polo de, i. 48; ii. 22

Orellana, Francisco de, i. 24

Orléans, Pierre Joseph d’, i. 17

Ormuz, Kings of, ii. 9

Oviedo, Gabriel de, ii. 22


Pachacamac, i. 47; ii. 22

Pacific Ocean, i. 1. 34, 57; ii. 13, 18

Paraguay, River, i. 81

Parke, Robert, i. 14, 15

Pellham, Edward, i. 18

Pelsart, Francis, i. 25

Pereira, Thomas, i. 17

Persia, i. 32, 49, 72, 73; ii. 19, 20

Peru, i. 33, 34, 41, 45, 47, 60, 61, 68; ii. 22

Peru, Chronicle of, i. 33, 68

Philip, William, i. 13, 54

Philippine Islands, i. 39

Pigafetta, Antonio, i. 52

Pitt Diamond, i. 78

Pitt, Thomas, i. 74, 75, 78

Pizarro, Francisco, i. 21, 47; ii. 22

Pizarro, Gonzalo, i. 21, 24, 47; ii. 22

Pizarro, Hernando, i. 47; ii. 22

Pochahontas, i. 6

Pool, Gerrit Thomasz., i. 25

Portugal, i. 64; ii. 10

Pory, John, i. 92-94

Powhatan, i. 6

Prado y Tovar, Don Diego de, ii. 14, 15

Prestage, Edgar, i. 95, 100

Prester John, i. 64; ii. 10

Pricket Abacuk, i. 27

Public Record Office MSS., i. 38

Puerto Rico, i. 4

Purchas, Samuel, i. 13, 56, 63; Extra Ser. 14-33

Pyrard, François, i. 76, 77, 80


Quatremère, i. 22

Quiros, Pedro Fernandez de, i. 25, 39; ii. 14, 15


Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 3

Raleigh, Walter, _Professor_, Extra Ser. 12

Ramusio, Giovanni Battista, i. 49, 52

Ravenstein, Ernest George, i. 99; ii. 6

Rawlinson MSS., ii. 17

_Recueil de Voyages_, i. 31

Remón, Alonzo, ii. 23

Ribault, John, i. 7

Rockhill, William Woodville, ii. 4

Rodriguez, Island, i. 82, 83

Roe, Sir Thomas, ii. 1, 2

Roggeveen, Jacob, ii. 13

Roy, Eugene Armand, i. 49

Rubruquis, Gulielmus de, ii. 4; Extra Ser. 13

Rundall, Thomas, i. 5, 8

_Russe Commonwealth_, i. 20

Russia, i. 10, 12, 20, 72, 73

Rye, William Brenchley, i. 9


Salil-Ibn-Ruzaik, i. 44

Samarcand, i. 26

Sancho, Pedro, i. 47; ii. 22

Santo-Stefano, Hieronimo di, i. 22

Saris, John, i. 8; ii. 5

Sarmiento de Gamboa, Pedro, i. 91; ii. 22

Satow, Sir Ernest Mason, G.C.M.G., ii. 5

Schiltberger, Johann, i. 58

Schmidel, Ulrich, i. 81

Schmidt. Ulrich. _See_ Schmidel.

Schomburgk, Sir Robert Hermann, i. 3

Schouten, Willem Cornelisz., ii. 18

Scory, Sir Edmund, ii. 21

_Seaman’s Secrets_, i. 59

Segersz., Jacob, ii. 11

Sellman, Edward, i. 38

Shakspere’s “New Map,” i. 59

Sharpeigh, Alexander, i. 56

Shaw, Norton, i. 23

Siam, i. 39

Simon, Pedro, i. 28

Sinclair, William Frederic, ii. 9

Sloane MSS. i. 25, 65; ii. 16

Smith, Capt. John, i. 65, 86

Smith, Sir Thomas, i. 19, 63, 65

Smyth, William Henry, i. 21

Solomon Islands, ii. 7, 8, 14, 15

Somers, Sir George, i. 65

Soto, Ferdinando de, i. 9, 47

Soulsby, Basil Harrington, ii. 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 18

Sousa Tavares, Francisco de, i. 30

South Sea. _See_ Pacific Ocean.

Spanish MSS., i. 29, 48

Spanish Voyages, i. 25, 39; ii. 7, 8, 13, 14, 15

Speilbergen, Joris van, ii. 18

Spitsbergen, i. 13, 18, 54; ii. 11

Staden, Johann von, i. 51

Stanley of Alderley, Lord, i. 35, 39, 42, 52, 64

Staunton, Sir George Thomas, Bart., i. 14, 15

Stere, William, i. 13

Storm van’s Gravesande, ii. 26, 27

Strachey, William, i. 6

Suarez de Figueroa, Christoval, i. 57; ii. 14, 15

Summer Islands, i. 65, 86

Syria, i. 32


Tabasco, ii. 23

Tahiti, ii. 13

Tamerlane, The Great, i. 26

Tana (Azov), i. 49

Tapía, Andrés de, ii. 23

Tartary, i. 17; ii. 1, 2, 4

Tavares, Francisco de Sousa. _See_ Sousa Tavares, F. de.

Teixeira, Pedro, ii. 9

Telfer, John Buchan, i. 58

Temple, Sir Richard Carnac, Bart., ii. 12, 17

Tenerife, ii. 21

Terra Australis, i. 25

Terra Florida, i. 9

Thomas, William, i. 49

Thompson, Sir Edward Maunde, K.C.B., i. 66, 67

Thomson, Basil Home, ii. 7, 8

Thorne, Robert, i. 7

Tiele, Pieter Anton, i. 70, 71

Tierra Firme, i. 28, 34, 47

Timour, Great Khan, i. 26

Toledo, Francisco de, Viceroy of Peru. ii. 22

Tootal, Albert, i. 51

_Topographia Christiana_, i. 98

Torquemada, Fray Juan de, ii. 14, 15

Torres, Luis Vaez de, i. 25, 39; ii. 14, 15

Toscanelli, Paolo, i. 86

Towerson, Gabriel, i. 19

_Tractatus de Globis_, i. 79

Transylvanus, Maximilianus, i. 52

Tupac Amaru, _Inca_, ii. 22

Turbervile, George, i. 10

Turkey Merchants, i. 87


Ursua, Pedro de, i. 28, 47


Valle, Pietro della, i. 84, 85

Varthema, Ludovico di, i. 19, 32

Vaux, William Sandys Wright, i. 16

Vaz, Lopez, i. 16

Veer, Gerrit de, i. 13, 54

Velásquez, Diego, ii. 23

Vera Cruz, ii. 23

Verarzanus, John, i. 7, 27

Verbiest, Ferdinand, i. 17

Vespucci, Amerigo, i. 90

Vilcapampa, ii. 22

Virginia Britannia, i. 6

Vivero y Velasco, Rodrigo de, i. 8

Vlamingh, Willem de, i. 25

Volkersen, Samuel, i. 25


Warner, George Frederic, Litt.D., ii. 3

Weigates, Straits of, i. 13, 54

West Indies, i. 4, 23; ii. 3, 23

Weymouth, George, i. 5, 88, 89

White, Adam, i. 18

Whiteway, Richard Stephen, ii. 10

Wielhorsky, i. 22

William of Rubruck. _See_ Rubruquis, Gulielmus de.

Wilmere, Alice, i. 23

Winter, John, i. 16

Witsen, Nicolaas, i. 17, 25

Wolstenholme, Sir John, i. 63, 88, 89

_Worlde’s Hydrographical Description_, i. 59

Wright, Edward, i. 59


Xeres, Francisco de, i. 47; ii. 22


Yncas. _See_ Incas.

Yucatan, ii. 23

Yule, Sir Henry, K.C.S.L., i. 31, 36, 37, 74, 75, 78; ii. 19, 20


Zeno, Antonio, i. 50

Zeno, Caterino, i. 49

Zeno, Nicolo, i. 50

Zychman, i. 51




LAWS OF THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.

I. The object of this Society shall be to print, for distribution among
the members, rare and valuable Voyages, Travels, Naval Expeditions, and
other geographical records.

II. The Annual Subscription shall be One and a-half Guinea (for America,
eight dollars, U.S. currency), payable in advance on the 1st January.

III. Each member of the Society, having paid his Subscription, shall be
entitled to a copy of every work produced by the Society, and to vote at
the general meetings within the period subscribed for; and if he do not
signify, before the close of the year, his wish to resign, he shall be
considered as a member for the succeeding year.

IV. The management of the Society’s affairs shall be vested in a Council
consisting of twenty-two members, viz., a President, three
Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, a Secretary, and sixteen ordinary members,
to be elected annually; but vacancies occurring between the general
meetings shall be filled up by the Council.

V. A General Meeting of the Subscribers shall be held annually. The
Secretary’s Report on the condition and proceedings of the Society shall
be then read, and the meeting shall proceed to elect the Council for the
ensuing year.

VI. At each Annual Election, three of the old Council shall retire.

VII. The Council shall meet when necessary for the dispatch of business,
three forming a quorum, including the Secretary; the Chairman having a
casting vote.

VIII. Gentlemen preparing and editing works for the Society, shall
receive twenty-five copies of such works respectively.



LIST OF MEMBERS.--1913.[88]

_Members are requested to inform the Hon. Secretary of any errors or
alterations in this List._


  1899 Aberdare, The Right Hon. Lord, 83, Eaton Square, S.W.
  1847 Aberdeen University Library, Aberdeen.
  1895 Adelaide Public Library, North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia.
  1847 Admiralty, The, Whitehall, S.W. [2 COPIES.]
  1847 Advocates’ Library, 11, Parliament Square, Edinburgh.
  1899 Alexander, William Lindsay, Esq., Pinkieburn, Musselburgh, N.B.
  1847 All Souls College, Oxford.
  1847 American Geographical Society, 11, West 81st Street, New York City, U.S.A.
  1906 Andrews, Michael C., Esq., 17, University Square, Belfast.
  1847 Antiquaries, The Society of, Burlington House, Piccadilly, W.
  1909 Armstrong, Capt. B. H. O., R. E., 5, Gliddon Road, West Kensington.
  1847 Army and Navy Club, 36, Pall Mall, S.W.
  1847 Athenæum Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
  1912 Aylward, R. M., Esq., 7ª Avenida Sur, No. 87, Guatemala.

  1899 Baer, Joseph & Co., Messrs., Hochstrasse 6, Frankfort-on-Main, Germany.
  1847 Bagram, John Ernest, Esq., 10, Old Post Office Street, Calcutta.
  1912 Baird, H. A., Esq., West House, Bothwell, N.B.
  1909 Baldwin, Stanley, Esq., M.P., Astley Hall, nr. Stourport.
  1899 Ball, John B., Esq., Ashburton Cottage, Putney Heath, S.W.
  1893 Barclay, Hugh Gurney, Esq., Colney Hall, Norwich.
  1911 Barwick, G. F., Esq., British Museum.
  1899 Basset, M. René, Directeur de l’Ecole Supérieure des Lettres d’Alger, Villa Louise, rue Denfert Rochereau, Algiers.
  1894 Baxter, Hon. James Phinney, Esq., 61, Deering Street, Portland, Maine, U.S.A.
  1896 Beaumont, Admiral Sir Lewis Anthony, G.C.B., K.C.M.G., St. Georges, Hurstpierpoint, Sussex.
  1904 Beetem, Charles Gilbert, Esq., 110, South Hanover Street, Carlisle, Pa., U.S.A.
  1899 Belfast Library and Society for Promoting Knowledge, Donegall Square North, Belfast.
  1896 Belhaven and Stenton, Col. The Right Hon. the Lord, R.E., 41, Lennox Gardens, S.W. (_Vice-President_).
  1847 Berlin Geographical Society (Gesellschaft für Erdkunde), Wilhelmstrasse 23, Berlin, S.W., 48.
  1847 Berlin, the Royal Library of, Opernplatz, Berlin, W.
  1847 Berlin University, Geographical Institute of, Georgenstrasse 34-36, Berlin, N.W. 7.
  1847 Bewsher, F. W., Esq., St. Paul’s School, Kensington, W.
  1911 Bingham, Professor Hiram, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
  1899 Birmingham Central Free Library, Ratcliff Place, Birmingham.
  1847 Birmingham Old Library, The, Margaret Street, Birmingham.
  1910 Birmingham University Library.
  1911 Blake, Dr. Joseph A., 601, Madison Avenue, New York.
  1899 Board of Education, The Keeper, Science Library, Science Museum, South Kensington, S.W.
  1847 Bodleian Library, Oxford.
  1894 Bonaparte, H. H. Prince Roland Napoléon, Avenue d’Jéna 10, Paris.
  1847 Boston Athenæum Library, 10-1/2, Beacon Street, Boston, Mass., U.S.A.
  1847 Boston Public Library, Copley Square, Boston, Mass., U.S.A.
  1899 Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine, U.S.A.
  1894 Bower, Major-General Hamilton, c/o Messrs. Cox and Co., 16, Charing Cross.
  1896 Bowring, Sir Thomas B., 7, Palace Gate, Kensington, W.
  1912 Boyd-Richardson, Lieutenant S. B., R.N., Leybourne, Witley, nr. Godalming, Surrey.
  1906 Brereton, The Rev. William, The Rectory, Steeple Gidding, Peterboro’.
  1893 Brighton Public Library, Royal Pavilion, Church Street, Brighton.
  1890 British Guiana Royal Agricultural and Commercial Society, Georgetown, Demerara.
  1847 British Museum. Department of British and Mediæval Antiquities.
  1847 British Museum. Department of Printed Books.
  1896 Brock, Henry G., Esq., 1612, Walnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.
  1909 Brooke, John Arthur, Esq., J.P., Fenay Hall, Huddersfield.
  1899 Brookline Public Library, Boston, Mass., U.S.A.
  1899 Brooklyn Mercantile Library, 197, Montague Street, Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
  1899 Brown, Arthur William Whateley, Esq., 62, Carlisle Mansions, Carlisle Place, Victoria Street, S.W.
  1896 Buda-Pesth, The Geographical Institute of the University of, Hungary.
  1910 Buenos Aires, Biblioteca Nacional (c/o E. Terquem, 19, Rue Scribe, Paris).
  1899 Burdekin, Benjamin Thomas, Esq., The Terrace, Eyam, Sheffield.
  1890 Burns, Capt. John William, Leesthorpe Hall, Melton Mowbray.

  1903 California, University of, Berkeley, Cal., U.S.A.
  1847 Cambridge University Library, Cambridge.
  1911 Canada, Department of the Naval Service, Ottawa.
  1847 Canada, The Parliament Library, Ottawa.
  1896 Cardiff Public Library, Trinity Street, Cardiff.
  1847 Carlisle, The Rt. Hon. the Earl of, Naworth Castle, Bampton, Cumberland.
  1847 Carlton Club Library, 94, Pall Mall, S.W.
  1899 Carnegie Library, Pittsburgh, Pa., U.S.A.
  1910 Cattarns, Richard, Esq., 7, Gloucester Terrace, Regent’s Park, N.W.
  1894 Chamberlain, Right Hon. Joseph, M.P., 40, Princes Gardens, S.W.
  1899 Chambers, Captain Bertram Mordaunt, R.N., Navy Office, Melbourne.
  1910 Chapelot et Cie., 30, Rue et Passage Dauphine, Paris.
  1910 Chicago, Geographical Society of, P.O. Box 223, Chicago.
  1899 Chicago Public Library, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1899 Chicago University Library, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1896 Christ Church, Oxford.
  1847 Christiania University Library, Christiania, Norway.
  1899 Cincinnati Public Library, Ohio, U.S.A.
  1907 Clark, Arthur H., Esq., Caxton Buildings, Cleveland, Ohio.
  1903 Clay, John, Esq., University Press and Burrell’s Corner, Cambridge.
  1909 Close, A.M., Esq.
  1908 Close, Lieut.-Col. Charles Frederick, C.M.G., R.E., Ordnance Survey Office, Southampton.
  1847 Colonial Office, The, Downing Street, S. W.
  1899 Columbia University, Library of, New York, U.S.A.
  1896 Conway, Sir William Martin, Allington Castle, Maidstone, Kent.
  1903 Cooke, William Charles, Esq., Vailima. Bishopstown, Cork.
  1847 Copenhagen Royal Library (Det Store Kongelige Bibliotek). Copenhagen.
  1894 Cora, Professor Guido, M.A., Via Nazionale, 181, Rome.
  1847 Cornell University. Ithaca. New York, U.S.A.
  1903 Corney, Bolton Glanvill, Esq., I.S.O., 19, Abingdon Court, Kensington, W.
  1899 Corning, C. R., Esq., 36 Wall Street. New York.
  1893 Cow, John, Esq., Elfinsward, Hayward’s Heath, Sussex.
  1902 Cox, Alexander G., Esq., Imperial Railways of North China, Tientsin.
  1908 Crewdson, W., Esq., J. P., Southside, St. Leonards-on-Sea.
  1904 Croydon Public Libraries. Central Library, Town Hall, Croydon.
  1893 Curzon of Kedleston, The Right Hon. Earl, G.M.S.I., G.M.I.E., 1, Carlton House Terrace, S.W.
  1911 Cutting, Lady Sybil, c/o the Earl of Desart, 2, Rutland Gardens, S.W.

  1847 Dalton, Rev. Canon John Neale, C.M.G., C.V.O., 4, The Cloisters, Windsor.
  1899 Dampier, Gerald Robert, Esq., I.C.S., Dehra Dun, N.W.P., India.
  1899 Danish Royal Naval Library (Det Kongelige Danske Søkaart Archiv), Copenhagen.
  1908 Darwin, Major Leonard, late R.E., 12. Egerton Place, S.W.
  1894 De Bertodano, Baldomero Hyacinth, Esq., Cowbridge House, Malmesbury, Wilts.
  1911 Delbanco, D., Esq., 9, Mincing Lane, E.C.
  1899 Detroit Public Library, Michigan, U.S.A.
  1893 Dijon University Library, Rue Monge, Dijon, Cóte d’Or, France.
  1899 Dresden Geographical Society (Verein für Erdkunde), Kleine Brüdergasse 21^{11}, Dresden.
  1902 Dublin, Trinity College Library.
  1910 Dunn, J. H., Esq., Coombe Cottage, Kingston Hill, S.W.

  1899 École Française d’Extrême Orient, Hanoi, Indo-Chine Française.
  1892 Edinburgh Public Library, George IV. Bridge, Edinburgh.
  1847 Edinburgh University Library, Edinburgh.
  1847 Edwards, Francis, Esq., 83, High Street, Marylebone, W.
  1906 Enoch Pratt Free Library, Baltimore, Md., U.S.A.
  1912 Ewing, Arthur, Esq., R.M.S. “Carnarvon.” Devonport.

  1910 Fairbrother. Colonel W. T., C.B., Indian Army. Bareilly, N.P., India.
  1911 Fayal, The Most Noble the Marquis de. Lisbon.
  1899 Fellowes Athenæum, 46, Millmont Street, Boston, Mass., U.S.A.
  1894 Fisher, Arthur, Esq., The Mazry, Tiverton, Devon.
  1896 Fitzgerald, Captain Edward Arthur, 5th Dragoon Guards.
  1847 Foreign Office of Germany (Auswärtiges Amt), Wilhelmstrasse, Berlin, W.
  1893 Forrest, George William, Esq., C.I.E., Rose Bank, Iffley, Oxford.
  1902 Foster, Francis Apthorp, Esq., Edgartown, Mass., U.S.A.
  1893 Foster, William, Esq., C.I.E., India Office, S.W.
  1910 Fraser, Lovat, Esq., The White House, Slough.

  1911 Garcia, Señor Genaro, Apartado 337, Mexico D.F.
  1847 George, Charles William, Esq., 51, Hampton Road, Bristol.
  1901 Gill, William Harrison, Esq., Marunouchi. Tokyo (c/o Messrs. Nichols, Ocean House, 24/5, Great Tower Street, E.C.)
  1847 Glasgow University Library, Glasgow.
  1880 Godman, Frederick Du Cane, Esq., D.C.L., F.R.S., 45, Pont Street, S.W.
  1905 Goldie, The Right. Hon. Sir George Taubman, K.C.M.G., F.R.S., Naval & Military Club, Piccadilly, W.
  1847 Göttingen University Library, Göttingen, Germany.
  1877 Gray, Albert, Esq., K.C. (_President_), Catherine Lodge, Trafalgar Square, Chelsea, S.W.
  1894 Gray, Matthew Hamilton, Esq., Lessness Park, Abbey Wood, Kent.
  1903 Greenlee, William B., Esq., 130 Kenesaw Terrace, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1899 Griffiths, John G., Esq., 4, Hyde Park Gardens, W.
  1899 Grosvenor Library, Buffalo, N.Y., U.S.A.
  1847 Guildhall Library, E.C.
  1887 Guillemard, Francis Henry Hill, Esq., M.A., M.D., The Old Mill House, Trumpington, Cambridge.

  1910 Hackley Public Library, Muskegon, Mich., U.S.A.
  1847 Hamburg Commerz-Bibliothek, Hamburg, Germany.
  1901 Hammersmith Public Libraries, Carnegie (Central) Library, Hammersmith, W.
  1898 Hannen, The Hon. Henry Arthur, The Hall, West Farleigh, Kent.
  1913 Hargreaves, Walter Ernest, Esq., Nazeing, Essex.
  1906 Harrison, Carter H., Esq. (c/o Messrs. Stevens and Brown).
  1905 Harrison, William P., Esq., 1523, Park Street, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1847 Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A.
  1899 Harvie-Brown, John Alexander, Esq., Dunipace, Larbert, Stirlingshire.
  1887 Heawood, Edward, Esq., M.A., Church Hill, Merstham, Surrey (_Treasurer_).
  1899 Heidelberg University Library, Heidelberg (Koestersche Buchhandlung).
  1904 Henderson, George, Esq., Tower House, The Park, Harrow.
  1903 Henderson, Turner, Esq., Studley Priory, Oxford.
  1890 Hervey, Dudley Francis Amelius, Esq., C.M.G., Westfields, Aldeburgh, Suffolk.
  1899 Hiersemann, Herr Karl Wilhelm, Königsstrasse, 3, Leipzig.
  1874 Hippisley, Alfred Edward, Esq., 8, Herbert Crescent, Hans Place, W.
  1904 Holdich, Colonel Sir Thomas Hungerford, K.C.M.G., K.C.I.E., C.B., R.E., 41, Courtfield Road, S.W.
  1899 Hoover, Herbert Clarke, Esq., The Red House, Hornton Street, Kensington, W.
  1887 Horner, Sir John Francis Fortescue, K.C.V.O., Mells Park, Frome, Somerset.
  1911 Hoskins, G. H., Esq., Sidney.
  1890 Hoyt Public Library, East Saginaw, Mich., U.S.A.
  1909 Hubbard, H. M., Esq., H6, The Albany, Piccadilly, W.
  1899 Hügel, Baron Anatole A. A. von. Curator, Museum of Archæology and Ethnology, Cambridge.
  1894 Hull Public Libraries, Baker Street, Hull.

  1899 Im Thurn, Sir Everard, K.C.M.G., C.B., 39, Lexham Gardens, W.
  1847 India Office, Downing Street, S.W. [20 COPIES.]
  1899 Ingle, William Bruncker, Esq., 4, Orchard Road, Blackheath, S.E.
  1892 Inner Temple, Hon. Society of the, Temple, E.C.

  1899 Jackson, Stewart Douglas, Esq., 61, St. Vincent Street, Glasgow.
  1898 James, Arthur Curtiss, Esq., 92 Park Avenue, New York City, U.S.A.
  1911 James, Norman, N. W. James Lumber Co., Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A.
  1896 James, Walter B., Esq., M.D., 17, West 54th Street, New York City, U.S.A.
  1912 Jenkins, Captain F. W. R., Apartado 331, Guatemala.
  1907 Johannesburg Public Library, Johannesburg, South Africa.
  1847 John Carter Brown Library, 357, Benefit Street, Providence, Rhode Island, U.S.A.
  1847 John Rylands Library, Deansgate, Manchester.
  1847 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md., U.S.A.
  1899 Johnson, W. Morton, Esq., Woodleigh, Altrincham.
  1910 Jones, L. C, Esq., M.D., Falmouth, Mass., U.S.A.

  1903 Kansas University Library, Lawrence, Kans., U.S.A.
  1887 Keltie, John Scott, Esq., LL.D., Secretary R.G.S., 1, Savile Row, Burlington Gardens, W.
  1909 Kesteven, C. H., Esq., 2, Hungerford Street, Calcutta.
  1899 Kiel, Royal University of, Kiel, Schleswig-Holstein.
  1899 Kimberley Public Library, Kimberley, Cape Colony.
  1907 Kindberg, Herrn Captain J. P., Göteborg, Sweden.
  1898 Kinder, Claude William, Esq., C.M.G., Kelvin, Avondale Road, Fleet, Hants.
  1890 King’s Inns, The Hon. Society of the, Henrietta Street, Dublin.
  1899 Kitching, John, Esq., Oaklands, Queen’s Road, Kingston Hill, S.W.
  1899 Klincksieck, M. Charles, 11, Rue de Lille, Paris.
  1912 Koebel, W. H., Esq., Author’s Club, 2, Whitehall Court, S.W.
  1910 Koninklijk Instituut voor de Taal Land en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indie. The Hague.

  1899 Langton, J. J. P., Esq., 802, Spruce Street, St. Louis, Mo., U.S.A.
  1899 Larchmont Yacht Club, Larchmont, N. Y., U.S.A.
  1899 Leeds Library, 18, Commercial Street, Leeds.
  1912 Legislative Library. Victoria, British Columbia.
  1899 Lehigh University, South Bethlehem, Pa., U.S.A.
  1893 Leipzig, Library of the University of Leipzig.
  1912 Leland Stanford Junior University, Library of, Stanford University, Cal., U.S.A.
  1899 Levy, Judah, Esq., 17, Greville Place, N.W.
  1905 Lincoln, Arthur, Esq., 7, Nassau Street, New York City, U.S.A.
  1912 Lind, Walter, Esq., 1º Calle, Guatemala, C.A.
  1899 Lindsay-Smith, Fred. Alex., Esq., J.P., 18, Sussex Place, Regent’s Park.
  1847 Liverpool Free Public Library, William Brown Street, Liverpool.
  1896 Liverpool Geographical Society, 14, Hargreaves Buildings, Chapel Street, Liverpool.
  1899 Liverpool, University of Liverpool.
  1911 Loder, Gerald W. E., Esq., F.S.A., Wakehurst Place, Ardingly, Sussex.
  1899 Loescher, Messrs. J., and Co., Via Due Macelli, 88.
  1899 Logan, William, Esq., Heatheryhaugh, Moffat, Dumfriesshire.
  1847 London Institution, 11, Finsbury Circus, E.C.
  1847 London Library, 12, St. James’s Square, S.W.
  1895 Long Island Historical Society, Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
  1899 Los Angeles Public Library, Los Angeles, Cal., U.S.A.
  1899 Lowrey, Joseph, Esq., The Hermitage, Loughton, Essex.
  1912 Luard, Major Charles Eckford, M.A., D.S.O., Indore, Central India.
  1880 Lucas, Sir Charles Prestwood, K.C.M.G., C.B., 65, St. George’s Square, S.W.
  1895 Lucas, Frederic Wm., Esq., 21, Surrey Street, Strand, W.C.
  1912 Lukach, H. C. Esq., M.A., Government House, Cyprus.
  1898 Lydenberg, H. M., Esq., New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue and Forty-second Street, New York City, U.S.A.
  1880 Lyons University Library, Lyon, France.
  1899 Lyttleton-Annesley, Lieut.-General Sir Arthur Lyttelton, K.C.Y.O., Templemere, Oatlands Park, Weybridge.

  1910 McCulloch, H. A., Esq., Banco Aleman Transatlantico, Buenos Aires.
  1910 MacDonald, H. E., The Right Hon. Sir Claude M., G.C.M.G., G.C.V.O., K.C.B., British Embassy, Tokio, Japan.
  1899 Macrae, Charles Colin. Esq., 93, Onslow Gardens, S.W.
  1908 Maggs Brothers, Messrs., 109, Strand, W.C.
  1847 Manchester Public Free Libraries, King Street, Manchester.
  1899 Manierre, George, Esq., 112w, Adams Street, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1880 Markham, Admiral Sir Albert Hastings, K.C.B., 6, Marble Arch, W.
  1852 Markham, Sir Clements Robert, K.C.B., F.R.S., 21, Eccleston Square, S.W. (_Vice-President_).
  1892 Marquand, Henry, Esq., Whitegates Farm, Bedford, New York, U.S.A.
  1899 Martelli, Ernest Wynne, Esq., 4, New Square, Lincoln’s Inn, W.C.
  1847 Massachusetts Historical Society, 1154, Boylston Street, Boston, Mass., U.S.A.
  1899 Massie, Major Roger Henry, R.A., Rangoon.
  1905 Maudslay, Alfred Percival, Esq., Morney Cross, Hereford.
  1899 McClurg, Messrs. A. C., & Co., 215-221, Wabash Avenue, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1901 Merriman, J. A., Esq., Standard Bank of South Africa, Durban.
  1911 Messer, Allan E., Esq., 2, Lyall Street, Belgrave Square, S.W.
  1893 Michigan, University of, Ann Arbor, Mich., U.S.A.
  1899 Middletown, Conn., Wesleyan University Library, U.S.A.
  1904 Mikkelsen, Michael A., Esq., 610, South Fifth Avenue, Mt. Vernon, New York.
  1847 Mills, Colonel Dudley Acland, R.E., Droaks, Beaulieu, Hants.
  1912 Milward, Graham, Esq., 77, Colmore Row, Birmingham
  1896 Milwaukee Public Library, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, U.S.A.
  1895 Minneapolis Athenæum, Minneapolis, Minn., U.S.A.
  1899 Minnesota Historical Society, St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A.
  1899 Mitchell Library, 21, Miller Street, Glasgow.
  1899 Mitchell, Wm., Esq., 14, Forbesfield Road, Aberdeen.
  1899 Monson, The Right Hon. Lord, C.V.O., Burton Hall, Lincoln.
  1901 Moreno, Dr. Francisco J., La Plata Museum, La Plata, Argentine Republic.
  1893 Morris, Henry Cecil Low, Esq., M.D., Gothic Cottage, Bognor, Sussex.
  1899 Morrison, George Ernest, Esq., M.D., _Times_ Correspondent, c/o H.B.M. Legation, Peking.
  1911 Morrison, R. E., Esq., Ardoch, Partickhill, Glasgow.
  1899 Morrisson, James W., Esq., 200-206, Randolph Street, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1895 Moxon, Alfred Edward, Esq., c/o Mrs. Gough, The Lodge, Souldern, nearBanbury.
  1847 Munich Royal Library (Kgl. Hof u. Staats-Bibliothek), Munich, Germany.

  1899 Nathan, Lt.-Col. Sir Matthew, G.C.M.G., R.E., Brandon House, Kensington Palace Gardens, W.
  1894 Naval and Military Club. 94, Piccadilly, W.
  1909 Nebraska University Library, Lincoln, Nebraska, U.S.A.
  1880 Netherlands, Royal Geographical Society of the (Koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap), Singel 421, Amsterdam.
  1899 Netherlands, Royal Library of the, The Hague.
  1847 Newberry Library, The, Chicago, Ill., U.S.A.
  1847 Newcastle-upon-Tyne Literary and Philosophical Society, Westgate Road, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
  1899 Newcastle-upon-Tyne Public Library, New Bridge Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
  1894 New London Public Library, Conn., U.S.A.
  1899 New South Wales, Public Library of, Sydney, N.S.W.
  1899 New York Athletic Club, Central Park, South, New York City, U.S.A.
  1895 New York Public Library. 40, Lafayette Place, New York City, U.S.A.
  1847 New York State Library, Albany, New York, U.S.A.
  1894 New York Yacht Club, 37 West 44 Street, New York City, U.S.A.
  1897 New Zealand, The High Commissioner for, 13, Victoria Street, S.W.
  1911 Nijhoff, Martinus, The Hague, Holland.
  1896 North Adams Public Library, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
  1893 Northcliffe, The Right Hon. Lord, Elmwood, St. Peter’s, Thanet.
  1899 Nottingham Public Library, Sherwood Street, Nottingham.

  1890 Oriental Club, 18, Hanover Square, W.
  1902 Otani, Kozui, Esq., Nishi Honganji, Horikawa, Kyoto, Japan.
  1899 Oxford and Cambridge Club, 71, Pall Mall, S.W.
  1847 Oxford Union Society, Oxford.

  1911 Pan-American Union, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
  1847 Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, Rue de Richelieu, Paris.
  1847 Paris, Institut de France, Quai de Conti 23, Paris.
  1899 Parlett, Harold George, Esq., H.B.M. Consulate, Dairen, Japan.
  1880 Peabody Institute, Baltimore, Md., U.S.A.
  1908 Pearson, Dr. F. S., Coombe House, Kingston Hill, S.W.
  1847 Peckover of Wisbech, The Right Hon. Lord, Bank House, Wisbech (_Vice President_).
  1896 Peech, W. H., Esq., St. Stephen’s Club. Westminster, S.W.
  1893 Peek, Sir Wilfred, Bart., c/o Mr. Grover, Rousdon, Lyme Regis.
  1911 Penrose, R. A. F., Esq., Bullitt Buildings, Philadelphia, U.S.A.
  1899 Pequot Library, Southport, Conn., U.S.A.
  1880 Petherick, Edward Augustus, Esq., Commonwealth Library, Melbourne, Australia.
  1895 Philadelphia Free Library, Pa., U.S.A.
  1899 Philadelphia, Library Company of, N.W. corner Juniper & Locust Streets, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.
  1899 Philadelphia, Union League Club, 8, Broad Street, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.
  1899 Philadelphia, University Club, 1510 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.
  1909 Plymouth, Officers’ Library, Royal Marine Barracks.
  1899 Plymouth Proprietary and Cottonian Library, Cornwall Street, Plymouth.
  1899 Portico Library, 57, Mosley Street, Manchester.
  1911 Pykett, The Rev. G. F., Anglo-Chinese School, Methodist Epis. Mission, Penang.

  1894 Quaritch, Bernard Alfred, Esq., 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. (12 COPIES).

  1890 Raffles Museum and Library, Singapore.
  1910 Reeves, E. A., Esq., Map-Curator, R.G.S., Hillside, Reigate Road, Reigate.
  1847 Reform Club, 104, Pall Mall, S.W.
  1899 Reggio, André C., Esq., 43, Tremont Street, Boston, Mass., U.S.A.
  1895 Rhodes, Josiah, Esq., The Elms, Lytham, Lancashire.
  1907 Ricketts, D. P., Esq., Imperial Chinese Railways, Tientsin, China.
  1882 Riggs, T. L., Esq., 1311, Mass. Avenue, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
  1911 Rio de Janeiro, Archivo Publico Nacional, Sa da Republica, No. 26.
  1887 Rockhill, H.E. the Hon. William Woodville, United States Ambassador, Constantinople.
  1899 Rodd, H.E. The Right Hon. Sir James Rennell, G.C.V.O., K.C.M.G., C.B., British Embassy, Rome.
  1898 Röhrscheid and Ebbecke, Herrn, Am Hof, 28, Bonn, Germany.
  1906 Rotterdamsch Leeskabinet, Rotterdam.
  1911 Royal Anthropological Institute, 50, Great Russell Street, W.C.
  1893 Royal Artillery Institution, Woolwich.
  1847 Royal Colonial Institute, Northumberland Avenue, W.C.
  1896 Royal Cruising Club, 1, Bolton Street, Piccadilly, W.
  1847 Royal Engineers’ Institute, Chatham.
  1847 Royal Geographical Society, Kensington Gore, W.
  1890 Royal Scottish Geographical Society, Synod Hall, Castle Terrace, Edinburgh.
  1897 Royal Societies Club, 63, St. James’s Street, S.W.
  1847 Royal United Service Institution, Whitehall, S.W.
  1899 Runciman, The Right Hon. Walter, M.P., Doxford, Chathill, Northumberland.
  1904 Ruxton, Captain Upton Fitz Herbert, Little Drove House, Singleton, Sussex.
  1900 Ryley, John Horton, Esq., 8, Rue d’Auteuil, Paris.

  1899 St. Andrews University, St. Andrews.
  1899 St. Deiniol’s Library, Hawarden, Flintshire, N. Wales.
  1893 St. John’s, New Brunswick, Free Public Library.
  1890 St. Louis Mercantile Library, St. Louis, Mo., U.S.A.
  1899 St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields Free Public Library, 115, St. Martin’s Lane, W.C.
  1847 St. Petersburg University Library, St. Petersburg.
  1894 St. Wladimir University, Kiew, Russia.
  1911 Saise, Walter, Esq., D.Sc, M. Inst. C.E., Stapleton, Bristol.
  1912 Sanford, J. B., Esq., H.B.M. Vice-Consul, Monterrey, N. L., Mexico.
  1899 San Francisco Public Library, San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.
  1899 Sclater, Dr. William Lutley, Odiham Priory, Winchfield.
  1899 Seattle Public Library, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
  1906 Seligmanu, Charles Gabriel, Esq., M.B., 36, Finchley Road, N.W.
  1894 Seymour, Admiral of the Fleet the Right Hon. Sir Edward Hobart, G.C.B., O.M., G.C.V.O., LL.D., Queen Anne’s Mansions. St. James’s Park, S.W.
  1898 Sheffield Free Public Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield.
  1847 Signet Library, 11, Parliament Square, Edinburgh.
  1890 Sinclair, Mrs. William Frederic, 102, Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, S.W.
  1910 Skimming, E. H. B., Esq., 6, Cleveland Terrace, W.
  1912 Skipper, Mervyn G., Esq., care of Eastern Extensions Tel. Co., Penang.
  1904 Smith, John Langford, Esq., H.B.M. Consular Service, China, c/o E. Greenwood, Esq., Frith Knowl, Elstree.
  1906 Smith, J. de Berniere, Esq., 4, Gloucester Terrace, Regent’s Park, N.W.
  1913 Smith, The Right Hon. James Parker, Jordanhill, Glasgow.
  1896 Smithers, F. Oldershaw, Esq., Dashwood House, 9, New Broad Street, E.C.
  1899 Societá Geografica Italiana, Via del Plebiscito 102, Rome.
  1847 Société de Géographie, Boulevard St. Germain, 184, Paris.
  1909 Solomon, Sir E. P., The Senate, Cape Town.
  1899 South African Public Library, Queen Victoria Street, Cape Town, South Africa.
  1904 Stanton, John, Esq., High Street, Chorley, Lancashire.
  1912 Stein, Herr Johann, K. Ungar. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, Kolozsvar, Hungary.
  1847 Stevens, Son, and Stiles, Messrs. Henry, 39, Great Russell Street, W.C.
  1847 Stockholm, Royal Library of (Kungl. Biblioteket), Sweden.
  1895 Stockton Public Library, Stockton, Cal., U.S.A.
  1905 Storer, Albert H., Esq., Ridgefield, Ct., U.S.A.
  1890 Strachey, Lady, 67, Belsize Park Gardens, N.W.
  1904 Suarez, Colonel Don Pedro (Bolivian Legation), Santa Cruz, 74, Compayne Gardens, N.W.
  1909 Swan, J. D. C., Dr., 25, Ruthven Street, Glasgow.
  1908 Sydney, University of, New South Wales.
  1899 Sykes, Major Percy Molesworth, C.M.G., Queen’s Bays, H.M.’s Consul General for Khorasan, Meshed, _viâ_ Berlin and Askhabad, Transcaspia, Russia.
  1910 Symon, The Hon. Sir Josiah, K.C.M.G., K.C., Gladstone Chambers, Adelaide.

  1899 Tangye, Richard Trevithick Gilbertstone, Esq., LL.B., 40, Bramham Gardens, S.W.
  1894 Taylor, Captain William Robert, 1, Daysbrook Road, Streatham Hill, S.W.
  1910 Teleki, Count Paul, Joszef-tér., 7, Budapest V.
  1899 Temple, Lieut.-Col. Sir Richard Carnac, Bart., C.I.E., The Nash, nr. Worcester.
  1894 Thomson, Basil Home, Esq., 81, Victoria Road, Kensington, W.
  1906 Thomson, Colonel Charles FitzGerald, late 7th Hussars, St. James’s Club, 106, Piccadilly, W.
  1896 Tighe, Walter Stuart, Esq., Rossanagh, Ashford, Co. Wicklow.
  1904 Todd, Commander George James, R.N., The Manse, Kingsbarns, Fife.
  1896 Toronto Public Library, Toronto, Ont., Canada.
  1890 Toronto University, Toronto, Ont., Canada.
  1911 Tower, Sir Reginald, K.C.M.G., C.V.O., 8, Baker Street, Portman Square, W.
  1847 Travellers’ Club, 106, Pall Mall, S.W.
  1899 Trinder, Arnold, Esq., River House, Walton-on-Thames.
  1899 Trinder, Oliver Jones, Esq., Cedar Grange, Caterham Valley, Surrey.
  1847 Trinity College, Cambridge.
  1847 Trinity House, The Hon. Corporation of, Tower Hill, E.C.
  1911 Tuckerman, Paul, Esq., 59, Wall Street, New York, U.S.A.
  1890 Turnbull, Alexander H., Esq., Elibank, Wellington, New Zealand.
  1902 Tweedy, Arthur H., Esq., Widmore Lodge, Widmore, Bromley, Kent.

  1847 United States Congress, Library of, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
  1899 United States National Museum (Library of), Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
  1847 United States Naval Academy Library, Annapolis, Md., U.S.A.
  1899 University of London, South Kensington, S.W.
  1847 Upsala University Library, Upsala, Sweden (c/o Simpkin, Marshall).

  1905 Van Norden, Theodore Langden, Esq., 22, West 59th Street, New York City, U.S.A.
  1911 Van Ortroy, Professor F., Université de Gand, Belgium.
  1899 Vernon, Roland Venables, Esq., Colonial Office, Downing Street, S.W.
  1899 Victoria, Public Library, Museums, and National Gallery of, Melbourne, Australia.
  1847 Vienna Imperial Library (K. K. Hof-Bibliothek), Vienna.
  1905 Vienna, K. K. Geographische Gesellschaft, Wollzeile 33, Vienna.
  1887 Vignaud, Henry, Esq., LL.D., 2, Rue de la Mairie, Bagneux (Seine), France.
  1912 Villa, Dr. F. Luis de, Banco Colombiano, Guatemala, C.A.
  1909 Villiers, J. A. J. de, Esq., British Museum (_Secretary_) (2).

  1904 Wagner, Herrn H., and E. Debes, Geographische Anstalt, Brüderstrasse 23, Leipzig.
  1902 War Office, Mobilisation and Intelligence Library, Whitehall, S.W.
  1847 Washington, Department of State, D.C., U.S.A.
  1847 Washington, Library of Navy Department, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
  1899 Watanabe, Chiharu, Esq., 4, Shimotakanawamachi, Shibaku, Tokyo, Japan.
  1899 Watkinson Library, Hartford, Connecticut, U.S.A.
  1899 Weld, Rev. George Francis, Hingham, Mass., U.S.A. (Weldwold, Santa Barbara, California).
  1899 Westaway, Engineer Rear-Admiral Albert Ernest Luscombe, 36, Granada Road, Southsea.
  1898 Westminster School, Dean’s Yard, S.W.
  1893 Whiteway, Richard Stephen, Esq., Brownscombe, Shottermill, Surrey.
  1910 Wihlfahrt, E., Esq., Russo-Chinese Bank, Peking, China.
  1899 Williams, O. W., Esq., Fort Stockton, Texas, U.S.A.
  1899 Wilmanns, Frederick M., Esq., 89, Oneida Street, Milwaukee, Wisc., U.S.A.
  1895 Wisconsin, State Historical Society of, Madison, Wisc., U.S.A.
  1900 Woodford, Charles Morris, Esq., Government Residence. Tulagi, British Solomon Islands.
  1907 Woolf, Leonard Sidney, Esq., 38, Brunswick Square, W.C.
  1899 Worcester, Massachusetts, Free Library, Worcester, Mass., U.S.A.
  1910 Worcester College, Oxford (Parker and Son, Oxford).
  1899 Wyndham, The Right Hon. George, M.P., 35, Park Lane, W.

  1847 Yale University, New Haven, Conn., U.S.A.
  1894 Young, Alfales, Esq., Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S.A.

  1847 Zürich, Stadtbibliothek, Zürich, Switzerland.

PRINTED AT THE REDFORD PRESS, 20 AND 21, BEDFORDBURY, STRAND, LONDON,
W.C.

FOOTNOTES:

 [1] Forming Book III of the Civil Wars of Peru.

 [2] The official register of the _Casa de Contratacion_ at Seville,
 shows that the fleet of Blasco Nuñez consisted of 49 ships. The
 Viceroy took 50 servants. The total number of passengers was 915,
 among them 36 married men with their wives, and 87 single girls
 with their parents. The chief passengers were Agustin de Zarate,
 Accountant, the Licentiate Zarate with his wife, Rodrigo de Contreras
 and his son, Judge Lison de Tejada, the Licentiate Alvarez, and the
 Viceroy’s brother Francisco Velasquez de Vela Nuñez.

 [3] _The new laws._

 The new laws, advocated by Las Casas, but opposed by several
 experienced statesmen, some of them with much knowledge of the Indies,
 were signed by Charles V at Barcelona on November 20th, 1542.

 The first Ordinance was that after the deaths of those who possessed
 grants of Indians, their wives or children were not to succeed to
 them[4], but that the Indians were to become vassals of the King, the
 children of the former owners receiving certain fruits of the labour
 of such Indians for their sustenance.

 No Indian is to be made to carry loads without being paid, nor to
 be forced to work in mines or pearl fisheries, nor to be obliged to
 render personal service.

 Bishops, Monasteries, and Hospitals to be deprived of Indians granted
 to them formerly, as well as all officials.

 All who fought in the war between Pizarro and Almagro, on both sides,
 to be deprived of all grants of Indians. This would include all the
 settlers in Peru.

 [4] The original grants were for two lives.

 [5] It appears that over 300 Indians had been brought from Peru to
 Panama by their owners. The Viceroy ordered them to be released and
 sent back.

 [6]

     Blasco Nuñez Vela, native of Avila, then General Overseer of the
     Guards of Castille, Viceroy and President of the Court of

     Justice, selected because he would enforce the royal orders with
     rigour.

     1 Licentiate Diego de Cepeda, native of Tordesillas, then a Judge
     in Gran Canaria--Judge.

     2 Licentiate Lison de Tejada, a native of Logroño--Judge.

     3 Licentiate Alvarez--Judge.

     4 Licentiate Pedro Ortiz de Zarate, a native of Orduña, who was
     then chief magistrate in Segovia--Judge.

     Agustin de Zarate, then Secretary of the Royal Council, was,
     appointed Accountant. He had been for 15 years Comptroller of
     accounts for Castille. He took as little part as possible in
     the troubles, confining his energies to his own department. On
     his return the Emperor made him Superintendent of finances in
     Flanders. He collected materials for a book which he wrote when he
     had leisure in Spain. It was published at Antwerp in 1555, Seville
     1577, and by Barcia. He writes as an eye-witness of the events
     which led to the expulsion of the Viceroy, but as a prejudiced
     partizan against Gonzalo Pizarro.


 [7] People he afterwards put to death.

 [8] Francisco de Carbajal was born in 1468 at a village called Ragana
 near Arevalo, in the diocese of Avila. His quotations and frequent
 references to ancient history show that he received a fairly good
 education. But he must have been young when he entered upon a military
 life. He served under the great Captain, Gonsalvo de Cordova, Colonna,
 Leyva, and other well-known warriors of the Italian wars. He was at
 the battle of Ravenna in 1512, when he was aged 44, and must already
 have seen much service. He fought at the battle of Pavia in 1525,
 and at the sack of Rome in 1527. At Rome he took for his share of
 the booty all the papers in a lawyer’s office. The ransom for them
 enabled him to go to Mexico with his wife Catalina Leyton, of a noble
 Portuguese family. In 1536, when he was 68, he first went to Peru. He
 was sent by the Viceroy of Mexico, Don Antonio de Mendoza, to assist
 Pizarro, at the time when he was besieged by the Indians in Lima.
 Pizarro sent him to settle in Charcas. Arriving at Arequipa on his way
 he knew no one, and was standing at the corner of a street with his
 wife and family, not knowing what to do. Miguel Cornejo, a citizen,
 saw them, heard their story, and took them to his house, treating them
 hospitably. At the battle of Huarina, ten years afterwards, Cornejo
 was taken prisoner, fighting against Carbajal, and expected to be put
 to death. Carbajal said to him--“I am not unmindful of what you did
 for me at Arequipa, with my wife and family, not knowing where to go.
 I give you liberty, and for your sake exempt your companions from
 all punishment. Go home and look to your safety with all quiet and
 content.” After the murder of the Marquis Pizarro, Carbajal joined
 Vaca de Castro and was appointed “Sargento-Mayor.” At the battle of
 Chupas he marshalled the royal army, and showed both military skill
 and extraordinary personal valour. The old veteran was very corpulent,
 and when a shot from young Almagro’s cannon mowed a space in the
 advancing troops of Vaca de Castro, Carbajal threw himself into the
 gap, telling the men that his size made him a bigger target than
 any one else. Then he took off his morion and breastplate, throwing
 them on the ground to be like the meanest soldier, so arousing the
 admiration of the troops that they carried all before them. The
 victory of Chupas was due to him.

 The rumours respecting the New Laws convinced Carbajal that there was
 trouble ahead. He was long past 70, and was anxious to end his days at
 home and in peace. He got permission from Vaca de Castro to return to
 Spain, and went to Lima to obtain a passage home. General Mendiburu
 (_Diccionario Historico-Biografico del Peru_) thought, from Carbajal
 having lodged in the house of the Treasurer Riquelme on that occasion,
 that they were great friends. But Cieza de Leon implies that he was
 rather an unwelcome guest.

 [9] Secretary also to the Marquis Pizarro. After the murder, he
 arranged about the burial and the care of the children.

 [10] A native of Sahagun. He served with Belalcazar in the conquest of
 Quito, and with the Pizarros at the battle of Salinas. He was at the
 battle of Chupas on the side of Vaca de Castro. He afterwards joined
 Gonzalo Pizarro, plotted against him, and got his deserts.

 [11] Of Diego Maldonado the rich there is much more further on.

 [12] The Licentiate Carbajal was a brother of the Factor Illan Suarez
 de Carbajal.

 [13] Antonio de Altamirano came to Peru with Alvarado. He was a
 citizen of Cuzco and had a part of the palace of Huayna Ceapac for
 his house, where he found a great treasure. His half-caste sons, very
 promising lads, were schoolfellows of the Inca Garcilasso, but they
 died young. Altamirano was put to death by order of Gonzalo Pizarro.

 [14] Hernando Bachicao was a native of San Lucar de Barrameda. He
 is not mentioned until 1537 when he was at the Mala conference. He
 served at the battle of Salinas and at Chupas. Regidor of Cuzco, he
 was active against the Viceroy, and was at Añaquito. At Huarina he
 deserted to Centeno but was captured. Carbajal hung him. Bachicao was
 a cruel, faithless ruffian.

 [15] Piura.

 [16] Yllan Suarez de Carbajal was a native of Talavera. He came to
 Peru with Hernando Pizarro in 1534, then aged 31, as Factor. He was
 learned and accomplished. He strove to reconcile Pizarro and Almagro
 and was at the Mala conference. He was at Lima when Pizarro was
 murdered, and was imprisoned by the Almagro faction. His murder by the
 Viceroy finally destroyed the chances of that unfortunate man.

 [17] Diego de Aguero was one of Pizarro’s original companions at
 Caxamarca, receiving 362 _marcs_ and 8880 _pesos_ of gold from the
 Atahualpa ransom. He was employed to negotiate with Alvarado for his
 departure. He was a citizen of Lima and had a _repartimiento_ at
 Lunahuana. He served at the battle of Chupas. He married a daughter of
 Nicolas de Ribera.

 [18] Pablo Meneses was a native of Talavera. He was Camp Master
 at Lima 1544. He joined Gonzalo Pizarro but, going to Panama with
 Hinojosa, he changed sides and joined Gasca. He served against Giron.

 [19] Or Llaches. See my translation of Xeres, p. 80, Hakluyt Society’s
 volume for 1872.

 [20] They were perfectly true. There is a letter from Blasco Nuñez to
 the Emperor Charles V, dated at Panama on February 15th, 1544 (_Muñoz
 Coll._, t. 83, f. 246) in which he brings all sorts of accusations
 against Vaca de Castro before he could possibly have verified any of
 them, and which he had received from followers of Almagro at Panama.

 [21] The Licentiate Antonio de la Gama was sent to Puerto Rico in 1517
 to hold a _residencia_. He went thence to Panama where he planned
 improvements. Arriving in Peru he was employed to negotiate with
 Almagro. In 1539 Pizarro left him at Lima as his Lieutenant and Chief
 Judge. After the battle of Chupas he judged and condemned the rebels.
 Vaca de Castro sent him to Lima as his Lieutenant, but he left on the
 approach of the Viceroy and went to Cuzco. The Viceroy excepted him
 from pardon for having joined Gonzalo Pizarro. He remained at Cuzco,
 and was living in 1551.

 [22] Ruy Lopez?.

 [23] So thought the Viceroy who seized Solar and intended to hang him.
 This was prevented, but Solar was kept in prison until he was released
 by the Judges.

 [24] The Licentiate Benito Suarez de Carbajal was a brother of Illan
 Suarez de Carbajal, the Factor. He came with his brother to Peru,
 and was at the battle of Chupas. He joined Gonzalo Pizarro against
 the Viceroy to avenge his brother’s death, and was at the battle of
 Añaquito where the Viceroy was killed. He then went over to Gasca
 and was at Sacsahuana, Gasca making him Alferez General. He was the
 Corregidor of Cuzco. The ladies called him “Galan” and “Buen Mozo.” On
 June 24th, 1549, he was climbing into a lady’s balcony at Cuzco, when
 the husband came out and cut the rope ladder; Carbajal fell 20 feet
 and was killed.

 [25] Alonso Riquelme, the Treasurer, was appointed to that office by
 Charles V, and went out with Pizarro. He was in favour of murdering
 Atahualpa. He was at the founding of the city of the Kings (Lima) on
 Jan. 18, 1535. He was at Cuzco when Almagro arrived from Chile. When
 Pizarro was murdered he was at Lima where he continued to reside. He
 joined the Judges against the Viceroy, and was a very decided partisan
 of Gonzalo Pizarro. He was then an old man, but the date of his death
 is not known.

 [26] Fray Geronimo de Loaysa, the first Archbishop of Lima, was
 born at Talavera. One of his brothers was Archbishop of Seville and
 President of the Council of the Indies. Fray Geronimo arrived at Lima
 as Bishop in 1543. He did what he could as a peacemaker. In 1546 he
 set out for Spain, at the request of Gonzalo Pizarro, to explain the
 state of affairs. But he found Gasca at Panama, and joined with him.
 He was at Sacsahuana and helped Gasca in the _repartimientos_. He held
 the first Council of Lima in 1551, having been promoted to Archbishop.
 In the insurrection of Giron he marched against the rebels. He
 befriended the two young daughters of the murdered Inca Tupac Amaru,
 taking them into his house. Archbishop Loaysa died on October 25, 1575.

 [27] Diego de Mora was a native of Ciudad Real. He came to Peru with
 Almagro and settled at Truxillo, marrying Ana de Valverde, sister of
 the Bishop. He was granted the valleys of Chimu and Chicama. He was at
 the battle of Chupas. He joined Gonzalo Pizarro and was at Añaquito.
 Then he turned round and joined Gasca, being present at Sacsahuana.
 But he refused to join Giron’s rebellion continuing as Governor of
 Truxillo.

 [28] Diego Centeno was a native of Ciudad Rodrigo. He came to Peru
 with Alvarado in 1534, and was at the battle of Salinas on the side of
 the Pizarros. He was also at Chupas. He then settled at Chuquisaca,
 and when the news of the new laws arrived, he and Hinojosa were
 appointed Procurators by the citizens. He seems to have wavered for
 some time, but eventually took up arms against Gonzalo Pizarro in
 Charcas. Old Carbajal went against him, defeated him, and hunted
 him until he was obliged to hide in a cave for nearly a year. He
 then collected forces again, surprised Cuzco, and marched southward.
 Gonzalo Pizarro and Carbajal encountered him at the battle of Huarina,
 where he was entirely defeated on October 20, 1547. He managed to
 escape to Gasca’s army, and was given charge of Gonzalo Pizarro
 when he surrendered. Centeno was much dissatisfied with Gasca’s
 distribution of the _repartimientos_. He went back to Chuquisaca where
 he was poisoned. He left two sons.

 [29] Pedro Alonso Hinojosa was born at Truxillo in Estremadura and
 came to Peru with Hernando Pizarro in 1534. He was at the siege of
 Cuzco, escaped from Almagro, and was Standard Bearer for the Pizarros
 at the battle of Salinas, April 20, 1538. He was also at the battle
 of Chupas. He joined Gonzalo Pizarro and went to Arequipa to secure
 the services of Carbajal. Gonzalo Pizarro gave him command of his
 fleet and he took Panama. But he was talked over by Gasca and gave up
 the ships to him. Gasca made him Captain-General of his army, and he
 was at Sacsahuana. He received Gonzalo Pizarro’s estates and mines
 in Charcas, where he was murdered by the rebels under Sebastian de
 Castilla in 1553.

 [30] Francisco de Almendras was one of Pizarro’s original followers,
 and at Caxamarca he received 181 _marcs_ and 4440 _pesos_ of gold as
 his share of the Atahualpa ransom. He became a Regidor or Magistrate
 at Chuquisaca, where he executed several enemies of Gonzalo Pizarro,
 whom he joined with his two nephews Diego and Martin on the road
 to Cuzco. He was a violent and very active partisan. Returning to
 Chuquisaca he was seized by Diego Centeno and put to death, in spite
 of his entreaties to be spared because of his large family, June 16,
 1545. His nephew Diego served against Giron, but was murdered by a
 negro. The other nephew Martin was afterwards Alcalde of Chuquisaca.

 [31] Alonso de Toro, another citizen of Cuzco, was Lieutenant-General
 to Gonzalo Pizarro. Diego Gonzalez, his father-in-law, killed him out
 of sheer alarm, owing to certain matrimonial quarrels.

 [32] Francisco de Villacastin was one of the original conquerors in
 Panama and in Peru. He became a citizen of Cuzco, had a house there,
 and married Leonora Ccoya, an Inca princess, the widow of Juan Balsa
 who was hanged at Lima by Carbajal. Villacastin first served with
 Pedrarias on the isthmus, and was employed in making the road from
 Nombre de Dios to Panama. The monkeys threw stones at the workers, and
 one wounded Villacastin, who was then a cross-bow man, knocking out
 two of his front teeth. He had a good _repartimiento_ at Ayavire. He
 died in prison after Sacsahuana, being a staunch supporter of Gonzalo
 Pizarro. Garcilasso says that he was wounded in the face by an enemy
 after he had surrendered. “He was a good man and did much good to many
 people.”

 [33] Tomas Vasquez was one of the first conquerors. He had a house in
 Cuzco and mines in Caravaya. He was a turbulent soldier mixed up in
 all troubles. For this reason the Viceroy, Marquis of Cañete, ordered
 him to be beheaded as an undesirable person.

 [34] Son of the Judge (Oidor) Zarate. He afterwards joined Centeno.

 [35] He was then Bishop: not Archbishop until 1547.

 [36] Friar Domingo de Santo Tomas was a native of Seville and
 professed a monk there. He was one of six Dominicans who first went
 to Peru, being the youngest. He studied the general language, which
 he called Quichua, and his grammar was published at Valladolid in
 1560. He also studied the language of the coast, which is much more
 difficult. He founded the houses of his Order at Chincha, Chicama,
 and Truxillo. He won the affection of the Indians whom he tried to
 defend. In 1545 he was named Prior of the convent at Lima. He strove
 to induce Gonzalo Pizarro to submit and accept the offers of Gasca. He
 then joined Gasca and was present at Sacsahuana, 1552. Vicar-General,
 July 28, 1553. Provincial. He then visited Spain and was well received
 at Court, returning to Peru in 1561, and was made Bishop of Charcas.
 He built the first church at Paucar-colla. After a residence at
 Chuquisaca he went back to Lima in 1567 to attend the second Council
 of Lima; and returning to Chuquisaca the Bishop died about 1570.
 Portrait in a room of the University of San Marcos.

 [37] The Licentiate Rodrigo Niño was the son of a Regidor of Toledo.
 He was faithful when the Viceroy sent him, with others, to intercept
 Puelles, but he afterwards sided with the Judges, and had the custody
 of the Viceroy at San Lorenzo and on the way to Huacho. He joined
 Gonzalo Pizarro and, on the march to Quito, he forged a letter to get
 Maldonado the rich into trouble, and put it under Pizarro’s pillow. He
 deserted Pizarro and joined Gasca who sent him to Spain in charge of
 convicts. Nearly all escaped in the West Indies, so when he arrived
 at San Lucar he was sent to prison in Oran. Released after two years
 he returned to Peru in 1554, and served against Giron. He married
 (third husband) Maria, sister of Bishop Valverde, whose first husband
 was Rodrigo Orgoñez. He was Alcalde of Lima 1555, 1558, 1564. His son
 Fernando was Alcalde 1597, 1603.

 [38] Or Chuquisaca.

 [39] In the valley of the Cauca, in the newly-discovered province of
 New Granada.

 [40] Alonso de Mesa was a native of the Canary Islands. He was one
 of Pizarro’s original followers, was at Caxamarca and received 135
 _marks_ and 3350 _pesos_ of gold as his share of the Atahualpa ransom.
 He was in the siege of Cuzco and served at the battle of Chupas.
 He concealed himself when Gonzalo Pizarro took up arms, and was at
 Sacsahuana with Gasca. He fled from Cuzco when Giron rose in rebellion
 and served against him. He was a citizen of Cuzco and had a house
 there. His son went to Spain to advocate the cause of the Incas.

 [41] Herrara leaves out this and states it as a fact.

 [42] Homily in S. Luc. c. xiv. _vv._ 25-33.

 [43] See my book, the _Incas of Peru_, pp. 260-274.

 [44] Lorenzo de Aldana came to Peru with Alvarado. He was appointed
 governor of Popayan, to supersede Belalcazar, by Pizarro. He was in
 the Chilian expedition with Almagro; but deserted the Almagro party,
 and was with Vaca de Castro at the battle of Chupas. He was Governor
 of Lima for Gonzalo Pizarro, who entrusted him with some ships to go
 to Panama. There he joined Hinojosa and both went over to Gasca, who
 again made him Governor of Lima. He served against Giron and was at
 Chuquinga. Aldana died very rich in 1571. He was conscience smitten on
 his death-bed at the treatment of the natives, and left all his wealth
 to be invested for the payment of the tribute imposed upon the natives
 in his _repartimiento_.

 [45] Parmenion, Alexander’s very able general who served Philip and
 his son for a lifetime, and had reached the age of 70, was left in
 command in Media when Alexander went onwards in pursuit of Darius. A
 conspiracy was discovered in which Philotas, the son of Parmenion,
 was supposed to be implicated. He was tortured and then put to death.
 Polydamas was then sent into Media with orders for Cleander, the
 second in command, to assassinate Parmenion before he heard of his
 son’s death. The crime was perpetrated by Cleander with his own hand.
 Of Parmenion’s other two sons, Hector was accidentally drowned in the
 Nile, and Nicanor was carried off by a sudden illness during the march
 into Hyrcania.

 The comparison of the Viceroy’s promulgation of the New Laws with the
 murder of Parmenion by order of Polydamas is rather far-fetched. The
 supposed point is that both felt bound implicitly to obey a royal
 order, however distasteful.

 [46] Francisco de Ampuero was a citizen of Lima, a friend and strong
 partisan of the Marquis Pizarro. After the murder he joined Vaca de
 Castro and was at the battle of Chupas. He joined Gonzalo Pizarro
 and was Alferez General at the battle of Añaquito. He married the
 Princess Inez Yupanqui Ñusta, after she had had a daughter by the
 Marquis Pizarro. He took his young daughter Francesca to Spain where
 she eventually married her uncle Hernando Pizarro in prison, and
 had children. Ampuero also made a home for two unfortunate orphans,
 grandsons of Inca Manco. He was Alcalde of Lima 1571-1574.

 [47] In the action which the Camp Master Francisco de Carbajal took
 against Gaspar Rodriguez de Camporedondo and the others at Pucara on
 Sept. 28, 1544, Loaysa made a confession. He said that he came from
 Lima and lodged in the house of Gaspar Rodriguez all the time that he
 was in Cuzco, hearing all the doubts he raised. One night, the 23rd of
 August, in the lodgings of Luis Suarez and the licentiate Leon they
 began to discuss the ordinances. Then Diego Maldonado the rich came
 in, and Leon said that, if he had a safe conduct, he would go to Lima
 and argue with the Judges that the King was ill-advised in approving
 the new laws. Loaysa said he would go if he had the means. Diego
 Maldonado the rich heard him and said, “What is wanting, Father?” He
 replied that he had no horse. Maldonado said that he would provide
 a mount for him to go to Lima and negotiate with the Judges. Thus
 supplied Loaysa left Cuzco with many letters, and attended only by
 four Yanaconas.

 Loaysa arrived in Lima when the Viceroy had just finished his dinner
 and, after making his report, he went to his lodgings in the house
 of the Accountant Juan de Caceres where he was visited by Pablo
 de Meneses, Don Alonso and Martin de Robles, Diego de Silva and
 several others. They asked for the news, and Loaysa said that Gonzalo
 Pizarro had 550 men. A provision of the Judges was obtained pardoning
 Gaspar Rodriguez, Gumiel, Guevara, Alonso de Toro, Tomas Vasquez,
 Villacastin, Portocarrero and Altamirano if they came over to the
 Viceroy in 15 days. The confession was taken down by the scrivener
 Pedro Gonzalez del Castillo.

 [48] Friar Tomas de San Martin, Regent or Principal of the Dominicans.
 He left Lima before the Bishop, overtaking Pero Lopez and Ampuero
 at Vilcas. He was authorized to negotiate with Gonzalo Pizarro, to
 offer him certain terms, and to try to alienate his officers from
 him. These negotiations came to an end in January, 1544. The Regent
 was also empowered by the Judges to ascertain in what light they were
 looked upon by Pizarro. He was assured that the rebels desired that
 the Judges and their court should remain in accordance with the King’s
 orders. Pizarro sent a letter to the Judges by the Regent.

 [49] The husband of the Countess Matilda of Tuscany was Guelpone or
 Welphone, to whom the Milanese confided the defence of their liberties
 in the early times of the Lombard Republic.

 [50] A.D. 1160.

 [51] St Jerome never wrote any special treatise on the instruction of
 virgins. He treats of the subject in his _Epistolae ad Eustachium_,
 _Le custodia virginitatis_, and in other places. But in none of these
 does the passage quoted by Cieza occur. It is in an anonymous letter
 entitled _Virginitatis laus_ which has been attributed, without any
 reason, to St Jerome.

 [52] I.e. the province of Santander.

 [53] Pedro de Puelles came to Peru with Alvarado in 1534, and was
 Lieutenant-Governor of Quito during the expedition of Gonzalo Pizarro
 into Quijos. He was at the battle of Chupas, and in 1544 was appointed
 Governor of Huanuco by Vaca de Castro. He was confirmed in this
 office by the Viceroy and was well received by him. Yet he joined
 Gonzalo Pizarro, went in chase of the Viceroy, and when Carbajal
 turned back owing to Centeno’s proceedings, Puelles was made Camp
 Master. At Añaquito he ordered the Viceroy to be killed. Puelles was
 again Governor of Quito. Returning to Lima he urged Gonzalo Pizarro
 to declare himself King. Then he resolved to betray Pizarro and join
 Gasca, but he was assassinated by his own officers.

 [54] The Father Provincial San Martin left Lima for Cuzco before the
 Bishop, though we are not told by Cieza de Leon when he set out or
 of the arrangements for his mission. It appears, from MS. letters,
 that San Martin was sent by the Viceroy to make certain proposals
 to Gonzalo Pizarro and, meanwhile, if possible to seduce his chief
 followers. Pizarro’s detailed reply to the Viceroy was dated August
 2, 1544. The conduct of San Martin fully accounts for the refusal to
 receive the Bishop or Pero Lopez.

 [55] Herrera calls him Juan, and adds that he was a son of the
 Licentiate Vadillo who led the expedition from Uraba to Popayan, Dec.
 vii, Lib. viii, cap. iii.

 [56] Gonzalo Diaz de Pineda came with Belalcazar to the conquest
 of Quito. In 1536 he was sent to explore Quijos and Canelos, and
 his report led Gonzalo Pizarro to undertake his expedition. Pineda
 accompanied Pizarro, and went in search of Orellana. In 1544 he
 offered his services to the Viceroy, and went with Vela Nuñez to
 intercept Puelles with 35 mules, which cost 12,000 ducats. He turned
 traitor, tried to murder Vela Nuñez, and joined Gonzalo Pizarro.
 In 1545 Gonzalo Pizarro sent him to Piura to collect men, when the
 Viceroy suddenly arrived. Pineda was surprised and fled into the
 mountains, where he died of hunger.

 [57] Doña Brianda de Acuña. The Viceroy left three sons in Spain,
 Antonio, Juan and Cristobal, the two eldest being pages of the
 Empress, with the habits of Santiago and Alcantara. Antonio died when
 appointed Ambassador to France. Juan de Acuña Vela was Captain-General
 of Artillery and on the Council of War. Cristobal was Bishop of
 Canary, afterwards of Burgos.

 [58] The true story was told by one of the Inca’s sons named Titu
 Cusi Yupanqui, who was an eye-witness. The story in the text is quite
 wrong. See page 164.

 [59] Friar Juan Solano, born 1507, a Dominican monk, was a native of
 Archidona and belonged to the monastery of San Estevan at Seville. On
 March 1, 1543, the King made him Bishop of Cuzco, to succeed Valverde.
 He did not reach Cuzco until Nov. 3, 1545. He placed the first stone
 of the cathedral on March 13, 1560, and created the parishes of San
 Cristoval, San Sebastian, San Blas, and Santa Ana.

 He signed the agreement to appoint Gonzalo Pizarro Governor of Peru
 when in Lima. He went over to the other side and accompanied Diego
 Centeno to Huarina; but escaped from the battlefield or Carbajal would
 certainly have hung him. Carbajal did hang his brother Jimenes. He
 joined Gasca at Xauxa. He was at Sacsahuana and then resided at Cuzco.
 He returned to Spain and went to Rome, where he lived for many years
 in the convent of La Minerva, and died on Jan. 14, 1580, aged 76.

 [60] Guillan.

 [61] As many as 25 mounted men deserted the Viceroy and rode out of
 Lima in the night. These were Baltasar de Castilla, Lorenzo Sebastian
 and Baltasar de Castilla were the brother and son of the Conde de
 Gomera. The family was closely connected with the Canary Islands by
 the marriage of Don Diego Ayala y Herrera with Inez, daughter and
 princess of Fernan Perasa, Lord of the Canary Islands. Their grandson
 Guillen Perasa de Ayala was created Count of Gomera by Charles V. He
 married Maria de Castilla and these younger sons used the surname of
 Castilla. Sebastian, the youngest, was the murderer of Hinojosa and
 was soon afterwards murdered, in his turn, by his own men. Baltasar
 joined the Almagro party, after the assassination of Pizarro, and was
 on that side at the battle of Chupas, Sept. 15, Mexia, Rodrigo de
 Salazar el Corcovedo, Francisco de Escobedo, Francisco de Carbajal,
 Pedro Martin de Sicilia (or de Don Benito), and Diego and Jeronimo
 de Carbajal, nephews of the Factor. Salazar was the man who had
 apprehended the younger Almagro at Cuzco. They seized some papers in
 charge of the priest Loaysa, whom they overtook. These letters made
 it clear that there was correspondence with the Viceroy and treachery
 in the camp of Gonzalo Pizarro. It was thought necessary to make
 examples of the traitors. Gaspar de Rojas, Felipe Gutierrez, and a
 Galician named Arias de Maldonado were at Guamanga. Pedro de Puelles,
 by Gonzalo’s order, arrested and beheaded them. Gaspar Rodriguez de
 Camporedondo was a double-dyed traitor. He was in Gonzalo’s camp at
 the head of 200 pikemen. Carbajal arrested him and he was beheaded
 without delay.

 1542. With Gonzalo at Añaquito, and sent with Hinojosa to Panama.
 A captain of infantry at Sacsahuana, April 9, 1548. Received the
 _repartimiento_ of Parinocochas. He gave the supper at Cuzco when his
 niece married Alonso de Loaysa, Nov. 13, 1553. Giron broke in and
 killed one or two of the supper party. He put Castilla to death for
 trying to escape to Lima. Castilla was a chief citizen of Cuzco, and
 there are descendants.

 [62] His mad resolution was to sack Lima and retreat to Truxillo,
 sending all the women and children by sea and the men by land.

 [63] The Viceroy had assembled 400 men to defend his house. The Judges
 were frightened and shut themselves up in the lodgings of Cepeda.
 Then one Francisco de Escobar said, “Gentlemen, let us come out and
 die fighting like men, rather than shut ourselves up like chickens.”
 So they came out and, marching to the square, were joined by many
 citizens as they went. Then things fell out as the Bishop describes.

 [64] San Lorenzo.

 [65] Party of Almagro.

 [66] Huacho.

 [67] As the army of Gonzalo Pizarro approached the Judges became
 more and more alarmed. They sent an embassy to him, consisting of
 the Accountant Agustin de Zarate and a prominent citizen named
 Antonio de Ribera. They found Gonzalo at Xauxa. Ribera was allowed
 to proceed but Zarate was arrested, and was kept a prisoner for ten
 days in the bitter cold of the heights of Pariacaca until Gonzalo’s
 forces came there on the way to Lima. Antonio de Ribera was a sort of
 brother-in-law of Gonzalo, as he had married the widow of his half
 brother Francisco Martin de Alcantara. Gonzalo’s answer to the Judges
 was that it was for the common good that he should be Governor and if
 that was granted he would comply with what the Judges asked. If not
 he would enter by force. Those who had left Cuzco to join the Viceroy
 were hiding in different houses. Others fled into the montaña. When
 Gonzalo Pizarro was within a league of Lima, he sent Carbajal in
 advance with 30 arquebusiers, who seized 28 of the fugitives, among
 them Gabriel de Rojas, Garcilasso de la Vega who escaped and hid in
 the Dominican Convent, Melchor Verdugo, the Licentiate Carbajal, Pedro
 del Barco, Martin de Florencia, Alonso de Caceres, Pedro de Manjarves,
 Luis de Leon, Anton Ruiz de Guevara. Carbajal locked them up in the
 prison and took the key. The Judges did not interfere. All their
 troops had gone over to Gonzalo Pizarro. The Judges were then asked to
 proclaim Pizarro as Governor. They said they had not the power. Upon
 which Carbajal took three of the prisoners and hanged them on a tree
 outside the town. These were Pedro del Barco, Martin de Florencia,
 and Juan de Saavedra. Carbajal was so witty and amusing during the
 executions that they must have found it quite a pleasure to be hanged
 by him. Luis de Leon was begged off by his brother, who was one of
 Carbajal’s soldiers. Carbajal told the Judges that unless they signed
 the document at once recognizing Gonzalo Pizarro as Governor, he would
 hang all the rest and sack the town. The Judges saw that the Camp
 Master was in earnest. The document was signed, and Gonzalo Pizarro
 entered Lima as Governor of Peru, promising that there should be no
 more executions. Bachicao led the vanguard with the artillery, then
 200 pikemen followed by 150 arquebusiers led by Guevara and 200 under
 Pedro Cermeño. Next rode Gonzalo Pizarro himself in a coat of mail
 covered by a brocade surtout. Behind him were three captains abreast,
 Puerto Carrero with the standard of Castille, Antonio Altamirano with
 the standard of Cuzco, Pedro de Puelles with the standard of Pizarro’s
 arms. Then followed the cavalry. In this order the procession went to
 the house of the Licentiate Zarate where the Judges were assembled.
 Pizarro received their submission and then went to the municipal
 buildings where the assembled Magistrates received him with great
 ceremony. Pizarro then took possession of his brother’s house, lately
 occupied by the Viceroy, and the troops were taken to their quarters.
 This took place in the end of October, 1544, forty days after the
 arrest of the Viceroy. Gonzalo only occupied himself with military
 matters, the Judges exercising their authority as a Court of Justice,
 with sittings in the house of the Treasurer Riquelme. Alonso de
 Toro was sent to Cuzco, Pedro de Fuentes to Arequipa, Francisco de
 Almendras to Chuquisaca as Lieutenants of the Governor. There was one
 more execution of an opponent who talked too much, one Diego Gumiel.

                  _Escape of Garcilasso de la Vega._

 Carbajal did not succeed in arresting Garcilasso de la Vega, who fled
 from Cuzco. When the Camp Master knocked at his door that night, it
 was opened by a soldier named Hernando Perez Tablero, a native of
 Almendral in the dukedom of Feria, and foster-brother of Alonso de
 Vargas the brother of Garcilasso de la Vega. He was an old servant
 of the family. As soon as he saw the dreaded Camp Master he ran to
 Garcilasso and warned him. The knight got out by a back way and
 escaped into the convent of Santo Domingo. He was received by the
 monks and concealed in a vault, where he remained for more than four
 months. Old Carbajal searched for him several times in the convent
 until, through the intercession of friends, he was at last pardoned.
 But Gonzalo Pizarro always kept him a prisoner, living in Gonzalo’s
 tent and never being allowed to go out of his sight, until Sacsahuana.
 So that he was unwillingly at the battle of Huarina.

 [68] _sic._

 [69] One witness said that, after the first blow, Cueto said,
 embracing the Viceroy, “_no more, Sir, for the love of God_,” yet he
 was killed by the servants with many stabs. Ribadeneira, Tapia, Vela
 (a relation) and other attendants were present.

 [70] By order of Alonso de Lerma, Ensign to the General Vela Nuñez,
 two negroes took the body of the Factor to bury it secretly.
 Afterwards the body was ordered to be disinterred, and the numerous
 deep poniard wounds were seen and noted. Finally it was again buried
 very honourably.

 [71] The Viceroy’s wild scheme was to abandon Lima, taking all the
 inhabitants to Truxillo, men by land, women and children by sea.

 [72] Juan de Acosta was a native of Barcarrota near Badajos. He served
 under Gonzalo Pizarro in the Quijos expedition as “Alferez General,”
 and displayed great valour, endurance, and energy. He returned with
 Gonzalo, and commanded the vanguard at the battle of Añaquito. He was
 wounded, but he was in the procession when Pizarro entered Lima in
 triumph. When Aldana betrayed his benefactor and declared for Gasca
 with Pizarro’s ships, Acosta went up the coast to prevent them from
 getting water. He served actively the cause of his master and was
 wounded at the battle of Huarina, being a captain of infantry. Before
 Sacsahuana Juan de Acosta, with 30 men, went to destroy Gasca’s bridge
 at Cotabamba, but his plan was betrayed by a soldier named Juan Nuñez
 del Prado. When all hope was gone, he proposed to Gonzalo Pizarro to
 dash into the enemy’s ranks and die like heroes. Gonzalo said, “better
 to die like Christians” and rode over to surrender. Acosta followed
 him (April 9, 1548). He was put to death by Gasca, and his head, in
 an iron cage, was exposed for a long time at Cuzco. When nearly all
 deserted their chief, Juan de Acosta remained faithful to the last.
 Nearly all the public men in Peru had acted treacherously or changed
 sides. The few honourable men deserve to be placed on record. Besides
 old Carbajal and Juan de Acosta, there remained faithful to Pizarro,
 and were ruthlessly put to death by Gasca, the Captains Francisco
 Maldonado, Juan Velez de Guevara, Dionisio de Bobadilla, and Gonzalo
 de los Nidos, whose tongue was cut out before execution by order of
 the cruel Gasca. Many others were hanged or tortured.

 [73] Almendras had befriended Centeno in many ways, and had treated
 him as his own son.

 [74] Killed in the battle.

 [75] Killed in the battle.

 [76] Wounded.

 [77] Wounded.

 [78] Francisco de Oñate, one of the first conquerors, had the house at
 Cuzco which was afterwards occupied by Garcilasso de la Vega, facing
 what is now the Plaza del Cabildo, on the west side. Oñate was slain
 at the battle of Chupas.

 [79] The Editor omits them, and all the rest, and merely gives the
 last few words of the narrative, and some testimonies.

 [80] The Appendix only consists of these extracts. Evidently the most
 important part of the narrative is omitted. Unfortunately Jimenes de
 la Espada gives no clue to the title of the document he copied from,
 nor to its whereabouts, he merely ends by saying: “I am somewhat
 prolix in giving these details because all or nearly all respecting
 the life of Titu Cusi Yupanqui, the penultimate native monarch of
 Peru, is completely unknown.”

 The Mission to Titu Cusi Yupanqui was in the time of the President
 Lope Garcia de Castro, 1564-69.

 [81] Inca Manco had been murdered by a Spaniard in 1545. He had
 established himself in the mountainous region of Vilcapampa, which
 Rodriguez calls “the land of war of Manco” between the rivers Apurimac
 and Vilcamayu. His eldest son Sayri Tupac came out and surrendered to
 the Spaniards. He died in 1560. The next brother Titu Cusi Yupanqui
 continued to reign in Vilcapampa.

 [82] Don Diego de Zuñiga y Velasco, Count of Nieva, was Viceroy of
 Peru from 1559 to 1564, when he was assassinated by a jealous husband.

 [83] Petacas de _mani_ (_Arachis hypogæa_).

 [84] Diego Mendez de Sotomayor fought at the battle of Chupas on the
 side of Almagro the lad, Sept. 16, 1542, and escaped to Cuzco where
 he was made prisoner. He escaped and took refuge with Manco Inca, who
 received him hospitably.

 Titu Cusi Yupanqui gave an account of the murder of his father,
 written Feb. 6, 1570. He describes how they tried to kill him also,
 and how he escaped.

 [85] “Intip churin ceam-mi sapalla, punchaupi churin canqui.”

 [86] Perhaps Martin Hurtado de Arbieto, who afterwards commanded the
 force sent against Tupac Amaro.

 [87] The Viceroy Count of Nieva.

 [88] _Sent to press, April 15th, 1913._